                     MYSTERIOUS
                     FRIENDSHIP:


                        A TALE.


               IN TWO  VOLUMES


                       VOL. I.

 To strike out the friendly affections from the moral world,
would be extinguishing the sun in the naturals; each of
them being the source of the best and most graceful satisfac-
tions that Heaven has conferred on the sons of men.

                                            CICERO.


             LONDON:
Printed by Knight & Compton, Middle Street, Cloth Fair,

                     for

     EARLE AND HEMET, 47, ALBEMARLE STREET,

                   PICCADILLY

                        1801.
               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

                      ---------

                     CHAP. I.
 
                 A Recruiting Party.

              ONE fine May morning, not
long before the unnatural stritc com-
menced between the British and their
American brethren, a small party, be-
longing to a company of foot, having ar-
rayed themselves in their best uniforms, 
and trimmed their hats with variegated
feathers and ribands, marched into a
little populous town in Devonshire, in
order to persuade the peaceful rustics to
forego their hobbling gait and clownish
   VOL I. B avoca-6         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

avocations; in lieu of which they were
informed by a spruce serjeant, that they
should immediately be put into the
hands of the dancing-master of the regi-
ment, who would teach them to turn
out their toes, and beat their enemies'
brains out in the politest manner.

   Whether the gentility of their address,
or an uncommon thirst of glory, ope-
rated most on the minds of the credulous
countrymen, I will not take upon me to
determine. ---- Certain it was, that the
serjeant's florid harangue actually influ-
enced nine hale lusty fellows in about as
many minutes, and, in all probability,
his elocution would have had a greater
effect, but for the petulance of a young
ensign, who, for some trifling fault, or,
perhaps, to exhibit his own vast conse-
qence, struck one of the party with a
cane. This immediately operated as a
charm on the good humour of the as-
sembled rustics, who unanimously be-
                                gan,   MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.   2

gan, by hissing, and other marks of
contempt, to shew their disapprobation
of his conduct.

  As this little incident, trifling as it
may seem, bid fair to produce a kind
of tumult, it was thought necessary to
adjourn the business, and secure the re-
cruits they had already obtained.

  While they were filing off for this pur-
pose, not a little obstructed by the ran-
dom shot of dirt, &c. which was plen-
tifully directed at the "Hero of the
Cane," but which the whole party could
not avoid partaking, they were met by
the officer who commanded the com-
pany to which this detachment belong-
ed. Not a little surprized at their dis-
orderly retreat, and the warlike pursuit
of the enraged rustics, he hastily en-
quired the reason, and was answered by
the serjeant as follows:

                  B2            "Please
MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

"Pplease your honor, I have been in his Majesty's service, man and boy, these five and thirty years, and have been also on the recruiting service times out of number; but this is the first time that ever I was pelted out of a town, or so disgracefully used: because for why, I have always conducted myself as a man and a soldier. To be sure, Mr. Jessamy is my officer, and consequently my superior; but, if I had been in his place, I would not have done as he did; for it has not only spoiled the day's service, but has likewise brought the name of soldier into disrepute."

"Why, what has he done?" said Captain Neville.

Twenty mouths were now opened at once, and Mr. Jessamy began to look a little silly.


"One
MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 9

"One speak at a time," said the cap-
tain.

"Why, then, I'll tell you all about
it," said a strapping clown, six feet
high. "You must know, Captain, that
this here serjeant of your's, who is as
pretty spoken a man as I ever heard in 
my life, was listing half the country,
when that there jackanapes of an officer,
saving your worship's presence, not hav-
ing the fear of God before his eyes, be-
gan whirriting this here poor fellow
like a dog, with his stick, for nothing
at all, thof he is as good flesh and blood
as himself; and so, Captain, no more of
us would list---so we hooted him, a little
bit like, and-that's all."

Captain Neville now, with a serious 
countenance, demanded of the ensign
What the man had done to merit such
treatment, who replied, that The fellow
had been impertinent.

"That
B3
10          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

  " That charge," answered the cap-
tain, " is scarcely of sufficient weight
to authorise you to throw an odium on
the service, by making the multitude
believe that a soldier is beaten and spurn-
ed like a dog by his tyrant officer.-
Peter," continued he, addressing him-
self to the soldier, " how came you to
behave impertinently?"

  " Please your honour," said the sol-
dier, " all my impertinence arose from
not hearing him speak to me, which, I
assure your honour, was not designed as
an affront, but because I was at that
time talking with au honest country-
man, whom I had almost persuaded to
enlist."

  " And so, Mr. Jessamy," said Cap-
tain Neville, " this unmanly insult, for
I can call it no better, was given, be-
cause the poor fellow did not happen to
hear you speak'to him. For shame! for

                                 shame!
        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         11

shame!—learn to consider those whom
fortune has placed in a subaltern situ-
ation as more immediately under your
protection, and that, consequently, it
is your duty to soften, not to encrease,
any little asperity they may meet with in
the service."

  A loud huzza from the countrymen
closed the captain's speech, and peace
and good order appeared so thoroughly
restored, that the recruiting business,
under the auspices of the captain, re-
ceived fresh vigour; for, Captain Ne-
ville having dismissed the ensign to his
quarters, took the command of the de-
tachment himself, and his affability and
humanity operated as such powerful
auxiliaries to the serjeant's oratory, that
the party received a further encrease of
a dozen heroes, with whom they retired,
in the utmost harmony and good hu-
mour.

                        B 4         CHAP.               CHAP. II.
          An unfortunate Farmer.

           IN a few minutes after the
captain's return to his quarters, the
waiter informed him that a person de-
sired to speak to him, and immediately 
introduced a decent looking man, ap-
parently turned of thirty, who, with an
air in which melancholy and despair
were strongly depicted, desired to be
enlisted.
    Capatain Neville surveyed the stranger
with looks of compassion. On his en-
trance he had modestly declined sitting, 
but the captain enforced it so peremp-
torily, that he, at length, complied; af-
ter which, he was also prevailed on to
drink a bumper of port.

                               A small 
           Mysterious Friendship.      13
    A small pause ensued


    " You are desirous of being enlist-
ed,  I understand,"  said Captain Ne-
ville; "if I have any skill physiog-
nomy, I judge you have experienced
some misfortune, or disappointment,
which, perhaps, a little time, or some
happy circumstance, may alleviate. Per-
haps, you may think it strange that I
should attempt to dissuade you from
embarking in a profession, which it is
my present business to promote----As
a soldier, it may be a fault; but, as a
man, I hope I shall stand acquitted, es-
pecially as I think that I read in your
features the care-clad brow of a parent,
whose better proivince would be en-
deavour to stem any casual mishap, ra-
ther than plunge into what may prove
an irretrievable misfortune."

   " Alas!' replied the stranger, wiping
a tear, which involuntarily flowed down
                   B5               his14 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

his cheek, "my misfortunes are, indeed,
irretrievable.-My every wish center-
ed in domestic felicity; that is for ever
destroyed; nay, shame and infamy are
added, to encrease the measure of my
woes, What, then, have I to hope?"

"I feel for you," said Captain Ne-
ville; "and, if you are resolved to en-
gage with me, will endeavour to render
your situation as comfortable as pos-
sible. But, first, if it will not add too
much to your distress, I should like to
hear from what source your misfortunes
are derived; not from an impertinent
curiosity, but from a hope of finding
some palliative."

-"Alas, Sir! that is impossible; ne-
vertheless, I feel your kindness; for, I
have found very few inclined to bestow
even commiseration on scenes of humble
affliction.

"MyMYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 15

"My father and grandfather were
both tenants of the same little farm,
and passed their lives in peace and con-
tent. Out of several children, myself
and one sister were the only survivors-
she was my elder by several years. Being
treated with an equal degree of kind-
ness, we were unacquainted with strife
or envy, and loved each other with truly
fraternal affection.

"At a little distance from our dwell-
ing, we had a neighbour, who also had
a son and daughter, with whom we used
to associate, until, at length, what at
first was only considered as a childish at-
tachment, became a permanent affection,
and speedily terminated in a double
union. For some time, we received no
check to our felicity; but, at length,
it was interrupted by the death of our
parents, a misfortune which was soon
followed by the lord of the manor, from
whom
16 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

whom we had our farms, selling his
estate.

  "As the purchaser had different views
from the late possessor, my brother-in-
law, as well as myself, had notice to
quit. He did not long survive the loss
of his farm, and my sister moved to this
part of the country; for, at that time,
we lived about twenty miles from hence.

  "For my own part, as I could not
immediately suit myself, I settled my 
wife in a small cottage, and engaged 
with a gentleman to manage the farming 
business on his estate; not long after 
which, my wife was brought to bed of a 
boy, and, about the same time, my em-
ployer's lady gave an heir to the family,
they having before only one daughter 
twelve months older. This child, how-
ever, being rather sickly, and the lady 
not choosing the trouble of rearing in 
herself, hearing that my wife had lately 
                                  become           
          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.        17

become a mother, sent to enquire of me
Whether she would take that care upon
her; at the same time offering to agree
to her own terms. This being a business
I did not think myself authorised to an-
swer, I went on the morrow to consult
her, and she, being pleased with the pro-
posal, accompanied me the next day,
and brought the child back with her.


  " The squire's family soon after re-
moved to London for the winter; and,
at his desire, I went to a small estate, he
was about disposing of, in a distant part
of the kingdom. My business them
was to value the live stock, implements
of husbandry, &c. Some difference aris-
ing with the purchaser, the business was
protracted for near six months, which
time my wife passed with my sister, she
having frequently urged her by letter to
bring the children, and stay with her
during my absence..

                                   " Yon
18            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

" You will, perhaps, Sir, think me
tedious iu recounting these trifling mat-
ters ; but, from this visit I may date all
my misfortunes; for, my wife, who had
hitherto given me no cause of complaint,
now became acquainted with the servant
of a gentleman in my sister's neigh-
bourhood, who was the source of all my
unhappiness—this circumstance, how-
ever, I did not learn until some years
after.

  " From this period, my wife's temper
was totally changed. She became sul-
len and reserved, and no longer seemed
to take any delight in the thought of
our being again settled. Nay, if 1 ever
mentioned taking a farm, she eagerly
opposed it, saying, I had better conti-
nue in my present situation. As I was
willing to believe this conduct proceeded
from a cautious and careful disposition,
I, though reluctantly, for the present,
acquiesced.

                                  "My          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.            19

"My employer, soon after, arrived
from the capital, and removed to a 
noble mansion, in the neighbourhood of
the place where my sister resided, hav-
ing succeeded to the title of Earl of 
Atherstone, together with a large estate,
by the death of a relation. Notwith-
standing this acquisition, neither my 
lord nor his lady appeared anxious to 
have the child home; on the contrary,
their whole attention seemed fixed on 
their encreased wealth and honours. It
is true, they had him brought to them
about once in a month, and contented
themselves with remarking, that, As it
grew a fine child, it should remain where
it was some months longer, and then be
replaced by the one with which my lady
was by this time pretty far advanced.

"Providence, however, had other-
wise determined; for, about a fortnight
before she was delivered of another son,
our young charge sickened of small 
                               pox,20 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

pox, and, notwithstanding every care,
at the end of the eleventh day, expired. 
Exclusive of interested motives, I found
myself very much affected by this event; 
for he was a most engaging little fel-
low, and I love him, I will say, as much
as my own son.

"My wife also appeared greatly hurt
by the child's death; indeed, she had 
been very well paid for her attention to
it, which, to give her all due justice,
was even more than equal to what she
bestowed upon her own; nor, in this in-
stance, notwithstanding her ill conduct
in other respects.

"In about a twelvemonth after this
event, I quitted my employment, and
took a small farm, about a mile from 
my sister's, where I have not the least
doubt that I should have done well; 
but here, my wife's temper, which, from 
the     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     21

the child's death, had been particularly 
gloomy, now became so bad, that my
house was continued scene of strife and
discontent. My poor boy also came in
for an abundant share of his mother's ill
humour, and was treated with more se-
verity than suited with either maternal
affection, or his tender years.

  "Neither was this the only cause I had 
for complaint; for, while I laboured early 
and late in the field, I found the busi-
ness within doors totally neglected, my
wife minding nothing but passing her
time in the village, where my sister liv-
ed, in which place, it seems, she had
formed an acquaintance with a woman 
of light character, whose house was a 
common rendezvous for all the gossips
and idlers in the neighbourhood. This 
being the case, no wonder that every 
thing went backward, notwithstanding
I laboured hard to keep things toge-
ther.

                               "At22    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

 "At the end of eight years, I found
it impossible to struggle any longer
against the stream, having by this time
but barely sufficient, when I sold off
every thing, to pay my debts. As for
my wife, she appeared very little moved
at my distress, though she must be con-
scious that it proceeded from her own
misconduct. In about a month after,
I broke up housekeeping, and she pro-
cured a place in a family of note, that
had a seat in the neighbourhood, and
I betook myself to daily labour, with the
hope that a few years of frugal industry
might repair our losses, enable us to re-
gain a comfortable asylum for old age,
and also give her time to reflect on the
folly of her former conduct.

 " My poor boy, having entered his
twelfth year, was now taken home
by my sister, who bestowed on him
all the care and attention of a fond mo-
ther. This proved a great alleviation
to.            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    23

to the troubles which I had for some
time encountered; but, alas! they soon
were encreased to a degree I had never
before experienced.

  "My wife had been in London, with
the family she had engaged with, about
two months, when, one evening, af-
ter my daily labour, happening to call 
in at a little public house for a pint of
ale, I took up a newspaper, and was al-
most bereaved of my senses, by reading
a paragraph, which denoted in plain and
express terms thay My wife was taken up
and committed to Newgate, for having,
in conjunction with one of the footmen,
robbed the family where she lived of a 
large quantity of plate.

  "At first, I would fain have per-
suaded myself that my senses deceived
me, or that I had made some mistake;
but, alas! the names of all the parties
rendered the matter too certain. with
                               a mind
24           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

a mind almost bordering on distraction,
I reached my sister's, and made known 
the dreadful tale,when,having mingled
our tears,it was determined that I should
set out that very night for London.
By my sister's assistance, collecting about
twelve guineas, I, with a heavy heart,
began my journey.

   "On the evening of the second day,
I reached the capital, and, though sadly
wearied, immediately repaired to the
house where my wife had lived.From
the porter I received a full confirmation
of my wife's crime, by his cruelly re-
proaching me with what I could by no
means help or prevent.

   "As I turned from the door,which he
almost shut in my face, a servant, whom
I had frequently seen in the country,
happened to be coming in. This man,
looking stedfastly at me, asked If I was
not farmer Bennet? On answering in the
                                affirma-         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      25

affirmative, and seeing me overwhelmed
with sorrow, he took me kindly by the 
hand, saying He was heartily sorry for 
my misfortunes.  We then adjourned
to a neighbouring public house, where I
learned, for the first time, that My wife
had been connected with her accomplice
for some years, she having confessed, on
her examination, that her acquaintance
with him commenced at the time of her
visit to my sister, during my absence on
the sale of the estate, as before related;
that he had procured her the situation in
the same family with himself, and that
the robbery had been planned by him,
and accomplished for the purpose of go-
ing off to America together.

  "This was an aggravation of her
wickedness, which I did not in the least
expect, and so encreased my misfor-
tunes; nay, I may also add, my resent-
ment, that, at first, I was half inclined
to return immediately to the country, 
                                 and26    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

and leave a wretch to her fate, who had
behaved so ungratefully, and so effectu-
ally ruined my peace.

 " After passing some short time with
the servant, we seperated, and, leaving
the house, I wandered up and down in
a state of wild distraction. From this
disorder I was, at length, in some mea-
sure, a little awakened by the sudden
interruption of a man, who violently 
caught my hand and exclaimed:

 " 'I conjure you, in the name of the
great God of mercy, to hear me-my
wife now lies at the last extremity, for
the want of food. -Shall I again be de-
nied assistance?'

 "In pitying the woes of another, I,
for a moment, lost sight of my own-
my hand moved instinctively to my
pocket, from whence having drawn a 
guinea, I put it into the stranger's. An
inarti           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.              27

inarticulate transport now shook his whole frame; he wrung my hand, and essayed to speak, but a convulsive incoherent sound could alone, for a while, bespeak his gratitude.

" 'Haste,'said I,' and relieve your wife,if indeed she is so worthy.'

" 'Oh!' said the stranger,'if you would but add to your bounty,by visiting the habitation of wretchedness,you would there be convinced that I am no impostor;you would there, too, soon discover the value of the life, which I hope your humanity will the means of preserving.'

"I waved my hand, and the stranger led the way.About a hundred paces brought us to a miserable dwelling, where, in a wretched upper apartment, which admitted the air in very direction, I beheld a poor female,apparently strug- 23         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

struggling against the untied attacks of
ill health and bitter want.

"On our entrance, she essayed to rise
from an old chair in which she lay re-
clining.

"You need to rise, my dear Fanny,'
said the stranger; 'our humane reliever
will, I am sure, excuse you.' He then
dispatched a littl girl, belonging to the
hous, for a loaf and a small quantity of
wine, some of which, on her return, he
poured into a cup; and, while he sup-
ported his wife's head with one hand, 
moistened a piece of bread in the wine,
and applied it to her lips. While he was
thus employed, her eyes were alternately
raised, with looks of tender affection,
to her husband, and those of gratitude
to me. In a few minutes, she appeared 
revived, and, in a weak voice, untied
 her acknowledgments to those of her 
husband.

   "How
          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP     29

  " How comparatively lrappy, thought
I, are these poor but affectionate peo-
ple!—how much do I envy even their
extreme wretchedness !-With these
thoughts, my own misfortunes-returned
with aggravated force, and I took a hasty
leave, having first rcceivcd a direction
to their dwelling, lest I should not find
it again.

  " I enquired my way to the prison ;
but, by the time 1 got thither, found it
was too late to see my wife that night.
Worn out with fatigue, both of body
and mind, I next enquired for a lodging;
and, with some difficulty, obtained one
at a public house in the neighbourhood.

  " Next morning, I repaired to the
prison, but was again denied entrance,
being told that the prisoner had business
enough that day, it being that of her trial,
and consequently no person could be ad-
mitted.

 Vol. I.	C	          " My30                 Mysterious Friendship.

  "My patience and fortitude now
quite forsook me, and I broke out into
the most loud and bitter lamentations of 
grief and sorrow. In the number of un-
feeling wretches who laughed at my mis-
fortunes, there fortunately happened to 
be a man of a more humane disposition,
who took me by the arm, and almost
dragged me out of the brutal crowd that
had assembled about me. Unknowing
what I did, I suffered myself to be led
across the street, into a little room, where
a woman sat at breakfast.

  "The good Samaritan, for I think he
deserves the name, explained in a few
words the situation in which he found
me, and every consolatory argument
was urged by both to alleviate my grief.
As they found my distress was much ag-
gravated by the reflection, that my un-
happy wife had no friend to console, or
speak a favourable word for her, in the 
dread hour of trial they exerted them-
selves        Mysterious Friendship.     51

selves in finding out the proper officers,
and got me introduced into the court.
At my entrance, the trial was in its last
stage; and, while I was gazing upon the
poor squalid terrified criminal, I heard
a person close by me say, in a low voice:
'The jury are going to give their ver-
dict.' ---Despair rendered me almost 
frantic; I sprang forward, threw myself
on my knees, and loudly exclaimed :
---' Mercy! ---Mercy!' ---My un-
happy wife instantly raised her eyes, gave
a loud scream, and fainted.

   "The whole court now became a 
scene of confusion, amid which, notwith-
standing my distressed state of mind, I
could distinguish an almost universal
murmur of pity and compassion. After
some little time, order being again re-
stored, the judge mildly asked, From 
what motive I had interrupted the pro-
ceedings of the court. Having ex-
plained, in broken and disjointed accents,
                     C 2              the32     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

the affinity between myself and the un-
happy culprit, I briefly recapitulated a
little history of myself, in which I en-
deavoured to extenuate my wife's fsults,
and to move their compassion in her
favour.  Unfortunately, my efforts in
her behalf had a contrary effect; for,
after the judge had listened with the
greatest patience, he told me, He was
sorry he could afford me nothing bu pity;
for, every thing I had uttered only proved
the prisoner's ingratitude and want of af-
fection, both as a wife and a mother;
consequently, it was considered as a far-
ther aggravation of her crime.  He, there-
fore, earnestly desired that I would re-
tire from the court, that I might be
spared the hearing of what justice alone
exacted.

  "Though my heart was rent with
anguish, yet it could not help bearing a
mournful testimony of the truth of these
remarks.  Nevertheless, I resolved not
to tear myself away from the guilty
  sourcesource of my unhappiness in the hour of
her distress; I, therefore, entreated per-
mission to remain; and, with more for-
titude than I thought myself possessed
of, heard the awful verdict pronounced.

"It would be too great a trespass on
your patience, were I to attempt a de-
scription of what I felt at that moment
or what I have since experienced; I
shall, therefore, only say, that, by my
entreaties, the prosecutor so strongly re-
commended the poor criminal to mercy,
and used such effective interest, that her
sentence was changed from death to 
seven years banishment; as for the com-
panion of her crimes, he having acted
as a principal, no mitigation could be
allowed.

" I continued in London administer-
ing what consolation was in my power,
until my wife embarked on board the
vessel, which soon sailed for America.
On her departing, I gave her the prin-
cipalcipal part of the money I had left, and
shared the remainder with the poor man,
whom I before mentioned having accost-
ed me in the street; and, having no fur-
ther business in London, I took an af-
fectionate leave of these unfortunate
grateful people, and returned to mingle
my sorrows with my sister, and my poor
boy.  They do, Sir, everything in their
power to make me forget my misfor-
tunes, but in vain; for, though it is
now three years since this unfortunate
event, yet every day, instead of alle-
viating, only serves to encrease my
affliction; therefore, as I understand
that your regiment is soon to go abroad,
I earnestly request to be enlisted, being
determined not to remain in England 
any longer.  This being my firm resolve,
I would sooner engage with you, not
only from the excellent character your
med give you, but also from what I
have been myself a witness to this morn-
ing."

                                   CHAP.        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     35

A Separation.
 
THE poor farmer having finished
his narrative, received the condolence
of Captain Neville. 

"You have been unfortunate, in-
deed," said he, " and I know how to
feel for you, being of your opinion, that
No happiness can be comparable to do-
mestic felicity. Fortunately, I am pos-
sessed of the best of wives, and of a
charming girl, now in her twelfth year.
You may, indeed, with justice, com-
plain of untoward fortune—but come,
give me your hand; since you are re-
solved to embrace the life of a soldier, it
shall be my province, as far as lies in my power,

C 436          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

power, to lighten your past misfortunes.
Use all diligence in learning your exer-
cise, and I will then confer on you the
first stage of promotion; and, in a little
time, you may possibly procure a hal-
bert."

    The usual forms of enlisting being
observed, Bennet returned to his sister,
who, for sometime, was almost inconso-
lable for what she termed an additional
misfortune: a little time, however, and
his arguments, contributed to render
her more easy; but what proved most
efficacious was the degree of favour he
found with his captain. Bennet's good
sense and native honesty could hardly
fail of gaining him friends. In the re-
giment, he was particularly noticed for
the facility and adroitness with which he
acquired the manual exercise; but what
gave him a decided claim to Captain
Neville's regard, was the following cir-
cumstance.

                                      It  
             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP       37

It has been already related that Ben-
net, one evening, during his sojourn in
the capital, was the probable means of
saving an unfortunate couple from pe
rishing through want.  When he took
his leave of the wretched pair, the wo-
man had very little appearance of re-
covery; he, therefore, gave the husband
a direction to his sister's desiring he
would write and let him know if For-
tune abated of her severity.


   Six months had elapsed since re-
turn, when, one morning, he repaired
to the captain's quarters, with a brow so
clouded, that his officer enquired If he
had experienced any new sorrow?


  " Your honour," answered Bennet,
"was so good as to retain my enlisting
money in your hands, at my own parti-
cular request; my reason then was, I
knew I should not be able to prevail on
                C5                  my
       38           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

my sister to take it; so, I meant to have
begged the favour of your honor en-
closing and directing it to her, when I
was leaving the country; by which
means, she would not have had an op-
portunity to return it."

  "Well, Bennet," answered the cap-
tain, "I suppose you have now changed
your plan of operations?"

  "In some measure, Sir," said Ben-
net; "for, I have just received a letter
concerning the poor gentleman; for, I 
am sure he is one, notwithstanding his
distress."

  "What gentleman, Bennet?"

  "Why, Sir, the poor gentleman that
--that I was fortunate enough to assist,
during the time I was in London."

                                 "Well,           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       39
"Well, Bennet, and what tidings? Is 
he more happily situated?"

Bennet cleared a rising mist form his
eyes, and presented a letter, which the
captain found to be as follow:

"SIR,

"This comes by the desire of my 
lodger, to let you know that his wife is
dead; he is too ill to write himself, and
almost distracted, having not where-
withal to put the corpse in the ground;
what is to be done God only knows. So
no more at present from

                       "SIR,
 
                     "You humble servant,

                            "MARY COMBLE."

 "'tis for this purpose, then, Bennet,
that you wish to draw your money, I
suppose?"

"It is, Sir," replied Bennet.

C6          " You


40         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  " You are in truth a most extraor-
dinary character; hut I must insist that
you reserve your money for its original
purpose," said the captain; " and, as
you are now under my command, that
you take these ten guineas, and remit
them to bury the dead."

  Bonnet's eyes again bccame misty,
and he was about stammering out his
acknowledgments, but the captain stop-
ped him, by saying:

  " I will have no reply; you arc a sol-
dier, and must learn to obey your com-
manding officer. When you have dis-
patched this affair, I wish to speak to you
about some other business."

  Bennet retired, and made up a packet,
in which he enclosed the money, and-a
letter explaining to the distressed wi-
dower to whom he was obliged for this
                               supply:
     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.              41

supply: he then returned to the captain,
to reccive his further orders.

  " Bennet," said the captain, " when
I left London, I was commissioned by
my wife, to engage some retired situa-
tion, where she might pass her time un-
til my return from abroad, as she pre-
fers living free from noise and bustle.
Now, as this appears a charming coun-
try, and, as I understand our regiment,
which is nearly complete, will be embark-
ed from this quarter, do you not think we
might find some agreeable spot to answer
the purpose?"

  " Yes, Sir," replied Bennet, " and I
believe I can point out one of the most
beautiful cottages in the kingdom. It
is situated at the entrance of the village
where my sister lives, about three miles
from hence, and has every desirable con-
venience. The last possessor is lately
                                   dead,42 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

dead; so that I believe you may also
be accommedated with the furniture."

  Bennet's description appeared so ex-
actly to correspond with Captain Ne-
ville's wishes, that the next morning,
accompanied by him, he took a review
of the premises, which he found so much
to his satisfaction, that he immediately
came to an agreement for the remaining
term of the lease, and likewise cove-
nanted to take the furniture at a fair
appraisement.

  A few days after, Mrs. Neville and
Miss Flora came to take possession of
their new dwelling, which pleased them
as much as it had done the captain.
And now, as we shall in future enjoy no
inconsiderable share of their acquait-
ance, it will be but right to give this
family a regular introduction, lest we
should incur the censure of  ushering our
readers into improper company, such as nobody

           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       43

nobody knows--or from whom they 
sprung--or whence they came.

  First, then, Captain Edward Neville
was the son of Hugh Neville, who, after
forty years spent in the service, obtained
the same rank his son now held--a com-
pany of foot.  Indeed, there appeared a
strange whimsicality in the progressive
rise  f this family; for, Captain Hugh's
father was also a captain of foot--no
more--though it has been surmised that, 
if his mother's uncle, the member of 
parliament, had lived, he might have
possibly procured a majority, as, at
that time, a parliament-man had some 
interest.

  As Captain Neville was never heard to
mention any of his ancestors prior to
these, we will not take upon us to enume-
rate them; not but what we suppose that
he had ancestors as well as others, though
we question if either he, or they, could
                                    trace
44        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

trace them as high as Adam: but this
being foreign to the purpose, we will
venture to assert a very good reason for
Captain Neville's never boasting of his
progenitors; the truth is, lie rather chose
his name should descend to posterity as
an honest man, than by any superficial
distinction.


  At the age of twenty-five, lie married
the daughter of a lieutenant. This young
lady having lost both her parents, re-
sided under the protection of a maiden
aunt, whose good nature and accom-
plishments, in spite of her celibacy, far
exceeded her contracted income, which
last ceased with herself. The other
trifling appendages, to which we may
add much beauty, and great good sense,
were inherited by Miss Arabella Wil-
mot, that being the maiden appellation
of Mrs. Neville.

                                   MissMYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 45

Miss Flora Neville was the only pro-
duce of an union, whose happiness had
received no interruption until the war.
A separation, however, did not imme-
diately take place, to the no small satis-
faction of our little group, Serjeant
Bennet alone excepted; for, being now
a complete soldier, he had received that
title; and, though he did not absolutely
thirst for glory, yet he was anxious to
remove from a place that daily reminded
him of his misfortunes.

At length, the shrill trumpet gave so
loud a blast, that every heroic ear be-
came thoroughly alarmed. Mandates
were issued for fresh levies, and for those
that were complete to be dispatched to
their destination. Among the latter,
the regiment to which Captain Neville
belonged was ordered to Ireland, pre-
paratory to its entering on actual ser-
vice.

As46     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

   As this was the first separation be-
tween the captain and his family, it was
not a little poignant; nor was the part-
ing of Bennet with his son and sister
less severe, not withstanding they occu-
pied more humble stations: our serjeant.
'tis true, had one consolatory reflection,
that, in his sister, the boy had found
all the affection and care of the most
tender parent, which, on his part, was
returned with attention and filial love.
He had now cutered his fifteenth year,
and had gone through all the common
learning that part of the country could
afford. As for his person, it was un-
commonly handsome, his temper mild
and engaging; and, notwithstanding his
birth, his manners were soft, easy, and
graceful, betraying neither in speech nor
action the least sign of awkwardness or
rusticity.

   Such was young Bennet, the darling
and sole care of his aunt, Mrs. Rachel
                              Welford,MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP 47

Welford, who, over and above her cares
and expence in causing to be taught
English, writing, arithmetic, and a quan-
tum sulf of Latin, was also intently
and parsimoniously bent to gather to-
gether the sum of fifteen pounds, being
the total demanded by Mr. Orccus, the
village apothecary, for taking him, the
said William Bennet, apprentice.

Now, Mrs. Welford had the best of
all possible reasons, in her own opinion,
for this determination. In the first place,
she viewed her nephew with that eye of
partiality with which all fond aunts and
mothers are wont--secondly, she wish-
ed to make him a gentleman-and, third-
ly, from her own family proving rather
unfortunate in that line, she had im-
bided an aversion to an agricultural way
of life.

But, to constitute, appoint, and in-
denture him a gentleman, there was
still48 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

still wanting seven pounds thirteen shil-
lings, a sum too insignificant to pur-
clase a vote at an election; but, in the
present instance, esteemed a very capi-
tal matter, because, though Serjeant
Bennet, according to his projected plan,
had contrived to get seven guineas of
his enlisting money safely conveyed to
her, still there was the first mentioned
sum wanting, to complete Mr. Cre-
cus's demand. Now, it would require
the utmost frugality to scrape together
the deficiency, within the short date of
a twelvemonth, which was the time pre-
cribed by Mr. Crecus; but, though this
was a hardship, it was nothing to letting
slip an opportunity that possibly mihgt
never be retrieved. But, while Rachel
is busied in contemplating how to raise
this enormous capital, we will walk
through the village, and take a view of
the cottage appertaining to the Neville
family.

This         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     49

   This charming little dwelling was si-
tuated about twenty yards from the
road, at the end of the village; and, being
detached from every other building, en-
joyed the cheerfulness of the neighbour-
hood, without too great a proximity.
Its approach was by a small neat shrub-
bery, and on each side were gravelled
walks that led to the back of the house,
and also to a delightful garden, so alter-
nately covered with fruit trees, clumps
of flowers, and shrubs, that it appeared
as if Pomona and Flora had engaged in
a trial of skill, to embellish the spot.
A clear rivulet, murmuring over its
pebbly bottom, divided this enchanting
place from a small well-cropt kithen-
garden, which was entered by a wooden
bridge, ornamented by Chinese railing.

   The cottage contained two parlours,
a drawing-room, and four sleeping cham-
bers; and, detached from the main build-
ing, were kitchen, stable, barn, and 
                             chaise-
50 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

chaise-house. And now, having given
a description of the dwelling, it may not
be amiss to say something of its inhabi-
tants.

   Mrs. Neville, it has already been re-
marked, was handsome, good-tempered,
sensible, and accomplished-at this pe-
riod, she had entered her thirty-fifth 
year.

   Flora was some months advanced into
her fourteenth, and was, in comaparison
to Mrs. Neville, what the expanding
bud exhibits, when rauged by the full-
blown rose. Though she had never ex-
perienced other tuition than her father's,
and Mrs. Neville's, yet she had read the 
best authors, inderstood geography, was
conversant in history, spoke French flu-
ently, and correctly, and was no con-
temptible performer on the piano forte.
Though playful as a young roe upon the 
mountains, yet her temper was mild as
                                  the                MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         51

the lamb, and her thoughts unsullied as
purity itself. It may possibly appear,
from this description, that Mrs. and Miss
Neville had some pretensions to the title
of fine ladies; but, one concomitant
being wanting, they declined asserting
their claim, consequently were not above
superintending their family concerns, and
were perfectly content with the auxiliary
aid of two female servants, who undertook
the more laborious part, while the pick-
ling, preserving, pastry, and needlework,
appertained to Mrs. Neville and Flora.
Neither were these huswifery avocations
their sole employment; for, as both the
ladies had a very considerable portion of
rather a scarce ingredient engrafted in
their compositions, viz. the milk of hu-
man kindness, the elder one was often
employed in comforting and relieving
her poor sick neighbours; while the fin-
gers of the young one never moved with
so much alacrity, as when making caps,
gowns, and other appendages for their in-
                                   fants.52           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

fants.  'Tis true, the appointments of a
captain of foot would not allow them to
act upon a very extensive scale; yet, what 
they could, they did, and that with a good
will, that doubled the obligation they
conferred.

  Flora, when unemployed in more use-
ful avocations, sometimes amused her-
self in training the honeysuckle, or jas-
mine, whose luxuriant branches would
otherwise have spread and disfigured her
favourite arbour. On her first arrival at
the cottage, she had invaded the parti-
cular province of Martha, by taking
from her the superintendance of the
poultry. However, after a hard struggle,
this post was again resumed by the vin-
dictive female, who declared, that, if
Miss Neville had her will, not a fowl
would be allowed for the family con-
sumption, one being exempt from slaugh-
ter on account of its particular beauty,
another because it fed out of her hand,
                                    &e.          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP    53

&c. &c. In short, the tenderness of
Flora's disposition continually displayed
itself by forming a number of reasons to
protect the whole breed.

   It is not to be supposed but that hearts
so tender and susceptible, as were those
of Mrs. and Miss Neville, would often
be anxiously oppressed, when they re-
flected on the dangerous occupation of a
beloved husband and father. This, in-
deed, was a source which embittered
their happiness, and was only fully re-
lieved when the post brought letters, to
assure them of his welfare. Some months
had elapsed since his departure, and no-
thing had transpired relative to the re-
giment's leaving Ireland; so that a ray
of.hope began to enliven their breasts,
that the halcyon hours of peace would
again be restored, before an order was
issued for its embarkation. But, alas!
this hope was vain; for, a mandate was,
at length, dispatched for their holding
  Vol. I.            D            them-54      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

themselves in readiness for embarkation,
transports being ordered round to Cork
for that purpose.


  As great bodies move but slowly, and
as affairs of moment require delibra-
tion, the victualling and appointing a
convoy took up so much time, that it
made out near a twelvemonth from the
regiment's arrival in Ireland, to its final
departure; a delay that was not a little
pleasing to the ladies, who agreeably
suprized the captain with a visit, before
the sailing of the fleet.

  As the pains of separation are better
imagined than described, we shall for-
bear saying any thing on the subject;
but, while the ladies are on their voyage
home, return to Mrs. Welford and Young
Bennet.



                             CHAP.
MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      55

CHAP. IV.

A Stranger.


DURING Mrs. Neville's ab-
sence from the cottage, Mrs. Welford
was intrusted with the care of the do-
mestic concerns, her prudence and aff c-
tion to her nephew having greatly inte-
rested that lady in her favour. For some
years, she had kept a little school,
which, as it did not answer, she had
given up; and she now only waited for
young Bennet's being indentured to Mr.
Crecus, relinquish house-keeping also,
and seek some eligible servitude.

The ladies had been absent about two
months, and were daily expected home,
when, one morning, a grave looking
gentleman, on horseback, apparently
        D2                    near
56            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

near fifty, tapped at Mrs. Welford's door.  On its being opened by young Bennet, he enquired If she was at home?  On the boy's answering in the negative, and saying that His aunt was at Captain Neville's the stranger replied:

     "Oh, then you are farmer Bennet's son, I take it.  Where is your father?"

     "He has sailed for America, Sir," answered young Bennet, with a sigh.

     "If I have been truly informed, you have a good aunt," said the stranger, "to make up for the loss of your father."

     - "Oh, yes, Sir; she has been a mother to me, I am sure:" and, as he spoke, the tears of gratitude flowed down his cheeks. 


                                    "Your

                   MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    57

   "Your father, I understand," an-
swered the stranger, "is in Captain
Neville's regiment?"

   William had just answered in the
affirmative, when Mrs. Welford came to
the door, and, seeing him discourse
with a gentleman, dropped a curtsy.
"Oh, here is my aunt, Sir," said Wil-
liam.

   "I am glad to see you, Mrs. Wel-
ford," said the stranger--"Your cha-
racter is not unknown to me; for, Fame
says You have discharged the duties of
a good wife, an affectionate sister, and
a tender relation to this poor boy."

   "Will you please to walk in, Sir?"
replied Mrs. Welford.

   "Willingly," said he; "for, I want
to have a little discourse with ."58    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  He then tied his horse to a rail, and
entered Mrs. Welford's small mansion,
where he seated himself without cere-
mony.

  " From what I have heard,"conti-
nued he, " of your character, I am
sure you will not be offended at my ask-
ing a plain question, especially when I 
promise that my interrogatory does not
proceed from impertinent curiosity. Is
it true that you mean to seek a situation?
and that your care in settling this child
has been your only prevention for some
time past? This is what I have been in-
formed by your neighbours, with the 
further additions I have already re-
lated."

      I am much obliged to my neigh-
bours for their good opinion," replied
Mrs. Welford; "but I know not how I
deserve their praise, as, I dare say, they
would have acted in the same manner;              
                                and          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP    59

and for my poor boy, he deserves every
thing I can do for him; I am only sorry
that necessity and his future welfare
will oblige us to part."

   "Perhaps," said the stranger, " there
may be no immediate occasion for it.
I have been only about a week in this
part of the country; yet , I prefer it to
almost any one I have seen; for which
reason, having no relations, and but few
connexions, I am resolved to settle
here. Your parsonage-house is to be
let; I have already seen it, and I ap-
prove it much, more particularly as it is
so near Captain Neville's amiable fa-
mily, with whom I hope I shall not re-
main long unacquainted. But this,
Mrs. Welford, is foreign to the purpose.
Your worth and integrity make me par-
ticularly anxious to prevail on you to
superintended my small family; not as a ser-
vant, but as a friend- a sister- Your
own actions are sufficient testimonials.
                   D4                As
60       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

As for me , I shall give a reference that
will, at least, acquit me of vice or dis-
honour; for, it is as necessary for you
to be assured that I am neither a de-
bauchee nor a scoundrel, as it is for me 
to know that you are a virtuous and
praise-worthy character. In regard to
pecuniary matters, if you accord with
my proposal, settle your own terms.
Your disinterested conduct to your bro-
ther, and his child, are convincing
proofs that you are not mercenary.-----
In regard to your nephew, I have ga-
thered sufficient information to acquit
me for saying that his being indentured
to Mr. Crecus may not altogether prove
eligible,as a little time, perhaps, may
prove; for which reason, until he can be
better disposed of, he shall likewise be
one of my family."


  The stranger paused, and received the
acknowledgments of a grateful heart.
Nor was young Bennet wanting in ex-
                           hibiting     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     61

hibiting his sense of this disinterested
kindness, though his expression was
chiefly confined to his eyes. Indeed, 
the behaviour of both aunt and nephew
might have puzzled an uninformed spec-
tator, and made him conjecture they
were mourning some dire calamity, ra-
ther than receiving a benefit.

  But, as these effusions appeared pain-
ful to the stranger, he put a stop to them,
by saying:

  "Come, Mrs. Welford; as you are
willing to accord with my proposition, 
'tis necessary that we should proceed to 
business.-Here, you may have a sa-
tisfactory account of my character"-
at the same time putting a paper into
her hand, containing a reference to the
principal of a banking house in the 
country town-"And now," conti-
nued he, "let us talk of terms; as it is
               D5                neces-62          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.


neccessary you should know what you
have to trust to."

   This Mrs. Welford would have left to
himself: but, as he peremptorily insist-
ed to the contrary, she modestly named
a very humble stipend, which the
stranger insisted should be trebled, that
is, that she should receive an annual sa-
lary of thirty pounds; nor did it avial
Mrs. Welford to remonstrate on the
score of Mr.Barton's (for that was his
name) having the goodness to take the
boy into his house also- that being,
as he said, his business, and what she
had nothing to do with. Mr.Barton
concluded his visit by desiring Mrs.
Welford to settle her own domestic af-
fairs as soon as possible, and repair to his
new mansion, where she would find tow
female domestics that he had just hired,
taking in the furniture, and preparing
for his reception.

                                Having 
       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       63

  Having thus finished his business, he
mounted his horse, and said He should
see her again in a few days. He then
shook the boy's hand, at the same time
leaving in it a purse of ten guineas,
which, in a low voice, he told him to
give his aunt, as she might possibly have
some little business to settle, previous to
her breaking up house-keeping. He
then waved his hand, and rode off, leav-
ing both aunt and nephew in the utmost
astonishment to account for so strange
a visit, which, if it had not been for the
corroborating proofs of the money and
other circumstances, they would scarcely
have been persuaded hut that they had
been under the influence of a disordered
imagination. As it was, they could not
help recapitulating every word that had
passed, until they bewildered themselves
in a labyrinth, that, however, had no
clew to direct them.

                  D 6             HavingHaving passed about two hours in
this manner, the directed their steps to
the late parsonage-house, where, amidst
no inconsiderable share of hurry and
bustle of carpenters, upholsterers, &c.
they, on certifying their names, were
welcomed by the two servants in posses-
sion, who had been already informed by 
Mr. Barton of this addition to the fa-
mily.

  As these communicative females in-
formed Mrs. Welford that they had
been recommended by the individual
banker, to whom she was referred, and
who was known throughout the country
for a gentleman possessed of a large share
of i, probity well as fortune, she es-
teemed it unnecessary to make any far-
ther enquiry respecting Mr. Barton, re-
solving, on the return of the ladies, to
repair to her new situation. In the mean
time, she paid off her tenement, dis-
posed of her furniture, and, on their ar-
                                     rival,
           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.          65

rival, found herself completely disin-
cumbered of the cares of house-keep-
ing.

    After the necessary compliments and
discussions had taken place, relative to
the health, departure, &c. of Captain
Neville and Bennet, Mrs. Neville was
informed of Mrs. Welford's new engage-
ment. In return, Mrs. Neville told
her, that, Having occasion to call upon
Mr.Everard,the before-mentioned bank-
er, who was also Captain Neville's
cashier, she took his residence in her
way home, when, having settled her
money matters, the banker, among other
discourse, informed her, that She was
on the point of having a very worthy
and respectable neighbour, in the person
of a Mr.Barton, whose money con-
cerns he had the honour to transact, and
who had taken the parsonage house ad-
jacent to her own: that he had, at Mr.
Barton's request, provided him with two
                                 female66                       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
female servants; and that, upon Mr.
Everard's informing him of Captain Ne-
ville's having probably sailed for Ame-
rica, Mr. Barton appeared much cha-
grined, saying, He had promised him-
self great satisfaction from his acquaint-
ance with the captain.  'And now,'
Madam,' continued Mr. Everard, 'I 
have to beg pardon for one liberty I have
taken, namely, at Mr. Barton's request, 
giving him an introductory line to you,
which, however, I should by no means 
have complied with, had I not been tho-
roughly assured of his being a gentleman
of a most exemplary character.'- "You
may believe, Mrs. Welford," continued 
she, "that, so far from being offended,
I was very glad to hear I was to have so
agreeable a neighbor; and I am parti-
cularly pleased to find that your asylum 
is with the same person."

  Mr. Barton's residence was scarcely
prepared, when he arrived, and having
                                              partakenMYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 67

partaken of a slight repast, he retired to
rest. The next morning, having sum-
poned Mrs. Welford and her nephew
into the parlour, he gave them to under-
stand, that it was his will and pleasure
that they should take their meals with
him.

"Remember, Mrs. Welford," said 
he, 'you are to consider yourself, both
in your conduct towards me, and in re-
gard to the servants, as if you were my
sister; consequently, this boy is my ne-
phew; and, mark me, young man,"
added he, "every improvement that you
make in things, that I find praise-worthy
in you, will afford me pleasure. To-
morrow, I shall examine what progress
you have made in your learning, and see
what further instruction you may re-
quire.-I will have no thanks, Mrs.
Welford; I am an humorist, and you
cannot offend me more than by not let-
ting me have my own way.-We will
dine
68         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

dine at two—I am going to Mrs. Nc-
ville's— Farewel."

  Mr. Barton proceeded to the cottage,
and had barely enquired tor the ladies,
and signified his name, before the par-
lour-door opened, and he found himself
welcomed with as much ease and cordi-
ality as if he hud been an old acquaint-
ance.

  " I was studying an apology for my
intrusion, Madam," said he; " but
your affability and condescension have
almost induced me to believe both that,
and also these credentials, unnecessary."

  " Most assuredly they are," returned
Mrs. Neville; "for had not Mr. Barton's
character preceded his visit, I should
have been tempted to hazard my small
skill of physiognony in his favour."

                                    In       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      69

  In truth, this reply could not be con-
sidered as one of those unmeaning com-
pliments with which the circles of
fashion abound; for Mr. Barton was one 
of those rare beings, whose outward and
visible appearance was deeply impressed 
by innate virtue; so there required but
little knowledge of Lavater to give it
due influence.

  As conversation, in general, how-
ever amusing they may prove to parties
concerned, are for the most part dull and 
uninteresting to others, it may, perhaps, 
be as well to retrench this between Mrs.
and Miss Neville and Mr. Barton: let
it, therefore, suffice to say, that they
parted, mutually satisfied, and tho-
roughly acquainted with each other.

  The next morning, a number of pack-
ing cases, filled with books, arrived at
Mr. Barton's, which, for some days, 
gave that gentleman and William full
                             employ-
70      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

employment to arrange in proper order.
Mr.Barton had appropriated one room for
the purpose of a library, which, previous
to his arrival, had been properly furnish-
ed with shelves, globes, maps, and every 
other appendage. Here, a certain por-
tion of each day was set apart for study,
and for the instruction of William; an
exercise which Mr.Barton entered upon
with as much pleasure, as he was well
qualified, having to the knowledge of
schools added that of human nature.
As no small share of this latter study had
been obtained in the seminary of afflic-
tion, his philosophy was not merely theo-
retical; consequently, not of the kind
to exhaust itself in pithy sentences and
moral apothegms, but in the more use-
ful and exalted practices of administer-
ing to the necessities, and alleviating the
calamities, of his fellow-creatures.

 Though Mr.Barton was, to all intents
and purposes, the complete scholar, yet
the.
          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.        71

the exterior ornaments had by no means
been neglected; for, in his more youth-
ful days, he had attained a proficiency
in music, fencing, drawing, &c. These,
however, were matters lie had long
ccascd to value himself upon; young
William, nevertheless, found they were
not only useful, but pleasant auxiliaries
to more weighty acquirements.

  But, methinks, I hear a fashionable
reader exclaim—" Ridiculous!-what
a fuss is here about the son of a Ser-
jeant!"—I can only answer, in return,
that Mr. Barton was a strange kind of an
humorist, or, perhaps, labouring under
that unaccountable caprice, that often
influences the rich and great, to lavish
their time and treasure 011 objccts to the
full as undeserving and contemptible.

  Every one has his particular taste;
therefore, Mr. Barton continued his be-
fore-rccitcd employment, with very little
                               variation,72         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

variation, except alternatively visiting and
receiving visits from the inhabitants 
of the cottage; or in riding, walking, 
and gardening, with his pupil, whose 
mind daily improved under the auspices 
of so able an instructor.

Some months had now elapsed, above
the started period in which William was
to be indentured to Mr. Crecus, and as 
that gentleman had lately been very ur-
gent, Mrs. Welford thought it proper to
remind Mr. Barton of the subject, who,
the next day, finally settled the business,
the paying the covenanted sum into Mr.
Crecus's hands, telling him, at the same
time, that the youth's future destination 
was changed.

As the money, without the apprentice, 
appeared a sufficient apology, Mr. Bar-
ton migth have spared himself the trou-
ble of an explanation; indeed, a little 
time would have rendered even the visit
                                 totally

          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      73

totally unnecessary; for, in a few days
after, Mr. Crecus's shop was closed, and
only a small assortment of empty boxes
and gallipots left, to satisfy a large num-
ber of clamorous creditors.

   " Well," said Mr. Barton, on this
event taking place, " don't you think I
was right, when I prognosticated, on
my first visit, that William's connexion
with Mr. Crecus might not prove sa-
tisfactory?"

   " You were, indeed, Sir," answered
Mrs. Welford, "and your goodness----"

   " Why, what a plague ails the wo-
man?: interrupted Mr. Barton, humor-
ously.--" You can be no Christian, if
you endeavour to interrupt my goodness,
as you call it. If I chuse to endeavour
at Heaven in my own way, what is that
to thee? Are we not enjoined to assist
the widow and the fatherless? But, hold;
                                      as

74 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

as I have been in some measure instru-
mental in hindering the young man from
being a body curer, suppose we make
him a body tormentor:-what say you,
William; will you be a lawyer?"

"I would rather be any thing else,
Sir," said William.

"Why so?"

"Because, Sir," answered William,
bursting into tears, "I would sooner
die, than seize poor people's goods, or
send them to prison."

"Well, then, William, you shall not
be a lawyer. But have ever these ter-
rible scenes of seizing and imprisoning
presented themselves to your view, that
the idea appears to affect you so much?"

"Yes Sir," answered William, sob-
bing-" I saw Hannah Jones's goods seized,
               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.          75

seized, this morning, by Lord Atherstone's steward; and she, and and her two poor little children, will be turned into the street."

     "And, pray," said Mr. Barton, "who is this mighty oppressor?  But, as I am no great respecter of mere persons, tell me, first, who Hannah Jones is; for, she being the sufferer, claims the prior attention."

     "Why, Sir," answered Mrs. Welford, "Hannah Jones is as honest, and as industrious a woman as any in the country.  Her husband has been incapable of labour for above a twelve month, and is now confined to his bed in an hospital; on which account, they are a year's rent behind for their cottage, and a small piece of ground, which they held of Lord Atherstone."

                                             "And



76          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  " And now for my Lord Atherstone,"
said Mr. Barton, dryly.—" I suppose no-
thing but necessity could have made
him proceed thus harshly?"

  " Lord, Sir!" replied Mrs. Welford,
" he has the greatest estate in the coun-
try. My brother's wife formerly nursed
his eldest son. He had a good estate
then, though no title, and was thought
neither a harsh nor an oppressive land-
lord."

  " Ay, but you find, Mrs. Welford,
that honours change manners."

  ' I cannot say how that may be,
Sir," said she; " perhaps, this is the
steward's fault; for, my lord has no large
family of children to provide for, hav-
ing only one son, Lord Dalton, a year
younger than William, and a daughter
two years older than their son. The
young lady, thev say, is a sweet-tem-
                               pered          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP     77

pered creature; but no one gives the
young lord a good word, he is so very
proud and mischievous. Though he has
got a clergyman for his tutor, yet he is
suffered to do what he pleases, to spend
what money he likes, and this he squan-
ders...."

   "To very little purpose, I dare say,
Mrs. Welford," interrupted Mr. Barton;
"so, William and I will take a little
walk, to procure us an appetite to our
dinner---"


Vol. I.              E           CHAP.                   CHAP. V.

             Oppression defeated

"WILLIAM," said Mr. Barton,
as they walked forward, "shew me the 
way to Hannah Jones's cottage."

"With all my heart," answered Wil-
liam joyfully; and, in a few minutes,
they reached it. There they found poor
Hannah, alternately reading a letter, and
crying over her children, and so much
absorbed in grief, that their entrance
was unnoticed. At length, raising her 
head, and casting her eyes upwards:

" The will of God be done!" ejacu-
lated Hannah.

                   "Amen,"            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       79

     " Amen," repeated Barton; " and, with his gracious permission, thou shalt wipe the tear of sorrow away.  You, I suppose," turning to a grim-looking fellow, who sat unconcernedly whistling in a corner of the room, "are the flinty executor of the noble creditor, and his ignoble rent-gatherer's mandates?'

     "I be an authoritive officer," replied he; "I be's no executioner."

     ".Well, then, Mr. Officer, Plese to deliver an account of your demand, and sign a discharge."

     " Sooner said than done----No, no --hold you there--who's to pay the money?"   

     " Harkee! no impertinence.--If your Power does not extend so far, send for your master, the steward----or his master,
                     E2                     80        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
ter.-Haste! I have no time to throw
away."

   The bailiff now called his understrap-
per, who was jurking in another part of
the dwelling. Having grumbled some-
thing in his ear, he retired, and the in-
termediate time till his return was em-
ployed by Mr. Barton in comforting 
poor Hannah, and explaining the nature 
of his visit. This was no sooner done,
than her tears began to flow as fast
through joy, as they had done before
from sorrow. In her first transport,
she threw herself at his feet, and em-
braced his knees; then kissed her chil-
dren, and for some minutes appeared 
absolutely bereft of reason; but the re-
turn of the messenger accompanied by
Mr. Wolf, who acted in the double ca-
pacity of an attorney and steward to 
Lord Atherstone, gave her time for re-
collection.

                                  ThisMYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 81

This great man's substitute having
strutted into the room, and put on as
much consequence as he could possibly
assume for the occasion, stroked down
his ruffles, seated himself, and scowled
round the room, expecting his presence
would act as a torpedo, and benumb or
awe into dread and silence every inmate
of this humble dwelling.

"I am informed-I say, I am in-
formed-" quoth Mr. Wolf, "that-"

"Well, then," interrupted Mr. Bar-
ton, "if you are informed, let us have
no more words, but tell me your de-
mand."

"Sir, I say this is not the behaviour
of a a gentleman-"

"To a gentleman-you are right, Mr.
Wolf; therefore, dispatch; let me not
detain
E 382         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

detain you and your worthy myrmidons from you exemplary occupations."

  Mr. Wolf then produced his demand, in a huff, amounting to eleven pounds thirteen and eightpence. This was paid by Mr. Barton with calmness, after which, Mr. Wolf and his attendants made their exits in a pet.

  The consoled Hannah now poured forth a strain of more connected acknowledgments, which Mr. Barton put a stop to, by enquiring after her husband's health.

  "On, Sir!" said Hannah, "I had just received a letter from him, as you came in, to let me know, that he was quite recovered, and was coming home, and it almost broke my heart to think he would have no home to come to, nor bed to lie down upon; but now, thank God, and your goodness, we shall be able

    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.   83

able to keep a house over our heads,
and to work,and get forward again."

 "That you may the better be enabled
so to do," said Mr. Barton, "I will
make you a weekly allowance of ten
shillings, until such time as your hus-
band shall have recovered his full
strength; here is likewise a guinea for
present exigencies.---Good day."

 With these words, Mr. Barton made 
a precipitate retreat, to avoid all further
acknowledgment, and, accompanied by
his pupil, returned home to dinner, at
least with as much self-approbation in
the disposal of eleven pounds thirteen
shillings and eightpence, as either my
Lord Atherstone, or Mr. Lawyer Wolf
enjoyed, while distraining for the said sum.

 William took the first opportunity to
acquaint his aunt with their adven- 
                      E4      tures

84	MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
tures at Hannah Jones's, which Mrs.
Welford, in the fulness of her heart,
could not forbear touching upon, at
dinner, execrating the inhumanity of the
one party, and pouring out her benedic-
tions on the other, until her eyes over-
flowed with gratitude for her own bene-
fits, and, at the same time, evinced her
admiration of those so lately bestowed
on others.

   " I find William has been a babbler,"
said Mr. Barton—" and you, Mrs. Wel-
ford, are every whit as bad. There is al-
ways a great deal more made of these
trifles than they deserve. The distress-
ing a fellow-creature, I grant you, is a
very bad action; yet I do not see where
the great merit lies in assisting distress,
to those who have it abundantly in
their power. But, pray, Mrs. Welford,
how long have you had this Wolf
amongst you."



                                " About           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     85

   "About five years, Sir; in which time,
he has ruined a number of families, by
settling their accounts, urging them to
commence frivolous suits, and encou-
raging them in every species of vexatious
litigation. Before his arrival, the whole
village was remarkable for the harmony
and good fellowship of its inhabitants;
now, there appears an universal distrust,
and nothing but broils, contention, and
discontent."

  ---"A lamentable change, indeed! But
how could it possbily be effected, at least,
to the degree you mention; for, such a
character could never have an influence
from either love or esteem."

  ---"Far from it, Sir. On his first com-
ing, he had very little employment, and
that only amongst those who were gross-
ly ignorant, or who were wicked enough
to defend a bad cause, some of which he
happened to gain, because his opponents
                E 5                were86        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
were poor, or fearful to encounter the
expence. But what has chiefly contri-
buted to give him an influence, is his
collecting Lord Atherstone's rents, an
office which he exercises with great se-
verity, especially with the poorer tenants, 
as he undoubtedly finds his account in
their distress."

    "Had this wretch," said Mr. Barton, 
" lived in Edgar's reign, he might, per-
haps, have shared the fate of his four-
footed namesakes, and his head proved
a tax for his rapacity; but, in out mo-
dern and refined times, instead of de-
stroying, they seem to encourage the
breed. But I think, Mrs. Welford, you 
mentioned this morning something about
the young hopeful sprig of quality, and
his tutor: from what you then hinted,
I should suppose the tenants will not be
much more benefited if he should live to 
come into possession."

                          "Indeed,          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    87
  
  --" Indeed, Sir, I am afraid not; for,
young Lord Dalton's tutor does not ap-
pear to teach him humanity, or he would
not connive at so many mischievous and
barbarous tricks, which his pupil is guilty
of. The young gentleman is a great a
scourge, in his way, as the lawyer, by
cutting off the tails of pigs, setting on
his dogs to worry poultry, not to men-
tion the mischief done to the farmers'
grounds, in hunting and shooting. In
these excursions, he is always accompa-
nied by his tutor, Mr. Supple, who is al-
most as great a favourite with the earl
and countess, as he is with the heir. It
seems he has perfectly studied their
foibles, and is continually sounding their
vast consequence, and the immense infe-
riority of their neighbours and depen-
dants. Indeed, pride and arrogance
seem to have gained a more than com-
mon height in this family, since my
lord's accession to the title, especially on
the part of the countess."
                   E 6                "Pride88      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

    --" Pride and arrogance, Mrs. Wel-
ford, are the proper distinctions of 
folly, and ought to be characteristically 
emblazoned in the escutcheorns of their
possessors."

    The conversation was here suddenly
interrupted by the hasty entrance of 
Mrs. Neville who, without speaking a
word, caught young Bennet in her
caresses; then, turning to Mr.Barton,
and smiling through a flood of tears,
she exclaimed:

    "You shall not any longer claim a 
sole interest in this boy; from hencefor-
ward, he shall be also mine, equally dear
as Flora. Oh! Mr.Barton! but for his
brave, his generous father, by this time,
I should have had no husband ----- my 
child but one surviving parent."

                                     As             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       89

   As soon as Mrs.Neville's peturbation
would permit, she produced a letter
from the captain, reciting his various
peregrinations, since the regiment's de-
parture from Ireland, to the time of his 
writing; just previous to which, they 
had been engaged in a smart skirmish,
wherein the captain would inevitably
have lost his life, but for the bravery of
Serjeant Bennet; encomiums in whose 
behalf, and recommendations of Mrs,
Welford and William to her care and at-
tention, filled a great part of the re-
mainder of the letter.

   "How could my dear husband," said 
Mrs.Neville, "suppose I needed prompt-
ing on such a subject? From this mo-
ment, Mrs.Welford is my sister ---
Willaim my child."

These words were accompanied by her
pressing them both in her arms, until
                                 Mr.90 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

Mr. Barton thought it high time to in-
terpose.

"Here's a fuss about nothing," said
that gentleman, "with your kissing and
embracing! What am I left out for? am
not I to be considered as one of the fa-
mily?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Neville, "and
there's a peace-offering for my rudeness
and neglect," accompanying these words
with offering her cheek to Mr. barton.
"I wish my dear Neville and poor Ben-
net were here! I would kiss them both
heartily, without any sense of shame;
but, alas! Heaven knows whether I shall
ever have it in my power to evince either
my love or gratitude. Perhaps, at this
moment-"

"My good lady," interrupted Mr.
Barton, "let us not afflict ourselves
without real cause. Has not your hus-
bandMYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 91

band lately experienced the interposition. 
of Divine Providence? and cannot the 
same Power again protect him? Be thank-
ful, then, for the past, enliven the pre-
sent with hope, and distrust not the fu-
ture. Consider, also, how many thou-
sands, beside yourself—"

"I confess my fault, and hope, in 
time, to repair it," interrupted Mrs. Ne-
ville. " 'Tis the worse, I own, for being 
a selfish error; but, confined to my indi-
Vidual affection, I have hitherto too 
slightly considered that others have hus-
bands, fathers, and children—Cruel 
wart—Great God! what sorrow does 
it not bring upon mankind!"

—"Offences, my dear Mrs. Neville, we
are taught to believe must needs come;
so, no doubt, will also a severe retribu-
tion. All, therefore, that we can wish
is, that the sword be changed into the
peaceful
92      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
peaceful sickle, and love and harmony
be unviversally recognised."

     -"Pray Heaven, my good Sir, that 
your words may be speedily realised!In
the mean time, you shall all accompany 
me home, and, for the remainder of the
day, we will banish melancholy reflec-
tions, and ba as happy--"

     "AS we can," said Mr. Barton; "so, 
come along sister Welford-come along, 
sister Neville-come alone,nephew Wil-
liam."

    On their arrival at the cottage, with
a whimsical affectation of gravity, Mr. 
Barton introduced them severally to Miss
Neville, by the aforementioned appel-
lations, and himself by that of uncle
Barton.

     To a young lady of Floras's sensibilty,
it may be easily conjectured that these
                                visitors
     



              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      93
Visitors were more than commonly wel-
come. Her young heart had not learnt
disguise, and it overflowed with love
and kindness to the relations of her fa-
ther's perserver-Mr. Barton was also 
particularly included, because he was 
their friend.

     Being perfectly disposed to be pleased 
with each other, the day passed with the 
utmost harmony and satisfaction, and, 
from this time, their friendship and af-
fection received so firm a cement as ne-
ver to be broken. 

     The only check to their happiness was 
the absense of Caption Neville and Ben-
net, and the fears which, from time to 
time, were entertained of their safety. 
As time was a theme which not unfre-
quently occurred, it gave Mr. Barton an 
opportunity, one evening that they were 
all assembled at the cottage, to address
                                     Mrs.

94     MYSTERIOUS FRIENSHIP.

Mrs. Welford and Mrs. Neville as fol-
lows:

 " I believe you can have no reason to
suspect me of dissimulation, when I say
that I prefer this circle, and its absent
friends, to all other existing beings. Re-
latives I have none; my income more
than trebles my disbursements, and I am,
as far as relates to myself, as happy as
frail mortality can expect; but should
be still more so to see those I esteem en-
joy satisfaction. But, how is this to be
done? say you. Nothing more easy,
provided erroneous delicacy and mis-
taken notions do not interfere. My for-
tune is sufficient for all. Let Captain
Neville quit the prejudices of education,
accept my friendship, and return to his
family. Time, it is to be hoped, has,
in some measure, effaced, or, at least,
blunted the remembrance of poor Ben-
net's misfortunes; therefore, a little mo-
ney, properly applied, may procure his 
discharge.
MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 95

discharge. In your last letter, I think
you mentioned one Barton as desirous
of their friendships; will you, in your
next, say he is impatient for their return,
that he may acquit himself-that is
-I mean-that-that-he may restore
them to their dearest interests, and ren-
der them, at least, inoffensive members
of society?"

It may easily be conjectured with what
astonishment and gratitude this noble
and disinterested proposition was re-
ceived; but, though it accorded with
the ultimate wishes of everyone pre-
sent, yet there appeared no little diffi-
culty in its completion, Mrs. Neville
being thoroughly aware how tenacious
her husband would be of receiving fa-
vours, or of quitting the service, at a
time that might possibly injure his re-
putation.

However,
06 NYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

  However, as Mrs. Neville and many 
others are often inclined to flatter their
own wishes, letters were immediately
dispatched-but, as a voyage across the
Atlantic and back again is not the but-
siness of a moment, we shall proceed
with our narrative.

  We have already mentioned, that, in
the intervals of study, in which, by this
time, William had made great progress,
Mr. Barton and his pupil used to amuse
themselves in riding, walking, &c. One
morning, having made a little excursion,
on horseback, and returning near Han-
nah Jone's cottage, they were alarmed
by the exclamation of some one in dis-
tress. Following the sound, they soon
beheld the object to be a livery servant
of Lord Atherstone's, lying in a ditch,
and almost covered with nettles. As
soon as he perceived Mr. Barton and
young Bennet, he exclaimed:

"ForMYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 97

"For the love of Jasus, gentlemen,
will you be kind enough to borrow me
some assistance, for I have broke my
neck."

This ludicrous supplication would have
almost defeated its intention, had it been
addressed to any other but Mr. Barton,
who, instead of giving way to any ri-
sible inclinations, instantly dispatched 
William to Hannah's cottage. In a few
minutes, he returned, bringing with him
three labourers, by whose help the man
was raised, laid upon a kind of hand-
barrow, and conveyed to Mr. Barton's
where he was immediately put to bed;
for, Lord Atherstone's house was at a
greater distance. On the examination 
of the surgeon, the poor fellow's shoul-
der was found dislocated, having, be-
sides, sprained an ancle, which rendered
him incapable of rising from the ditch;
both hurts appeared attended with great
pain, especially the shoulder; this, it
seems,98             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

seems, was the occasion of the unfortunate Irishman's saying "He had broke his neck," an error he still continued to persist in, whatever the surgeon could say to the contrary.

As Mr.Barton's humanity was, at least, equal to Lord Atherstone's neglect, the poor fellow remained at that gentleman's for the space of three weeks, experiencing every care and attention from Mrs.Welford and each individual of the benevolent little mansion.

Indeed, he was far from insensible of the kindness with which he had been treated, often repeating that He would sooner serve Mr.Barton for nothing at all, than my lord, or the hopeful heir, for a hundred a year.It was while accompanying the latter and the tutor in hunting, that he met with his accident, which they had both witnessed;they were

MYSTERIOUS FRIENSHIP. 99

were too keen sportsmen to afford him
any assistance.

They, perhaps, also considered it de-
rogatory to shew humanity to a domes-
tic; so that the whole proceeding passed
unheeded, as a matter of course, or,
perhaps, his lordship might think that
Mr. Barton's humane treatment of his
servant was scarcely a sufficient extenu-
ation for the contemptuous mention of
his great name, in the affair relative to
Hannah Jones. His lordship should, 
however, have considered that it was
not the person, but the manners, that
incurred Mr. Barton's censure. These
were, of themselves, sufficiently repre-
hensible; but, when retailed, and se-
conded by Mr. Wolf, appeared doubly 
odious; for, the finale of that story, 
however glossed and smoothed, could
not fail to exhibit both the lawyer and
his employer in a despicable light.

Possibly,100          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

    Possibly, these little bagatelles would
not have operated so far as to exclude,
or call even in question, his lordship's
attention to etiquette and politeness,
had not the demon of discord again in-
terfered in the shape of - a hare; for,
strange as it may appear, there are per-
sonages, and those great and respectable,
if wealth and high-sounding names give
respectability, who will not only cavil
about a hare, but also for a hair.

    Mr. barton having already atchieved
the adventure of the distressed cottager,
and relieved a poor oppressed woman and
her two children, fame instantly put
her trumpet to her mouth, and proclaim-
ed, that A certain famous knight, ycleped
Barton, of immense possessions, and
with a heart soft as butter, had taken
up his residence in these parts, for the
express purpose of combating tyranny,
relieving oppression, and, in fine, to dis-
perse
          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     101

pense his treasures to all that supposed
they had a right to claim a part.

These, or similar ideas, being spread
abroad, a day or two before the accident
befel Lord Atherstone's servant, a poor
woman, with a ragged infant in her
arms, and two others holding by her
remnant of a gown, knocked at Mr. Bar-
ton's door, and, having gained admit-
tance to the parlour, she fell on her
knees, and, with her children, began a
concert that perforce commanded atten-
tion, it being both loud and plaintive.
Her story, when it became intelligible,
in her own language, was briefly this:

"My husband is a jobbing kind of a
pains-taking man as ever broke bread.
To be sure, a loves a drop of drink,
when a can get it-but then a works main
hard, your honour, that is, when any
body will employ him: to be sure, a little
liquor is the only indulgement poor peo-
                                     ple
Vol. I.         F          
102 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

ple gets; and som your honour, my poor husband was yester een passing through the little coppice, an a saw summut stir, as it were; and so, your honour, my husband at first was summut frightened, likes as your honour, or any body else, mought be. Howsumdever, at lastm being rather a bauld and dissolute man, he moves cautiously and bauldly, nearer and nearer, when who sould id be but a poor wounded hare, aumost dying, poor soul!-so my husband, who is a very tender-hearted man, like your honour, knocked un 0 the head, to put un out is pain; and then a thought it would be a sin to leave un, to become carrion, when our own family would be glad of a meal's victuals; so, to make short of my story, your honour, a brought un home securely, as a body may say; but a didint know a was watched by one of Lyar Wolf's chaps; and so, if God, and your honour doesent stand our friends, as ye did Hannah Jones's, my poor husband
must
            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP         108

must go to jail, or be sent to fight the
Merrycans."

   "This is a bad business, mistress,"
said Mr.Barton, " and, though I think
it does not deserve equal commiseration
with that of Hannah Jones, for this 
once I will stretch a point --- There--go
and replevin your husband, and tell him 
in future to beware of a coppice."

    Though this brought some money into
the fell gripe of the lawyer, yet he did
not fail to represent Mr.Barton to his
patron, as an encourager of poachers
-----purse-proud, ostentatious, and eager
to raise his own plebeian fame by de-
pressing and calumniating that of his 
superiors; but, as the whole of this
gentleman's conduct happened to be dia-
metrically opposite to that of the ac-
cuser, the scandal went no farther, but
remained with Mr.Wolf and his noble
friend

           F 2         Mr.104       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

   Mr. Wolf not being able to fix the
envenomed tooth of scandal on Mr. Bar-
ton, endeavoured to wreak his malice
upon those with whom that gentleman
had connexions, by harassing them in
every possible manner. William, the in-
nocent William, he distinguished in
every company by the names of beggar's
brat, and the spawn of a jail bird; so
that the poor youth often had the mor-
tification to be insulted by ignorant
wretches, who thought they should, by
so doing, pay a more than ordinary
court to this worthy attorney.









                                   CHAP.MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.                        105

CHAP. VI

An Invitation

WILLIAM had already, under the masterly hand Mr. Barton, become an informed and accomplished youth. At this period, he was near eighteen, tall of his age, with features animated and handsome; a person elegant and graceful; in behaviour modest but not timid, and ardent without being impetuous. Though born and bred in the country, he had not imbibed any rusticity of manners, or fondness of what are termed rural sports, these, before Mr. Barton took him under his protection, being totally out of his protection, being totally out of his sphere. Since that period, they became his aversion; for, that gentleman's humanity did not merely extend to the human species.
106           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

cies. Discoursing of hunting, he would
say : "I know not how to draw a pro-
per line of distinction between a noble
stag-driver and an ignoble bullock-
hunter. Their object appears to be
perfectly similiar, namely, the worrying
of an inoffensive animal, until, ex-
hausted by fatigue, it sinks, expires, and
affords a brutal triumph to its ferocious
followers. The mischief resulting from
both amuesements are also pretty equal,
the exalted chaser seldom paying more
regard to crops or fences, that doth the
Smithfield sportsman to the lives of those
who are unfortunate enough to be en-
countered by the enraged animal." But,
as there are numbers who may possibly
dissent from Mr. Barton, and positively
maintain that stag-hunting boxing, bul-
lock-driving, &c. are very sublime and
gentlemanlike amusements, I shall re-
turn to out story.               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 107

  A more than usual time had elapsed,
since the ladies had received letters from
America, which did not fail to create a
considerable degree of alarm in the
friendly villages. At length, however,
one arrived, acknowledging the receipt
of Mrs. Neville's first epistle; but, from
Mr. Barton's offer not being noticed, it
was plain the other had not reached him,
This was, however accounted for by the
captain mentioning his being lately de-
tached from the sea-coast into the inte-
rior part of the country, from whence 
it was difficult to procure letter,s or in-
telligence from Europe; a circumstance
that would have created no little anxiety,
had it not been counterbalanced by his
adding, that They were then stationed
in a secure and strong post, some dis-
tance from the immediate seat of war.

  This being the case, they had no other
remedy than to visit with patience, un-
til the captain had received the other


                F4 Packet;
108        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

packet; indeed, Mrs. Neville did not
indulge the most flattering prospects
from it, as she was too well acquainted
with her husband's high sense of honour
to be very sanguine. It, therefore, re-
quired all the philosophy and friendship
of Mr. Barton to keep her in any kind
of spirits.

   "You are a poor moping, melancholy
turtle," said he, one evening , "conti-
nually brooding over your imaginary
evils---I could tell you a tale; but no,
it would only serve to make us both still
worse company. Besides, as I intend
the captain shall hear it one of these
days, once shall serve for all. In the
mean time, we will rely upon Providence,
and be cheerful. I have brought you
some tickets for the next assembly;
what say you, ladies? Shall we go, and
take William with us? The son of an
honest soldier cannot disgrace us."
                               
                              "Good      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    109     

    " Good heavens!" exclaimed Flora,
blushing, "the son of my father's pre-
server disgrace us!"

    " No, my dear," replied Mrs. Ne-
ville, smiling; "William, without that
consideration, which, however, I must
confess, has its merits, cannot disgrace
any one: therefore," continued she, "to
prove that I think as I speak, and, be-
cause it will amuse the young people, I
will accept of your offer; though, I must
confess, I have no great inclination."

    " Now, my principal inducement,"
said Mr. Barton, "is to entertain the
old people, and prevent their becoming
melancholy. Have you never heard that
care will kill a cat?"

    " I am will aware of your friendly
motive, my good neighbour," replied
Mrs. Neville; "and therefore, we will
                             prepare.

            
110    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

prepare all our little embellishments,
and exert our best spiritson the occasion."

   "Pray, do," said Barton; " and ,in
the mean time, I must also endeavour to
rub off the rust, turn out my toes, and
make my lad, at least, a little spruce;
for, depend upon it, as this is a first ap-
pearance, our exterior will undergo a ri-
gid scrutiny.- For my own part," con-
tinued he, with a sigh, "as I always
were black, little alteration will serve."

   "Mrs. Neville involuntarily re-echoed
Mr.Barton's sigh, although the cause
was unknown; for, her susceptible heart
represented some powerful motive for
his always appearing in the habiliments
of sorrow. Her emotion was not lost
upon Mr.Barton, who, assuming an air
of gaiety, exclaimed:

   "There, now, Flora, I only talked of
a black coat, and it immediately robbed
                                   your  


            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP              111'
your mother of her spirits; never consi-
dering how many glad liearts are thus
disguised -However, we' will drop the
subject; for weakness is sometimes catch-
ing,-Good morning; lay out your
best apparel, and summon all your graces
for the occasion."`
  With these words, Mr, Barton de-
parted, with a countenance, in which a
close observer could‘ not fail- to discover
that, although' he forced cheerfulness to:
gain- an' apparent ascendant over some
very painful remembrances, yet the
struggle was hard to sustain.,

“ Alas!" said' Mrs.. Neville, “ some
concealed' distress preys on that worthy
man.. I have frequently observed it,
and longed to know the cause; but
his silence on the subject, and his ap-
parent vivacity, renders- his uneasiness
sacred.. Besides, unavailing questions
might only tear open a wound, not yet
              F6                  suffi-

112    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
sufficiently heald to bear the pang of
 repeating -woes, perhaps, whose very
recollection are almost past endurance."

      " Indeed," replied Flora, "though
I love him very sincerely, I have often
thought his behaviour enigmatical-
that is, I mean in respect to William, and
Mrs. Welford, whom he did not know;
for, when once acquainted with them,
the wonder ceases; but, from the first
of his coming into the country, he has
appeared to consider and treat them
rather as cherished relatives than stran-
gers."

       "The same idea has frequently struck
me," returned Mrs. Neville; "but he
could have no incentive but his own ge-
nerous disposition, and their defenceless 
state, which, I understand, he learned
by chance."

                               "Huma-     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.               115

   "Humanity, indeed," answered Flora,
"might prompt him to assist them; but
his affection for William appears little
short of paternal."

  Such were the comments that Mrs.
Neville and her daughter passed on their
friend, Mr. Barton, both applauding
his conduct, and agreeing how worthily
his benevolence was exerted; and Flora
concluded the panegyric by saying, that,
Though William was, but a serjeant's son,
yet she did not think there was a more ac-
complished, or a more personable youth,
in the whole county; besides, his father
having saved the life of her dear papa,
gave him a claim on their friendship, as
well as on that of Mr. Barton.

                                    CHAP.        CHAP. VII.

Preparations for a public Appearance.

     IT must not be imagined that
the whole village viewed Mr. Barton's
conduct with the same sentiments as
Mrs. Neville. Fortunately, Mrs. Wel-
ford was neither young nor handsome
enough to incur any dishonourable sur-
mises, The babblers, therefore, con-
tented themselves with observing That
Mr. Barton would be the ruin of the
lad; for, that he did not know how to
do a varsal thing, and what was larn-
ing good for, without a fortin? To be
sure, nobody knows the luck of a lousy
calf, for, some were born with a silver
spoon in their mouths, others only with
a wooden ladle---Every body knew Jane
Bennet, William's mother, was not over-
                                chargedMYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 115

charged with virtue---and it wasn't im-
possible but what Mr. Barton might
have been her friend, in a cornen, long
before, consequently might be nearer
related to him than some folks ima-
gined.

Such, for some time, had been the
private whispers of the village; but,
when it was known that he was to go
to the assembly, this malevolence re-
doubled, and the common cry was, Set
a beggar on horseback, and he will ride
to the devil---he had better to think of
his mother, who was transported amongst
the Blackamoors and Merrycans, than to
go to semblys; but he was better fed
than taught, and it would have been
more to Mr. barton's credit to have
taken some honest folk's child, as, what
return could he expect from such a
breed. Nobody ever heard of a crow
that hatched a dove; but, howsumdever,
Mr. Barton had his eyes open, and, come
what

116        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

what would on't, had no one to thank
but himself.

 It may be necessary to observe, that
William's mother, on her embarkation
for America, had promised to write and
inform her husband of her future dispo-
sal; but, though the unhappy man had
left with her all the remaining money he
had brought to town, some trifle ex-
cepted, yet such was her ingratitude
and neglect, that no intelligence ever
reached him, and the war aferwards
breaking out, precluded all chance of
information.

 As Mr. Barton had received the parti-
culars of the unfortunate story from
Mrs. Welford, there appeared to him
such instances of natural depravity in
the mother of William, that he desired
she might never be mentioned, except
when they were alone. "'Tis cruel,"
said he, "to remind the boy of such a
                                slut,
MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 117

slut, especially as the virtues of the fa-
ther more than outweigh the mother's 
vices; the one, therefore, should ever
be held in remembrance, the other bu-
ried in oblivion."

Mr. Barton's request was not made
without reason; for, whenever Bennet
was mentioned, William's face was en-
livened with a smile; his speech was
firm, and his young heart glowed with
ardor to share his dangers, and partake
of his commendations. On the con-
trary, if his mother was named, his
features lost their animation, his voice
faltered, and his blood seemed to recoil
at the recollection that it flowed from
such a contaminated source.

"How happy is my father," said he,
one day, to Mr. Barton, "in being in-
strumental to the saving Mr. Neville's
life. Should they return, as I pray
Heaven they may, how will the good
Mrs.118            MYSTERIOUS FREINDSHIP.
Mrs. Neville, and Flora, caress my father; for, you know, Sir, they are not proud-witness their kindness to me."
  
  -" And, like a duitful son, you will envy him some of these caresses---is it not so, William?"

  -" Sir?"

  -" Thou wouldst like a part of them bestowed upon thyself?"

  -" Alas, Sir! I am not fortunate enough to deserve them; but, were I indeed so happy, their esteem would greatly overpay every thing that could possibly be hazarded to serve them."

  -" Spoken with the warm imagination of seventeen ! but go, my lad, to the tailor's, and bespeak thee a new coat, and suitable appurtenances ; remember, they cannot be too good---'tis for my credit ; 
       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      199
credit;  therefore, spare no expence---to 
please me, you cannot be too well-dress-
ed, with the proviso that you distinguish
between the dignified appearance of a 
man, and the trappings of a monkey---
So, begone, and hasten back, to let me
know what you have chose, that I may
be able to judge of your taste."
    
     After William's departure, Mrs.  Wel-
ford endeavoured to dissuade Mr. Bar-
ton from taking him to the ball.

   " It will, I fear, disgrace you, Sir,"
said she;  "besides, thought the boy,
through your goodness, has learned to 
dance, yet may it not give him too ele-
vated notions for his future station in
life/ and then the company----for, Lord
Atherstone's son always visits the as-
sembly?"

   "I will answer you in due form, Mrs.
Welford," replied Mr. Barton, "and, first120         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

first, for the disgrace; that, you know,
is my business; secondly, his future
station in life: now, as I have, amongst
a number of other absurdities, conceiv-
ed that it is manners alone constitute
the real gentleman, peradventure I may
hereafter throw in some trifling super-
fluous appendages, to swell out that
character--ay, but then the exalted
company---there is the rub : but, a
word in your ear, Mrs. Welford---I'
would not give a fig for a boy that did
not think himself a companion for the
sublime emperor of the Ottomans."


  As Mrs. Welford made no further Op-
position, they discoursed on different
subjects, until William's return, who in-
formed them he had chosen a light
french gray kerseymere coat and
breeches, with a plain white satin
waistcoat, and that they were to be
ready at the appointed time.


                            " I like
           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      121

   "I like thy taste pretty well," said
Mr. Barton, "but it being for an ex-
traordinary occasion, prithee step back,
and desire him to plaster, or rather
sprinkle, a few silver spots over the said
waistcoast; for, as thou and I have no
titles to distinguish us, we, like many
others, must borrow a false glare for the
night; and I enjoin thee the task of
shining for both."

   "I beg pardon, Sir," replied William,
"but will it not look neater without?"

   "But will it not look finer, so deco-
rated, to almost every eye but thine and
mine? For example, didst thou never
admire that gingerbread most that was
gilt? Believe me, friend William, thou
wilt find the same childish propensity in
thy journey through life; for, there are
children of all ages, whose delight is in
outward shew, and who care not how
gross the composition, so that the de-
                               formity122     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

formity be concealed with superficial
trappings."

   As Mr. Barton's commands were a 
law to William, he immediately obeyed,
though he would have much rather had
his habiliments free from finery. This
is the first time, said he to himself, as
he returned from the tailor's, that ever
I thought different from my dear and
generous protector---my father a
serjeant, and my mother a convict.
Alas ! I know no dress too plain for
me.

   At length, the day appointed for the
ball arrived, and William being arrayed
in his new clothes, his fine dark hair,
with a small addition of powder, falling
in natural graceful curls on his should-
ers, accompanied by Mr. Barton, pro-
ceeded to Mrs. Neville's, where they
found the ladies dressed in plain white
muslin, with that simple elegance, that
                                    far
          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       123

far outvies all the gaudy trappings of
studied finery.

  Flora Neville was, at this time, turn-
ed of sixteen, one of the most perfect
of Nature's compositions—the divine
spark of animation ever enlivening her
fine blue eyes. Her complexion was
delicately fair, and her hair, which fell
in ringlets to the bottom of her slender
waist, was of the finest auburn—her
nose Grecian, her mouth beautifully
dimpled, her lips of the coralline hue,
enclosing teeth, whose dazzling white-
ness might vie with ivory itself. Her
neck and shape were elegantly turned.
Though young, she had already reached
the middle size; in fine, had a painter
sought an object, from which he wished
to pourtray Hebe, he would have fixed
on Flora Neville.

  Mr. Barton had ordered a post-coach
from the neighbouring town, to convey
them124         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

them to the assembly, which was held there, and which was three miles distant from the village. On the road thither, Mr. Barton asked Mrs. Neville's permission for Flora to dance with his young friend during that evening. That lady having given her consent, and Flora having also acceded, William endevoured to express his gratitude; but, from extreme diffidence, lost the greater part of the sentence, as scarcely any other words than honour and condescension proved articulate.















                                         CHAP.MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 123

CHAP. VIII.

A Country Assembly.

AS three-fourths of our little
party had been early initiated into what
is, in general, termed a polite life, a
country assembly produced none of 
those unfashionable sensations which
the polite world denominate mauvaise
honte. Veracity, however, obliges us
to confess, that our youth, on his en-
tering the assembly room, did not find 
himself wholly at ease; for, having at
a very early age imbibed several preju-
dices, he could not always immediately
divest himself of them. These sensa-
tions being unknown, or, if known, 
disregarded, by Mrs. Neville, she did
not fail to introduce both him and
Mr. Barton to the mayor and his lady,
both
VOL. I G126          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

both present, the latter being the largest,
richest, most gaudy, and most conse-
quential personage in the world group.

Mrs. Mayoress, who was upon visit-
ing terms of civility with Mrs. Neville,
received the gentlemen's decoirs with as
much affability as was compatible with
her state and dignity; purtesting that
She should be vastly glad of their ac-
quaintance, and hoped they would call
and take a cup of tea with her, as she
should be always happy to have con-
nexshons with respectful parsonages; for,
Mr. Everard had told the mayor that
Mr. Barton was a parson of that there
perscription; "And so, Sir," added she,
"I hopes you and Mr. Mayor will be
better acquainted. I suppose I need not
tell you that Mr. Mayor is no pitiful
upstart, whose means came by his fore-
fathers, but by his own industry.
Thank God, for money matters, he can
shew his face with the proudest; and, as
for          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    127

for your dignitaries, I don't know whe-
ther he an't more desarving as other
folks; for, you must know, Sir, Mr.
Mayor has been of great sarvice to his
country, and is going to court with a
dress, and then, perhaps, he may get
beknighted, and then somebody may be
called my lady, as well as Lady Ather-
stone."

  As this lady in expectancy did not
seem inclined to bring her elocution to
a period, the patience of her auditors
must infallibly have been put to a severe
trial, had not the commencement of the
minuets necessarily deranged Mrs.
Mayoress's levee, who, with the young
people, immediately attended, Mr. Bar-
ton and Mrs. Neville rather chusing
to sit down to the card-table.

  If the utmost grace did not attend on
all the steps of this party, each indivi-
dual appeared so perfectly satisfied with
                    G 2               his128     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
his own abilites, as not to admit, at
least for the present, leisure to scruti-
nize his neighbours; so that harmony
and good-humour received no inter-
ruption, until the arrival of Lord Ather-
stone's son and his tutor; but scarcely
had the congees, cringes, courtesies,
and compliments taken place on the oc-
casion, before the whole company ap-
peared divided into parties and factions,
and every eye directed to one point of 
view, namely, the table where Mr. Bar-
ton and Mrs. Neville were seated, and
who, since the entrance of the young
lord, had been joined by William and 
Flora. Mr. Barton presently guessed the 
cause of the interruption, which, how-
ever, he resolved not to notice, and,
therefore, appeared intent on his cards,
endeavouring likewise to engage the at-
tention of Mrs. Neville.

   After some short time, the confusion
subsided, and preparation was made for
                              dancing;MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP 129

dancing; William and his partner took
their places accordingly. Thus far, all
was well; but, when they had gained
the top, and had gone down about six
couple, to their amazement, they found
the rest of the company had relinquish-
ed their stations, and seated themselves.
Mr. Barton, who had his eyes on the
party, immediately walked up, and,
with much composure, enquired which
was the next couple in rotation to that
they had passed. William immediately
pointed out Mr. Supple and his partner,
to whom Mr. Barton addressed himseld
in the following manner.

"Sir, I take the liberty to inform you,
that your behaviour to his young lady,
and her partner, is totally contrary to
all established etiquette, and derogatory
to the name of a gentleman."

"Perhaps, Sir," replied Mr. Supple,
with a sneer, "you call the son of a ser-
jeant a gentleman?"

G3 -"I do,130        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  ---" I do, Sir, provided he do not
disgrace his father by any meanness or
rascality."

  ---" And, probably, Sir, you may sup-
pose such a gentleman a proper compa-
nion for the Earl of Atherstone's son?"

  ---" By no means, Sir; with your noble
pupil's present tuition, I should rather
conceive him an improper companion for
the son of a serjeant."

  ---" Sir! Sir, you are impertinent,
and---"

   " True, Sir," interrupted Mr. Barton,
"and I am sorry for it, especially as
the subject of my impertinence is no-
minally a minister of that mild Master,
who taught us not to despise even the 
son of a serjeant; consequently, whose
duty it should be to inculcate humanity,
instead of pride and arrogance."

                               ---" This

           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     131

    —" This language, Sir, may perhaps
require a future explanation."

    —" It shall not need it, Sir; I will ex-
plain it now. This premeditated indig-
nity not only insults the party to whom
it was principally directed, but also in-
cludes this young lady, her mother,
and myself; nay, even your own pitiful
tools, who, if they possess any under-
standing-, must plainly see they are the
mere instruments of your despicable,
scheme, to destroy not only their own
pleasure, but also that of others."

    —" Sir, you give yourself the lan-
guage---"

   " Of a man, Sir," interrupted Mr.
Barton, "who would not knowingly in-
sult an insect, nor yet will tamely bear
an injury. But I beg pardon of that
part of the company who have no in-
terest in this business, for my share of
                
              G 4               the132         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

the interruption, which I hope they will
have the goodness to place in its proper
point of view."

   "Ay, ay," returned Mr. Mayor;
"so, let those who chuse, dance; and
those who don't, let it alone; for, we
came here to be merry, and not to
quarrel about our ranks. For what I
see, one is as good as another, especi-
ally if he has got the fore horse by the
head--that's my mind; and so, I says,
as long as the young man comports him-
self properly, it is nothing to nobody,
that is to say, as you chuses to notice
him, who every body knows to be
warm."

   The latter part of this speech was ad-
dressed to Mr. Barton, and these being
the sentiments of the mayor, who was
not only a man of great bulk, but also
a man of great weight; for, setting
aside his office, which gave no small
                                shareMYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 133

share of authority, he was supposed to
be actually possessed of, at least, one
hundred thousand pounds---no wonder
that the arguments of such a man should
be attended to, or that the evening's
amusement should again be restored.
Neither will it appear strange that even
some of the seceders should join the
party, particularly when it is known
that they were personages whose in-
terest it was not to dissent from Mr.
Mayor, notwithstanding their natural
malignancy might prompt them to the
contrary.

As for Supple, and his noble pupil,
when they found themselves unable to
carry their point, they, for a while, sat
swelling with rage and disappointment,
especially as they saw themselves nearly
deserted by their own party. At length,
finding that their malevolence only af-
fected themselves, they put the best
G5 face
194       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

face they could on a bad business, and
abjectly recommenced their dancing.

  The worshipful man of metal, who
supposed the being possessed of wealth
a sufficient plea for any thing he ehuse
either to do or say, had joined Air.
Barton and Mrs. Neville. With the
former, he was soon upon perfect terms
of familiarity, although it was the first
time they had ever met, cordially invit-
ing him, Mrs. and Miss Neville, and
William ; and, that no incentive might
be wanting, they were told that he
would give them such a glass of Claret,
Champaign, or Burgundy, as my Lord
Atherstone himself could furnish. In
fact, this was not an idle boast; for, the
worshipful mayor had for several years
carried on a very extensive contraband
trade, not only for wines, but also for
a number of other lucrative articles.

                                    These
         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.        135

   These matters being quite foreign to
the subject, we shall say no more about
them; and, as nothing of moment oc-
curred, save what has been related, we
will likewise bring the ball to a conclu-
sion.


  On our little party's return home,
William modestly expressed his sorrow
for the uneasiness his company had oc-
casioned.


  " I am only concerned," returned
Mr. Barton, " as far as relates to the
ladies, and for the distress I perceived.
you felt at the time, motives which I
confess rendered me somewhat warmer
than I otherwise should have been."


  " To us, replied Mrs. Neville, " no
apology is due; for, flora and myself
have long agreed to give William all the
countenance his own merit claims,
              G6                   other196       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

other obligations out of the question."

     " Say you so, ladies," returned Mr, Barton; " why, then, I shall only account this little fracas as a kind of atchievement on the part of William ; and, to give it and himself all due eclat, though I am an enemy to unnecessary parade, I will further encreasse my household establishment, and exhibit " somewhat of a more swelling port," that my young Lord Lackwit, and his brazen-faced accommodating tutor, may not totally carry the palm of superficiality."

        In effect, Mr. Barton was as good as his word : for, he immediately purchased a coach and horses, hired a coachman, groom, and footman, presented Mrs. Neville and Flora with a couple of well broke pads, for the purpose, as he expressed                 
           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       137

pressed it, of having the ladies' com-
pany in their excursions. William's
wardrobe also received a very consider-
able addition, as did likewise his allow-
ance, so that his situation was now not
inferior to what might have been ex-
pected, had he been Mr. Barton's own
son. Indeed, these new appointments
appeared to be wholly formed upon his 
account ; for Mr. Barton was in himself
so totally an enemy to parade, that, when
going out, if unaccompanied, he never
took a servant with him, or seldom
used the carriage.

                                       CHAP.








                                 188  MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP


             CHAP IX 
              A Visit.

WITHIN three days of the next ball, Mr. Barton was honoured with a visit from his worship the mayor, whom we shall hereafter mention by the name of Mr. Baldwine. This gentleman for every mayor is a gentleman, though every gentleman is not a mayor, came for the special purpose of enforcing the company of Mr. Barton and his village friends to dinner, on the morrow. The next day, therefore, the new coach, attended by the groom and footman, conveyed the whole party to the mayor's where they found, properly bedizened and prepared for their reception, John Baldwine, mayoress; Mr, Robert Baldwine,
                                     
                                               son  MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP       139

son and heir, aged nineteen; and Miss
Barbara Baldwine, of seventeen, pert,
plump, and rather pretty.

   As the visitors were supposed to have
encountered much fatigue, from their
long journey of three miles, a massy sal-
ver was instantly produced, groaning
under the weight of rhenish, sugar,
sherry, biscuits, &c. The ladies and
Mr. Barton declined having any re-
freshment, although they were assured
by the mayoress that it wanted near half
an hour to dinner. However, Mr, Ro-
bert, who, it seems, had conceived an
instantaneous liking to William, declared
they might do as they pleased, but that he
and Mr. Bennet would take a glass to
their better acquaintance. From a prin-
ciple of politeness, this was agreed to
by William, after which the different
branches of the family selected each his
individual. Miss Bab dragged Flora
up stairs to see her monkey, paraquet,  
                                  and
140 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

and dormouse. Mr. Baldwine's hobby
was his extensive warehouses, stores, &c.
which Mr. Barton must needs see be-
fore dinner. Now, as Mr. Robert had
no hobby on the premises, he contrived
to get William a little to himself, under
pretence of shewing him a favourite
horse, in a paddock adjoining to the
house.

"I only wanted," said he, when they
were got out of the room, "for us
to have a little discourse to ourselves;
not that I can pretend to entertain a 
young gentleman, like you, who has
learning and behaviour, which I have
not, but that's not my fault. Bab has
been sent to the boarding-school by my
mother; byt my father says that read-
ing, writing and arithmetic, is enough
for any man. Now, I am of a different
opinion; and, though my father can
give me a great deal of moeny, yet that
does not make me less ashamed, when I
go           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     141

go into genteel company, and scarce
know how to make a bow, much less to
discourse of any thing, so am obliged to
sit like a fool, twirl my hat, and hold
my tongue, or else say only Yes and No
--If you please-- or No, thank ye.
Now, you cannot think how happy I
was, when my father said you was coming
here; for, it came into my head imme-
diately to beg of you to let us be ac-
quainted, and then, you know, you can
tell me what books to read, and how I
should behave myself."

   There appeared to William, in this ad-
dress of young Baldwine's such strong
marks of natural sense, and such a ge-
nuine conviction of his defective edu-
cation, that he found himself much in-
terested in his favour; so that, after
having thanked him for this mark of
confidence, he assured him, that He
should be happy in his friendship, and
proud to communicate any little know-
                                ledge142          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

ledge he had been fortunate enough to
acquire.

   With the dispositions of these two
young men, it will not perhaps appear
wonderful that, in one half hour, the
foundation of a friendship was more
firmly established than often takes place
from a twelvemonth's intimacy; so that,
when they returned to dinner, it was
with all the freedom and complacency of
old acquaintance.

   On their entrance into the dining-
parlour, the whole party being again
assembled, they sat down to a profusion
of roast and boiled, all made dishes of
kickshaws, as the mayor termed them,
being excluded; but, though he had an
insuperable objection to French viands,
he had none to their beverage, the 
choicest produce of their vines, together
with that of other countries, gracing his
sideboard.

                                    After       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         149

After dinner, the conversation was
turned by Miss Bab to the ensuing as-
sembly. She lamented as a great mis-
fortune her being absent from the last,
on a visit in the country. Miss then
expatiated with great volubility on every
article she proposed wearing, absolutely
tiring Mrs. Neville and Flora with her
appeals, about the becomingness, as she
termed it, of such and such appendages
of dress.

Mrs. Mayoress, next to hearing herself
talk, admired her daughter's elocution.
However, fearing the might be totally
distanced, she interrupted Miss Bab, in a
most interesting passage, no less than an
enquiry Whether pink or lilac would be
the most becomingest colour to her com-
plexion?

"Pink! child!" exclaimed Mrs.
Mayoress, "you must think of some
other colour; for, I shall positively wear
                                     maiden    144           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

          maiden blush myself to-morrow, and
          you know it will be prepostrous for two
          of a family to wear the same colour-we
          should be taken for idyets and wulgar
          folks."

           "La! Ma," answered miss, sulkily,
          "I never likes to mention my favourite
          colour; for,you are always taking it 
          from one: now,I am sure I thinks your 
          mor-d'oye would suit your complexion
          better."

           -"What signifies what you thinks,
          child?-But aprepo, as the man says,
          you go to the assembly to-morrow,ladies
          and gentlemen?"

           "The ladies must determine us,"said
          Mr.Barton,at tha same time directing
          a look at Mrs.Neville, by the way of
          asking how she accorded with the pro-
          posal.       


                                       "I vote                               
         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     145

  " I vote for going," said Mrs. Ne-
ville, " because it will amuse the young
people; besides, if we were not to make 
our appearance, might not our late ac-
tion be construed into a defeat by Mr.
Supple, and his mercenaries ?"


  " Let us again take the field, then,
by all means," replied Mr. Barton.


  " Ay, ay," cries the mayor; " let
us go in a body, and nose the proud
parson. I wonder what business people
have to be proud, when they have got
no money?"


  " Very true, indeed, Sir," said Mr.
Barton ; " however, I hope you will al-
low that the affluent have abundant
cause for exultation, as Providence has
so amply afforded them, the means of re-
lieving the necessitous."

    
                              " There,"There, now, father," eagerly ex-
claimed young Baldwine; "for all you
call me a fool, you see I am not the only one."

-"Oh, fie! Bobby! I protest you make
me blush at your unpurliteness," said
Mrs. Mayoress; "however I hope, Sir,
you will excuse Bobby; for, he has been 
always under the direcshin of Mr. Mayor,
who doesn't wastly attend to purlite-
ness

" I beg, Madmam," replied Mr. Bar-
ton, "you would not make an aplogy;
for, Mr. Robert Baldwine could not have 
pleased me half so much, if he had stu-
died Lord Chesterfield for a compli-
ment.--Young gentleman," continu-
ed he, tasking up a glass of wine, "give
me leave to repeat your first address to
William, Here's to our better acquaint-
ance."

                              "I thank      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       147
   " I thank you heartily, Sir," returned
young Baldwine; "for, I don't know
any thing that I wish for so much as an
acquaintance with you and Mr. Wil-
liam."

   " You forget the ladies, Bobby," said
Mrs. Mayoress.

   " No, I don't, mother." answered
he; "but I must not expect their fa-
vour while I am such a clown; but, as 
Mr. Barton and Mr. Bennet don't dis-
courage me, I hope I am not too old to
improve."

    " Not in the least," replied Mr.Bar-
ton; "especially as you do not appear
to have one capital obstruction to en-
counter, namely, conceit; for which rea-
son, I will also venture to pronounce,
you will also obtain these ladies' favour
able opinion.:

                                     "He
148 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

"He has mine, already," replied Mrs.
Neville; "so I desire to be included in
the coalition."

"O, la!" cries Miss Bab; "and so,
I am to be left out; but I won't though:
for, Miss Neville and I will be sworn
friends, and tell one another all our se-
crets, invent pretty fashions, and
read pretty books together; for, you
must know, Miss, I subscribes to the
libry. Pray, Miss, did you ever read
Delicate Distress--The Reclaimed Li-
bertine--The war of the tender Pas-
sions--Affected Indifference--The As-
signation--Indiscreet Toys--Fatal se-
duction--The Cruel Disappointement--
The Distressed Daughter--The Feelings
of the Heart--The FalseStep--The----"

"Why! hey-day! Bab," interrupted
the mayor, "if you keep galloping on
at this rate, I am afraid you will go near
to make a false step with your assasinations
         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.        149

tions and tender passions; but, egad! if
you do, you many chance to meet with a
cruel disappointment, be a distressed
daughter, and have a hard-hearted fa-
ther into the bargain. I wonder how
andy body can waste their time with such
nonsense; but this comes of your board-
ing-school edication. Zounds! if you
wants amusement, instead of a parcel of
lies, read Robin Cruso, and his man Fri-
day--Bingfield, and his dog-birds--or
Peter Wilkins, and the flying men and
women."


  " Mercy on me!" exclaimed the may-
oress, " I really believes you are both
romance-mad-now, natural history for 
my money, such as Pamelar or Wartue
Rewarded, Sir Charles Grandison, and
Clarisser Harler; ther you learns life,
behaver, and purliteness; there is no
clowns nor boars in them books; no-
thing but gentlemen and parsons of hon-
ner.  Oh! what charming dear crea-
  VOL, I.        II           tures
150          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

tures are Mr. B. and Sir Charles Grandi-
son! So graceful, so senteatious, so
obliging, and so condescending!"

  " Now, for my part, mamma," says
Miss Bab, " I think Lovelace worth a
hundred of them; ay, and he is more
virtuous too; for, didn't he offer to
marry Clarissa, after-"

  Mr. Barton, fearing this dialogue should
prove too descriptive, artfully changed
the subject, to the 110 little dissatisfac-
tion of Miss Bab, who, being interrupted
in one of her favourite topics, for some
time remained sullenly silent.

  As nothing very interesting passed
during the remainder of this visit, let it
suffice to say, that, all due forms and ce-
remonies being complied with, the vil-
lage-friends took possession of their car-
riage and departed.

                                    In        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     151
   
    In their way home, Mr. Barton asked 
the ladies How they liked their enter-
tainers?"

     " They are really a most curious 
group," said Mrs. Neville; " but, 
though I can scarcely help smiling at 
the absurdities of the father and mo-
ther, I am quite grieved at their mode 
of bringing up the young people."

     " It is truly lamentable," replied Mr.
Barton; "especially on the part of Miss
Baldwine, whose vanity and pertness are 
powerful auxiliaries to the prejudices of
a vitiated taste and education. Luckily
for Bobby, as they call him, he appears
to have sense enough to perceive and be
ashamed of his deficiencies, though they
are not of that aggravating cast which
so strongly marks the young lady's cha
racter."


                  II 2            William
152      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  William now related his conversation
with young Bladwine, the recital of
which appeared to give Mr. Barton much
pleasure.  "I am glad," said that gen-
tleman, "to find my sentiments of him
so far confirmed, as it gives additional
strength to opinions I have eveer been
rather tenacious of, viz.  that there is a
certain proneness to good or evil in our
natures, which neither education nor
long habit can entirely conquer: do you
hold with me, Philosopher Neville?"

  -" Not altogether, Sage Barton; for,
I cannot help thinking, that Early edu-
cation and long habit may almost con-
quer Nature itself."

  "Shall we endeavour to procure the 
whelp of a lioness, and reduce the expe-
riment to practice?" asked Mr. Barton.

"We have it in our power to make a
less dangerous one, in the persons of Miss Bab               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       153

Bab and Master Bobby," returned Mrs.
Neville.

  " The very thing," answered he:
"humanity, charity, and all these sorts
of things out of the question. Shall we
do it?"

   " Content," said Mrs. Neville.

   " Content," quoth Barton; "though,
egad! I must acknowledge, if you should
succeed in driving folly away from Miss
Bab, your task will be abundantly more
difficult than mine, especially as young
Baldwine meets me half way, being
eager for improvement; on the other
hand, if I have any skill, Miss Bab is
too self-willed to approach you on any
other terms than that of a mere superfi-
cial visitor."


  --" She must be indulged, then, and
imperceptibly betrayed into a liking of
                   H 3          rational154        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

rational reading and amusement. In
this, I think we shall find no great diffi-
culty, as she appears to court an ac-
quaintance with Flora. But, is it not
wonderful that the father and mother of
these young people should be so strangely
vulgar and illiterate?"

   "Not at all," replied Mrs. Baron;
"for, I understand that John Bald-
wine, some five-and-thirty years past,
entered the mansion of which he is now
master, in the humble station of a
clerk. While in this occupation, he
took unto his bosom Dorothy his pre-
sent wife. In process of time, his mas-
ter slept with his forefathers, having first
bequeathed him ten thousand pounds of
good and lawful money of Great Bri-
tain. With this sum he entered trade,
which, it seems, has prospected so much,
that his capital is reputed to have en-
creased at least ten fold. Money, like-
wise, produces honours; therefore, John
                               Baldwine  

          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    155

Baldwire hath already been recognised
churchwarden and mayor, and is not
without hopes of receiving the stroke,
which at once constitutes and appoints
him, Sir John Baldwine, knight."






















                     114           CHAP.                 
   156          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
                     
                       CHAP. X.                             

                     A Discovery. 

             MR. Barton had just finished his
         account of the knight in expectancy,
        when they arrived at Mrs. Neville's, and
        having settled the hour for the next day's
        excursion, the party broke up. On the
        morrow, the friends again repaired to
        the mayor's, according to promise,
        where, after the important business of
        tea-drinking was discharged in due form,
        the whole company proceeded to the
        place of action.

           The assembly, this evening, was not
        less numerous than on the former night;
        Lord Dalton and Mr. Supple, as usual,
        forming a part. Their appearance, how-
        ever, was a matter of indifference to
                                         Mr.MYSTERIOUS FREIENDSHIP.   157

Neville, who was not entirely free from apprehensions of some fresh insult; but
her doubts on this head were soon re-
moved by the young lord's approaching
her, with great sand froid, and beg-
ging her permission to dance a minuet 
with Miss Neville.  As she could not 
with property refuse her assent, his
lordship, with an air of triumph, led her
into the circle, to the manifest dissatis-
faction of William, who now, for the 
first time in hs life, severely felt his in- feriority.  in a moment, he became 
thoughtful, absent, and confused; and, 
when requested to dance with Miss Bald- 
wine, instead of either attending to the 
young lady, or the music, his eyes and 
ears were so apparently directed to other
objects, that Mr. Barton could not help 
exclaiming: "What are you about, Wil-
liam?" a rebuke, that in some measure 
restored him to himself and recollection,
though not to his usual harmony and:
               H5          tranquil-tranquillity. To Mr. Barton's question
of, "Are you not well, William?" he
replied, "Yes, Sir--No, Sir--" and
sighed without scarcely knowing why,
at the same time turning his face away,
as if afraid of meeting his benefactor's
enquiring eye.

"Come with me a moment," said Mr.
Barton, in a whisper, as he led the way
to an adjoining apartment. "What is
the matter, William?"

"Nothing, Sir" returned he, with a 
sigh.

--"Tell me, William; are you not dis-
pleased at Lord Dalton's dancing with 
Miss Neville?

--"Alas, Sir! why should I be offend-
ed?

                              --" Nay,MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.                           159

- "Nay, I know not; but wold you not rather that Miss Bab, or any other person, had danced with him?"
  "Forgive me, dear Sir," said William, deeply blushing; "but, indeed, I would rather all the world had danced with Lord Dalton than Miss Neville; yet I don't know why; for, I am sure I do not bear him any ill will."
  -"In our passage through life, Willima, it is frequently necessary to bear with calmness things not entirely plesant:-but compose yourself, and let us return to the company."
  During their absence, the young lord had asked Flora's permission to dance with her for the remainder of the evening, which, however, she refused, pleading a prior engagement.

                     116              William,160 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

William, on his entrance into the room, reassumed his partner, and the dancing commenced with great gaiety, with all but poor Bennet, whose spirits had received too great a shock for an immediate recovery.

This depression was too visible not to be perceived by Mrs. Neville and Flora, who both asked him If he was well? To those enquiries he answered in the affirmative; but, as his gravity still continued, Flora's features gradually wore the same accept.

"I am sure you are not well, and yet you continue to dance, out of complaisance, though you suffer by it," said she.

"Indeed, I am very well," replied William; "but, when I consider the distance fortune has placed between us-that is-I mean-the vast disparity between      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.  161

" I really did not suppose you had so
much pride, William," answered Miss
Neville; "but tell me truly, would
you change situations with him, and for
rank and wealth inherit all his vice and
foppery?"


" Indeed, I don't know how to an-
swer that question, Miss Neville," re-
plied William; " for, I am sometimes al-
most tempter to think that wealth and
rank are, at least, powerful auxiliaries
to happiness, and very often palliate a
 number of imperfection:----But, tell
me, don't you think Lord Dalton agree-
able?"

" Not I, indeed," answered Flora;
" to me he appears an impertinent pre-
summing coxcomb, and I am sure you
only jest in the asking the question; for,
                                      you162             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

you must certainly think the same; and,
had I not been obliged by etiquette to
dance a minuet with him, I should most
certainly have refused; for, all the time,
I wished him at home, with his proud
mother, or indeed any where but here."

  William's malady, as it came he knew
not how, so it fled he knew not where.
He became well in an instant; his eyes
sparkled as he led down the next dance,
with a conscious something, that flat-
tered his present feelings more than the
acquisitions of either wealth or titles.

  Miss Neville's spirits, too, also ap-
peared uncommonly exhilarated; for,
though she had as yet scarcely bestowed
a thought upon the difference of sexes,
yet she could not help experiencing a se-
cret pleasure in what had so apparently
passed in William's bosom.  In her idea,
he had a decided superiority over all the
young men she had ever seen; and it
                                 was        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      163

was also as plain that she had a decided
preference in his favour.  A gleam of
satisfaction was the first result of this 
discovery, which was succeeded by a 
soft enquiry  Why she found herself
pleased at it?  A blush answered the
question, and, for the present, put an
end to the examination.

  In the mean time, the bosom of Wil-
liam was not entirely free from pertur-
bation.  Though the little conversation
with Flora had restored, in a great mea-
sure, his tranquility, yet, being aware
that Mr. Barton had discovered his un-
easiness, he was not without apprehen-
sions of that gentleman's displeasure.
His offence, 'tis true, was an involun-
tary one; and he was conscious that he
had every thing to hope from his kind 
patron's generous candour and benevo
lence.--" Yet, will he not think me 
presuming and ungrateful?" said he.
"Me, the mere creature of his boun-
                                ty?"164             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

ty?"  These, and similar meditations, occupied William during the remainder of the evening, and spread a cloud over him, which even the charming sprightliness of Flora could not wholly dissipate. 

     On the morrow, after breakfast, Mr. Barton, with an encouraging smile, summoned William to the library. 

     " Well, William," said he, "how do you find yourself this morning?  Have you recovered from your last night's disorder?"

     William, after some hesitation, stammered out, "I am very well, Sir, I am much obliged to you."

     "That is as much as to say," replied Mr. Barton, "as well as a young man can be, who, for some time past, has been in the daily practice of admiring a beautiful        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.   165

tiful and accomplished girl.--Poor Wil-
liam!"

 "Poor, indeed," scarcely articulated
William; "poor in every thing but your
friendship; which, if any involuntary
presumption of mine should make me
forfeit it, I had better have never expe-
rienced."

 "Involuntary offences, William,'
said Mr. Barton, smiling, 'will never
influence me to your disadvantage; nor,
if I have any skill, should I suppose that
Flora is much displeased with your invo-
luntary presumption--but you know
she has a father; and, though I have
every reason to believe him a man of
sense, yet there is no answering for pre-
judices of birth, and other vain appen-
dages, if even we should be able to get
over other more material matters. How-
ever, it is time enough to talk of those
things.--Now, if I had not an invincible
                                   detes-
166           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

detestation to fighting, you might enter into a profession, which certainly would entitle you to the name, at least, of a gentleman; I mean the army. There, interest and money might procure rank, even superior to Captain Neville's. What say you, William? Do you feel any heroic symptoms? Or do you prefer keeping a flock of sheep, that you may the more conveniently sigh out your plaintive vows at the feet of your fair Daphne?"

"My situation, Sir," answered William, hesitatingly, "precludes me from all choice; yet, believe me, were Fortune instantly to place me on her highest pinnacles, I would most readily accord to the wishes of my benefactor."

""Say, thy friend, William," replied Mr. Barton; "therefore, 'tis my will and pleasure that thou shouldst remain in inglorious ease, and, as many have done before     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     167

fore thee, gain thy pretensions to genti-
lity from thy father's laurels. I have re-
ceived intelligence that neither he, nor
the captain, chooses to relinquish his
claims to them; for which reason, it
must be our business to procure Bennet
senior a more elevated station, without 
which, were he as brave as Caesar, he 
might pass unnoticed: but more of this
another time; for the present, get your-
self ready to visit the ladies-we will go
and dine with them."

  As there required but little preparation 
for a friendly visit, in about half an hour
the gentlemen were seated in the cot-
tage-parlour.

  "We are come to beg a dinner," said
Mr. Barton.

  "I will answer you in the language
of an hostess," returned Mrs. Neville;
"You are kindly welcome, gentle-
men."

                              "Well,168          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

   " Well, then," said Mr. Barton. "I
will endeavour to encrease my welcome;
what say you to news from the conti-
nent?"

   The ladies instinctively rose from
their seats.

   " I am sure," hastily exclaimed the
elder, " Mr. Barton would not jest with
us on so interesting a subject, and I also
think his countenance does not proclaim
any melancholy tidings."

   " You are a perfect sybil," said Mr.
Barton; " for I have, this morning, re-
ceived letters, which acquaint me that
out two warriors were both alive and
well at a very short date back ; but nei-
ther the captain nor the serjeant chooses
to relinquish the paths of glory. And
now, you must know that, some months
since, I made overtures, by means of a
capital commercial house, to seduce them
                                   --not
               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       169

---not from their allegiance, but to the
charms of a whole skin, and peaceable
quarters. However, my negotiations,
though conducted with all possible de-
licacy, have not succeeded; your proud
husband declines returning, on a two-
fold reason, honour--and--but no mat-
ter; I could have wished he had acceded
to my overtures to obtain his friend-
ship. Yet, perhaps, if I had been Cap-
tain Neville, my conduct would have
been the same. The serjeant, two, joins
with the captain, and is full of acknow-
ledgments; but forsooth, will live and
die with his officer--such are his ex-
pressions. Now, though I have been
refused, that shall not prevent me from
endeavouring to serve him; for, some
how or other, I have taken a whimsical
kind of liking to his character.'----

   Mrs. Neville here interrupted Mr.
Barton with her acknowledgments for
his having interested himself in endea-
vouring for her husband's return, a con-
                                    sent
170     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

sent to which, she owned, would have
very much contributed to her happi-
ness-" However," continued she,
" though I deplore those punctilios that
will not permit my dear Neville to avail
himself of your generous offers, yet I
am convinced I shall not also have to la-
ment your displeasure at the cause."

  " In good truth, you will not," said
Mr. Barton; " for, 1 remember the time
when those bubbles, called pride and ho-
nour, would have outweighed every con-
sideration with me;—but, if you please,
wc will relinquish the subject. I am go-
ing to London, on particular business,
which may possibly detain me five or six
weeks; so, William, you must not only
take care of the ladies, but, in conjunc-
tion with your aunt, be my representa-
tive."

  As this was the first word that Mr.
Barton had dropped of his intended jour-

                                   ney,             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    171

ney, it acted not only as a surprise on
the whole triumvirate, but also spread a
concern on all their features, which was
soon perceived by Mr. Barton.

 " Why, I shall grow vain, " said he,
" and begin to think myself a person
of consequence; but, depend upon it,
my good friends, I shall be better pleased
to join you again than I am to quit your
society."

 " And when do you propose leaving
us?" said Mrs. Neville.

 -" Why, I think to-morrow; for,
the sooner my departure, the speedier
will be my return, and, in the interme-
diate time, suppose you commence your
trial of skill with Miss Bab; and  I would
also have William invite and cultivate an
acquaintance with young Baldwine; for,
I am much deceived in that youth, if he          
                                    does172 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

does not break from the cloud with which he is enveloped."

"I am of your opinion," returned Mrs. Neville, "and have no doubt that he will improve from William's company and example. As of Miss Baldwine, I must confess that my hopes in her favour are not quite so sanguine. However, it will be but charitable to endeavour to combat her foibles, and, should we not prove successful in conquering them, the trail will, at least, afford one satisfaction, namely, that the attempt has not been wanting; so, do you make haste and settle your business in the capital, that you may the sooner lend your assistance; and, depend upon it, that during your absence we will endeavour to keep William in spirits; for, I perceive, the bare mention of your journey has already made him grave."

"I am             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    173

   "I am sorry for that," said Mr.Bar-
ton. "If he pines after his friends for
so short an absense, he will make but a
milk-sop of a solider.- Do you know
that William and I were this morning
talking of adding another hero to the
family?"

   "Heaven forbid!" exclaimed Flora.

   "Amen!" returned Mr.Barton; "and
so, we settled it that he- should re-
main at home."

   "And you are much to be commend-
ed," answered Mrs.Neville; "for, had 
I my own choice, I would prefer Mr.
Neville's being almost any other pro-
fession than his present dangerous one,
even though I should be involved in the
disgrace, and, instead of being termed
Captain Neville's lady, be only called
plain Mrs.Neville."
   
   Vol I.           I             "And, 174 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

"And, what are your sentiments on 
this subject, Flora?" asked Mr. Barton.

"Exactly the same as my mamma's," 
replied she.

"Then, I pronounce ye two un-
fashionable rational beings," returned 
Mr. Barton; "and I hope that your ple-
beian wishes will, at last, be gratified 
by a return of peace and domestic hap-
piness."

As Mr. Barton had some little neces-
sary arrangements to make, previous to 
his journey, he returned home soon after 
dinner, and, early the next morning, de-
parted for the capital.

CHAP.
           
                 CHAP. XI.

             A Simple Narration.
             
          William had been so much
accustomed to the company of his gene-
rous friend, that he found a disagreeable
vacuum in his absence; to alleviate
which, soon after breakfast, he took a
ride to the mayor's, where he found young
Baldwine much pleased at his visit.
On leaving home, he had promised to
'return to dinner; but this the Baldwine
family would by no means permit; in
consequence of which, a servant was
dispatched to inform Mrs. Welford of
it; and also to signify that he should
stay all night.

  The former conversation between the
young men was in this visit renewed,
                 12             and176         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
and Mr. Robert Baldwine expressed
great satisfaction, on being informed by
William that He came for the express
purpose of asking him to pass some time
at Mr. Barton's, who, on his return
from London, had promised to lend
every assistance towards his improve-
ment.

  
   " I am sure, then," replied young
Baldwine, " I shall owe him more duty
than I do to my father; for, though I
came into the world through his means,
yet, at the same time, it was for his own
pleasure.  What advantage, then, have I
over a bear's cub? I have very little
more knowledge.  It is true, I have
not my provision to seek : my father is 
not niggardly ; I may keep what horses
or servants I like, and spend what mo-
ney I please ; but, if I talk of educa-
tion, he flies into a passion, and says
He got his money without learning ; 
therefore, it can be good for nothing
                                   but
                 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.          177

but to make a man a jackanapes.  Now, to be sure,.  I have seen some people that bore more resemblance to a monkey than to a human creature; but, after all, I believe that to be their own fault: though I do not know whether I would not rather be a monkey than a bear; for, I observe that the ladies will smile at the tricks of the one, while they are frightened at the other."

     William could nor forbear smiling at the termination of this speech.

     'So, They." said he, "it is on the ladies' account that you are so anxious for improvement?"

     " Not altogether," answered young Baldwine, hesitatingly: "though, to be sure, there is one that I should not like to think me quite an idiot.  Why, now, for example, you, I suppose, would not wich to appear ridiculous    
                  I3                       in   178      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

in the eyes of Miss Neville?" This
was a case in point, which called up
all the blood in William's face.-"Is
it on Miss Neville's account," said he,
eagerly, "that you wish, then, to ap-
pear-?"

"Lord love you! no," interrupted
young Baldwine. "Not but Miss Ne-
ville is a charming young creature, and
I know you think so too; for I could
see how uneasy you were at Lord Dal-
ton's dancing with her, at the assem-
bly."

  "Why, sure," answered William,
"you could not think so!"

  "Ay, but I could," returned young
Baldwine. "Some time ago, perhaps,
I might not have been so clear-sighted:
I am sure I was as much concerned as
if it had been myself; for, I do not
know why, but I love you as if you
                               wereMYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 179

were my own brother; and, as I know
you will not laugh at me, I am resolved
to tell you why I so much desire to im-
prove myself. You must know, then, 
that, until about six months past, I was
one of the happiest fellows in the whole
county, and had not a wish beyond
keeping the best hunter, or passing a
joyous evening with companions as
easy and thoughtless as myself. But,
as I observed, about six months ago,
one fine morning, I had been to take a
ride, and was returning home by a pri-
vate road that divides part of Lord
Atherstone's grounds from some com-
mon lands, when, hearing the sound of
a carriage, I turned, and saw a chaise
approaching with so much swiftness,
that I found I must either get out of
the road, or run the chance of being
borne down, horse and all; to escape 
which, I leaped a furze hedge, and gained 
the common, where I turned my horse's
head, that I might see who was driving
so 
I 4180             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

so furiously. A loud scream then
struck me, and a chaise rushed by, with
great speed, in which I had only time
to observe there sat a female.

   "As the reins were trailing upon the
ground, it was not difficult to conjec-
ture that. the horses had taken fright,
and had run away with her. I again
leaped the hedge, clapped spurs to my
horse, and soon got up to the heads
of the runaways, whose career I had
the good fortune to stop, just before
the road narrowed and turned off to the
right, at which place the chaise must
inevitably have been overturned and
shattered to pieces. Having properly
secured the reins, I lifted the lady out
of the carriage, which was no sooner
done, than she sunk senseless, with the
fright, at my feet.---I now raised from
the ground the most charming creature
my eyes ever beheld. Her's were shut,
and I waited their unclosing with
                         feelingsMYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.  181
feelings that I had never before expe-rienced.-At length, she began to revive; and, though, on the other hand, I knew not how to refrain. I would fain have spoken; but, for the first time in my life, experienced the want of polite language. All this time, her head was resting upon my shoulder; and, though I would have given worlds to have continued it there, I nevertheless, as soon as she could rise, attempted to stammer out an excuse for what was owing to accident alone. while in this situation, a servant rode up in a livery, which I jnew to belong to Lord Atherstone. This man appeared almost frantic be-tween affright and joy. 

" ' Oh! my lady,' cried he, 'how glad I am to find you safe.---Indeed ! indeed ! it was not my fault; for, when I opened the gate, this cursed beast

I5  started,
182        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

started, which made it fall out of my
hand against the chaise, and this
frightened your ladyship's horses ; but,
what made it still worse, mine being
unluckily on the contrary side, I could
not immediately come to your lady-
ship's assistance.'

  " ' I do not blame you, John,' re-
plied the young lady ; ' all is well; but,
had it not been for this gentleman, I
fear I should have experienced some
fatal accident.—--Accept, Sir,' continued
she, ' my most grateful thanks; and,
if you will take the trouble to visit
Atherstone-Hall, you will also receive
those of my parents.—May I enquire
to whom I have been so infinitely ob-
liged ?'

  " Having told my name, and assisted
her into the carriage, I took my leave,
like a sheepish booby as I was; for, I
liad not the courage to offer to see her

                                  safe               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.        188

safe home, but stood gaping after the 
chaise, when it moved forward, as if I
had been nailed to the spot.

   "When it was out of sight, my head
appeared giddy, and my heart seemed
to die within me; so that my father and
mother, when I came home, enquired 
what ailed me; nor was it to be won-
dered at; for, I am sure I felt as if I
had been struck with a thunder-bolt.
Indeed, I could scarcely tell what 
had caused this alteration. All that I
knew was, that there seemed to be but
one object in the world, and that one
was Lord Atherstone`s daughter. In 
this mood I remained for several days,
and kept moping and pining about the
house, as if I had been bewitched.

  "One morning, I sauntered into my 
sister`s apartment, while her music-
master was teaching her the harpsichord.
For my own part, I had never any par-
                 I6              ticular
184          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

ticular fancy to music; so had only
strayed into the room for want of some-
thing else to do. After they had
twanged the keys, as my sister calls
them, until they were tired, her master
took a piece of music, which he called
a cantata, and began playing and sing-
ing. I don't know how it was, but,
after he had sung about half a dozen
lines, I could not, for the soul of me,
forbear listening with the greatest at-
tention ; and, before he had half finish-
ed, I plainly discovered that I was the
simple Cymon, and Lady Caroline
Wyville the charming Iphigene, who,
at once, had opened my eyes to my
own imperfections. The music now
appeared charming; I begged him to
sing it again, and even a third time.
I then enquired If the story was a true
one, and received for information, that
they were lovers who had existed many
hundred years ago, and that Cymon,
from a mere booby, had gained learning
                                  and          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP              185

and politness, so as to merit the resolve,
from that time, to forsake all my old
companions, and favourite sports; to
endeavour to become polished; and, if 
possible, as happy as Cymon had been
before me. Now, I don't know a single
soul that I would tell this to but your-
self; because, as I observed before, I
know you will not laugh at me, but
will assist me in what I have so much a 
heart."


  "You may depend upon every as-
ssitance in my power," said Willaim;
" and, as Mr.Barton returns so soon,
you will then have a more able precep-
tor. However, we will, in the mean
time, begin a course of English reading
together; for which purpose, you shall
accompany me home to-morrow; and
I have also a commision to invite 
                             your186     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

your sister to pass a few days at Mrs.
Neville's."

  "I am very glad of that," replied
young Baldwine; "for, though Bab 
has been at the boarding-school, and is 
not so awkward as I am, yet I can see
she has a great deal to learn, ay, and to
unlearn too, from the plaguy romance
books she has read; and, then, she is
so pert and so forward! What a differ-
ence between her and Miss Neville!
ay, and another, too, that I could men-
tion; but, to be sure, they have had a pro-
per education; and, when I compare
the manners of Mr. Barton and Mrs.
Neville with that of my own father
and mother, I can hardly forbear think-
ing how much better Bab and I should
have been under such instructions; but,
I trust, it is not yet too late for either
to improve."

                                  CHAP.           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       187


              CHAP. XII.   

A Youth improved.- A young Lady too
  wise for Instruction.-Plebeian Sor-
  rows.

     On the folowing morning, the
new friends repaired to Mr. Barton's,
an young Baldwine began his studies
with much avidity, his juvenile precep-
tor commencing his tuition by putting a
volume of the Spectator into his hands.
This was alternately varied by other ap-
proved authors.  Ancient and modern
history was not neglected; and,by the aid
of Mr. Barton, no despicable proficient,
gave his friend lessons in geography and 
music; and also exercised him 
fencing.  Theri intermediate time was
                                occu-     188        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

occupied in riding, or visiting at Mrs.
Neville's, where Miss Baldwine was
also become a visitor, and party a
scholar, thought without knowing it,
as Mrs. Neville endeavoured cautiously
to decoy her into a more rational mode
of study than she had hitherto been ac-
customed to. It is true she didi not at
present exhibit such strong tokens of
improvement as her brother ; for when
Mrs. or Miss Neville read to her, and
selected, in order to engage her atten-
tion, some interesting story that had a 
moral rendency, and, at the conclusion,
endeavoured to make her give her opi=
nion, her constant reply was, that She
either thought it sad dull stuff, or that
she was not paying any attention, being
just then contriving one of the prettiest
caps that ever was invented. Indeed,
her commenrs, if they may be termed,
were not at all times so innocent : for,
one evening, when Mrs. Neville had
been reading the story of Inkle and                                   
                              Yarico,    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.   189

Yarico, with such pathos and feeling as
filled Flora's bright eyes with tears,
Miss Bab burst into a loud laugh ex-
claiming:

  "How can you be so silly to cry
out about a nasty Blackamoor? why,
they are good for nothing but slaves;
my papa is concerned in the buying
and selling hundreds of them."

  It is a traffic," said Mrs. Neville,
"that may possibly be very lucrative;
yet I do not find myself inclined to
envy him. But, pray, Miss Baldwine,
give me leave to ask you one question.
Don't you think that these nasty
Blackamoors, as you call them, are of
the same species, and have equal sen-
sations with yourself?"

  "O dear ! no; for papa says they
were born to work for the white people."

                         --"The--"The white people have, indeed, in-
humanly exercised a tyrannical power
over them; but that they were expressly
sent into the world as objects of misery,
I have too exalted an ideal of the Deity
to believe.  Don't you think your opi-
nion would have different, if Pro-
vidence had placed you in their situa-
tion?"

--"Me!  in the situation of such
brutes!  I protest you make me shud-
der."

--"Their miseries, my dear, are, in-
deed, enough to make any rational crea-
ture shudder; yet, I see no reason why
you should denominate them brutes,
merely from the tint of their skins;
for, though they are of different com-
plexion, and it has pleased Providence
to curtail them of her abundant super-
fluities, I cannot think they are com-
                                 posed
           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.          191

posed of viler clay than myself, Flora,
or even yor."

 --" Yes, you do, my dear; you have 
only imbibed some erroneous opinions:
would you not wish to be set right?"

 --"I dont't see that it is of much con-
sequence. Besides, it is taking a great
deal of trouble to very little purpose;
for, I am sure, it would never afford me
any amusment."

 --"Why, do you then seriously think,
Miss Baldwine, that separating truth
from error can ever be deemed trouble-
some?"

 --"Indeed, I do; for I hate serious
thinking; it always makes my head
ache."

                          --"Permit192          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  --"Permit me to ask you another ques-
tion: Pray, what do you call amuse-
ment?"

  --"Lord! what an odd question! why,
reading entertaining novels, playing at
cards, dressing, visiting, dancing, and
a thousand other little agreeable trifles,
I call amusing."

  " Trifles, indeed !" Said Mrs. Ne-
ville, smiling; "but, as I find you are
so averse from being serious, we will,
for the present, postpone the subject."

   Thus ended Mrs. Neville's first essay
with Miss Bab, nor were several ones
that followed attended with better suc-
cess. However, to make some amends
for this failure, young Baldwine, in a
few weeks, by the aid of his friend
William, and the company of Mrs.
Neville and Flora, made not only a
rapid improvement in his manners, but
                                 also           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         193
also in his air and conversation. Among
other studies, William introduced French
and Latin, in both which his pupil also
gave very visible signs of not barely
gaining credit himself, but also of re-
flecting it upon his instructor.  Indeed,
the indefatigable industry of the hither-
to neglected Baldwine was so great, that
the friends made their rides considera-
bly shorter, and confined their visits
merely to the cottage.  The amusement
of the former, as William one day jo-
cosely observed, was totally restricted
to the purlieus of Atherstone-Hall,
young Baldwine constantly leading to-
wards that mansion, though, for the
most part, his pains were ungratified
with any other sight that what the bare
walls afforded. However, sometiimes he 
proved more fortune, and caught a 
glimpse of the fair nymph for whom
all these pains were taken, and who, as
yet, was ignorant of the ravages her
                                charms
                      :             194             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

charms had made in the heart of her
anxious and watching admirer.

   In one of these rides, at length, he
was more successful; for, in the indi-
vidual lane, where he had at first seen
the fair Caroline, he again beheld her,
and attended by the same servant as at
the time of the accident. Young Bald-
wine being immediately recognized, she
checked her house, and with the great-
est sweetness, entered into conversation
with him, endeavouring to excuse her
papa and mamma for not personally
thanking him, instead of sending a card
to that purport. Though young Blad-
wine received this address with more
propriety and less confusion than he
would have done some months before,
yet his behaviour and agitation suffi-
ciently evinced that no common cause
could produce so violent a perturbation
of spirits. These, however, he so far
rallied, as to beg permission to attend   
                                    her
  

her to the termination of the road that
joined Lord Atherstone's grounds,
where, with a deep sigh, he took leave,
remaining for some time silently gazing
after his lovely syren, who, turning
round and seeing him, as it were, root-
ed to the spot, kissed her hand, when,
immediately entering the avenue, she
was soon lost to his sight.

"Is she not an angel?" exclaimed
young Baldwine.

"She is, indeed, very charming, "an-
swered William.

"Would to Heaven," ejaculated young
Baldwine, "she was not of high birth
or that I was her equal in rank; for I
fear that even money will not, in so 
proud a family, be deemed an equiva-
lent."

William only answered with a sigh.
                      "I see,"
196       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  " I see," said young Baldwine, in a
melancholy tone, " that you are of my
opinion,"


  " Believe me, no," replied William;
" I was only thinking, that, if you
esteem yourself so far removed from
what your whole wishes appear to center
in, what must my disappointment he, if
I were to indulge views which most pro-
bably would never be realized?"


  " My clear Bennet," answered Bald-
wine, " I am convinced I am not wrong
in saying you allude to Miss Neville;
but, where is the mighty difference be-
tween you? I am sure she loves you as
well as you love her; for I have watch-
ed the looks of both.—-Then, you are
esteemed by Mrs. Neville; and do you
think the Captain will violently oppose
the son of the man that saved his life ?
more especially as every body says that
Mr. Barton will make you his heir ?

                                  But,          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      197

But, suppose he should not, one day or
other, I shall have enought in my power,
and then the want of a few thousands
shall not keep you and Flora Neville
from being united."

   This friendly address of young Bald-
wine's so affected William, that he burst
into tears. As soon as he had a little
recovered his agitation, he owned that
he meant to have concealed his attach-
ment to Flora, even from him, and this,
not from a want of friendship, but
mercly through shame, arising from a
consciousness of his own dependent si-
tuation.

   "But can I," said he, "be guilty of
persisting in a falsehood to such disin-
terested generosity? to one who has also
favoured me with his confidence? Honour
and gratitude forbid! Yes, I acknow-
ledge Flora is dearer to me than my ex-
istence; but shall the son of a serjeant,
   Vol. I.             K           a de-198       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

a dependant on the benevolent Mr. bar-
ton, dare to aspire to the daughter of
Captain Neville?"

    "Why not?"-eagerly interrupted
young Baldwine-" Come, let us both
take courage; mine, indeed, is the most
hopeless situation; for, you have free
access to Miss Neville, while I-but,
no matter; since I have enjoyed your
friendship, I find myself every day less
awkward, and consequently bolder. It
shall, therefore, go hard, but that my
lovely Caroline shall, by some means
know my sentiments. If she disdains
me, I may, perhaps, be miserable; but
I shall, at least, be relieved from uncer-
tainty."

    The conversation was here interrupt-
ed by a mutilated sailor opening the
individual gate which had nearly proved
so disastrous to Lady Caroline. Though
the poor fellow said nothing, yet he
looked
         Mysterious Friendship.       199

looked so expressively, that both Wil-
liam's and young Baldwine's hands in-
stinctively moved towards their respec-
tive pockets.


   "You have seen hard service," said
William, with a sigh, which the recol-
lection of his father's situation forced
from his bosom.


   "I have seen some, my good Sir,"
replied the man; "and yet, the loss of
my leg I did not think so much of; for,
I comforted myself with reflecting that
it was for the honour of Old England,and
that my poor Sal and the little ones
would not like me the worse on my re-
turn to them. I had also other reasons
for being cheerful; for, after being
maimed, there was no danger that I
should again be forced from them.
Then, thinks I, what a comfort it is
not to have lost one of my arms, for I
shall yet be able to work for Sal and the
                  K2            children.200       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

children.  But, alas!my masters, my
troubles were not at an end. Many a 
weary mile did I walk, cold, hungry,
and often pennyless, my poor limb
smarting and aching with the fatigue,--
But this would have been nothing, had
I found--but it was not to be!--For-
give me, my masters--I will make my 
story as short as I can. After having
reached Biddeford, where I once lived,
I learnt that my poor Sal went to Lon-
don, to gain tidings of me, where,
hearing that how I was killed in an en-
gagement, she died of grief and want,
having brought into the world an infant
she was big with when I left her.--
What became of my poor boy Dick,
and the little one, I have never been
able to learn.

   " After having wandered half crazy
for many months, I strayed into this
part, and I now begin to be as well re-
conciled to my bad fortune, as the un-
                             certainty        HOWARD CASTLE.     201

certainty of my poor children's fate will
let me.—To be sure, at times, the
thought of past happiness with poor
Sal comes over me like an ague-fit, and
I sit moping for days together.—Every
bit of bread or drop of water that I put
in my mouth seems like to choak me.
The reason I have taken up my abode
here, and built that clay hovel, is, be-
cause—because," sobbed the poor sailor,
"this spot is so like that near Bidde-
ford, where I was once so happy."

The mutilated narrator here paused,
and drew the corner of an old tattered
handkerchief, which encircled his neck,
across each eye.  Baldwine's and Wil-
liam's hands moved in a similar direc-
tion; each then dropped a piece on mo-
ney into the sailor's hat, and bade him
farewel.

The friends then turned their horses,
and were proceeding on their way, when
                               a loud202     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIp.

a loud halloo from the sailor stayed
their progress, and again brought them
back.

  "I beg pardon for my boldness, good
gentlemen," said he; "but one of you
has, in a mistake, dropped a half-gui-
nea amongst the money in my hat."

  "True," said Baldwine, smiling; "and
yet, for the honour of Old England, I
hope such mistakes are sometimes made
in behalf of her crippled defenders."

  With these words they again set for-
ward, and with such speed as precluded
all thanks.

  "What a proof of honesty has that
poor unfortunate fellow exhibited!" said
William; "I am sure Mr.Barton, at
his return, will do something for him,
and, in the mean time-"

                       "In        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     203

  " In the mean time," hastily inter-
rupted Baldwine, " I desire that you
will leave him to me; for, I insist that
he shall be my pensioner. Do you
think that you and Mr. Barton are to
engross all the poor and oppressed, in
body and spirit, in the parish? No, no,
friend William; I have a scheme in my
head that will make this brave fellow
comfortable, if not happy; and, to-
morrow, I will begin to put it into exe-
cution."
                               K 4 CHAP.20             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

                    CHAP. XIII

    A Crippled Vessel safe moored.

      THE next day, the friends took
the same ride, and the wounded sailor,
as soon as he perceived them, stumped
forward, at no common pace, to open
the gate for his benefactors.

  "God bless you, my masters!" ex-
claimed he.

  "Well, friend! how do you find
yourself by this time?" said Bald-
wine.

  "Bravely, I thank you, Sir," re-
turned the sailor; "thof I could
scarcely sleep for thinking what I
should do with the money you gave
                               me            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.  205

me yesterday; but I believe I have set-
tled it at last."

   "That's well," replied Baldwine;
"and how is it to be disposed of?"

   "Why, Sir, after hammering my
brains for half a dozen hours to no pur-
pose, all of sudden, it came pat into
my head, that, if I could but get some-
body to draw a petition to the mayor
and corporation, they might, mayhap,
let me fence in a bit of the waste ground,
and I would then rear a more comfort-
able hovel; for at present, I am only
on sufferance. I also would then raise
a few turnips and potatoes, and buy a
pig, with the money you have been
kind enough to give me."

   "A very good scheme!" said young
Baldwine; "and, as this gentleman and
myself happen to have some little in-
                  K 5          terest,  



206      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

terest, we will see what can be done for
you."

   William and his friend then pursued
their ride, attended by the hearty bless-
ings of the sailor; and, according to
usual custom, reconnoitred atherstone-
Hall, and its environs; after which,
they immediately proceeded to urge the
business of their mutilated acquaintance,
whose interest they embraced so warmly,
that they found very little difficulty in
procuring the wished-for grant in his
favour. This point settled, they next
repaired to a neighbouring carpenter,
to whom young Baldwine gave the ne-
cessary orders for instantly construct-
ing a decent building, to consist of
two rooms, one above the other, with
a little recess behind the lower one,
though sufficiently large to answer the
purpose of a bed-chamber; and, being
resolved not to do things by halves, he
                                   next

   MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      207

next gave orders for a gardener and a labourer to meet him the next morning on the spot, to fence, break up, and crop the allotted ground.  Having thus settled this business, the friends adjourned to Mrs. Neville's, and communicated to that lady and Flora their morning's employment, which accorded so much with their own feelings, that, at their particular request, the gentlemen agreed they should join the next day's cavalcade, in order to witness and partake of the honest seaman's joy and surprise.  

  The whole party, accordingly, were early on horseback, and had barely reached the hovel, before the appointed workmen arrived also, to the no small astonishment on honest Ben Burdock (that being the seaman's name).  For some time, he beheld the proceedings of the different artificers, and their various measurements, with folder arms and a pro-

                              K 6
208        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

profound taciturnity; but, on being
asked by young Baldwine If he had any
objection to his tenement being built
some few yards from the intended spot,
on account of the neighbourhood of a
fine spring? every doubt of their inten-
tions appeared removed, and his joy ex-
ceeded all bounds.

   " Objection !" repeated Ben; " Lord
love your good heart, what objection 
can I have, except your putting your-
self so much expense on my account?
but, indeed, I am able to break up the 
groupd myself, and to hedge it in, so 
that charge may be well spared."

   In this, however, Ben was over-
ruled, and the precise spot determined
close by the spring-side, the gate being
also removed to the new situation, as
more commodious and less dangerous
to passengers, the road in this place
being considerably wider. the expence
                                  was



       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     209

was somewhat enhanced by the altera-
tion; but, as this was to be made good
by young Baldwine, the workmen made
no semur, especially as they were well
aware it was an innovation in which he
could indemnify them.

  The plan being thus settled, the work
was immediately begun, and carried on
so speedily, that, in about a month,
the little fabric was completed, the
garden dug, fenced, and planted; a neat
bar thrown across the road, in lieu of
the old heavy awkward gate, and so
contrived, that Ben, in rainy or bad
weather, might pull it open, without
going out of his dwelling. Every thing
being finished, Mrs. Neville, Flora, and
William, furnished the tenement at their
own peculiar expence, not forgetting a 
couple of pigs, which were placed in a
proper receptacle on one side of the
garden. These last were particularly
remembered, as honest Ben, in a former
                             conversa-210            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

conversation with young Baldwine, seemed to lay a more than common stress bringing up a pig, for a provisional winter-store.

   Nothing was now wanting but to translate Ben into his new living, which he entered with much thankfulness, the tear of gratitude stealing down his furrowed cheek; which as usual, he wiped off with the tattered remains of the before-mentioned handkerchief, that appeared to have partaken of it's master's severe service.

  "How can I ever deserve this goodness?" blubbered out the grateful sailor.

  "By saying no more about it, my honest fellow," replied young Baldwine; "but if you are resolved to make a return, I will tell you how you shall amply repay me. When the charming daughter
       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     211

daughter of Lord Atherstone approaches
your gate, let it fly open quick as
thought, that her dear life may not be
again endangered."


    "Why, Lord! are you, then, the
gentleman that saved her?" exclaimed
Ben.  "Bless her dear good-natured
soul!---Open the gate to her! ay, that
I will: why, Lord love you! I heard
from her own mouth all about the acci-
dent; for, one day, I fastened the girth
of her saddle that had got loose, and
so, she said, says she, 'This is an
ugly heavy gate of your's; it had like
to have been very fatal to me, but for
the timely assistance of a young gentle-
man.' She then asked me if I Knew
Mr. Baldwine? and, when I answered,
I did not remember the name, she said
no more, but went on."


   "And did she, indeed, mention me?"
replied young Baldwine, catching hold
of the seaman's arm.
                               "Ay,212 MYATERIOUS FRIENDSHIP,

   " Ay, I;ll be sworn, did she," said
 Ben, in an accent of much pleasure,in 
being the instrument of conveying sa-
tisfaction to his benefactor.  "Ay, and
I'll be bound, by her looks, there is no 
love lost between ye-and, egad! now,
i know what tack to go upon, and how 
the land lies on both sides the channel,
mayhap, somehow, I may be able to 
pick up more intelligence-But, mum-
bless you both together:-if any wishes 
to part you, may they be water-logged 
to all eternity!"

Though the seaman's speeches savoured
 but little of courtly compliment, yet 
there appeared a heartiness and sincerity 
in his behaviour that pleased the friends 
much better; so that, after having ab-
solutely forced upon him their half-gui-
neas a-piece, to commence housekeep-
ing with, as they termed it, they de-
parted, and left him more happy than 
he had been for many months before.
                                    NorMYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.	218

Nor was young Baldwine, during the 
remainder of his ride, less elate : to be 
even mentioned by Lady Caroline, was 
to him of no little consequence ; but 
the idea that the sailor conveyed of 
her thinking favourably of him, afforded 
the utmost transport, which William 
was not willing to damp, though his 
interpretation of Ben's report did not 
appear to afford quite so sanguine a 
construction.

William's and his friend's dispositions, 
gt least in this instance, widely differed.
A too great consciousness of being the 
creature of Mr. Barton's bounty had 
made the former timid; not that the 
wealth which the latter would one day 
inherit caused him to be assuming,' 
though it must be confessed, in this in-
stance, it inspired him with hope some-
what approaching towards an apology 
for the defect of high blood.

CHAP.
214      Mysterious Friendship.

             Chap. XIV.

   The Contrast; or noble and ignoble
              Visitors.

   On the young gentlemen's ar-
rival at home, they found a packet of
letters from Mr. Barton, signifying his
being in perfect health, but that busi-
ness might possibly detain him in Lon-
don some weeks longer.  Enclosed was 
a letter for Mrs. Neville, which William,
accompanied by his friend, went to de-
liver.  As there was very little ceremony
used between the two families, the gen-
tlemen stayed to dine; after which the la-
dies and William amused themselves with
playing on the piano-forte.  The tea-
table had just succeeded the little con-
cert, when the party was disturbed by
Lord Dalton and Mr. Supple being an-
nouced.
          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     215

nounced. These gentlemen entered,
with all the familiarity of intimate ac-
quaintance.

    "On passing your door, Madam,"
said the latter, " neither myself, nor my
lord, could resist the impulse of paying
our respects."

    "We are much indebted to your good-
ness and his lordship's great condescen-
sion," replied Mrs. Neville, pointedly:
  
  "will you please to take tea?"

     "You are infinitely obliging, Ma-
dam, " answered Lord Dalton, drawing
his chair close to Flora, without no-
ticing the rest of the company: "shall
we have the pleasure of seeing you at
the next assembly?"

     "I believe not," replied Mrs. Ne-
ville, "as Mr.Barton, who, in general
is my chaperon, is in London, and-"
                             "I should 

216      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  " I should be highly flattered, Ma-
dam," interrupted Mr. Supple, " with
permission of supplying Mr. Barton's
place."

  " And I," said my lord, "shall think
myself highly honoured, in being fa-
voured with Miss Neville's hand for the
evening—I hope you will not be cruel
enough to pronounce a refusal."

  During this short discourse, William
had alternately experienced the burnings
of a fever, and the shiverings of an
ague. To speak, was impossible; nor
could he scarcely breathe, until Mm.
Neville replied;

  " I thank you, Sir; but we must, at
present, decline the honour you pro-
pose."

  Lord Dalton expressed his sorrow at
this disappointment, with a mixture of
                              offended
           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     217

offended pride, which he could not con-
ceal, by saying to Flora, in an under-
tone of voice:


   " May I not flatter myself, amiable
Miss Neville! that you will endeavour
to get this cruel resolution revoked, or,
at least, that you will promise me the ho-
nour of your fair hand, the first time
you favour the assembly wih your pre-
sense?"


   " For the first part of your request,
my lord," replied Flora, "my mother's
commands are ever so consonant with
my own desires, that I should do vio-
lence to myself to oppose them; and,
for the latter, 'tis impossible for me to
promise for such a length of time."


" Your lordship's sister, I think," said
Mrs. Neville, willing to break on the
discourse, "never visits our assembly?"

                            ---" Very218 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

   "Very seldom, Madam: but, apropos,
will you give me leave to introduce Ca-
roline to your acquaintance? I am sure
she will be proud to be known to you."

    "Lady Caroline's acquaintance, Sir,
must confer honour; she is, I am told,
a lady of great merit and accomplish-
ments."

    "The little prude is very well; but,
Madam, 'tis impossible to judge of me-
rit, or even of accomplishments, that are
perpetually before our eyes."

     "I must beg leave to dissent from
your lordship, in this particular; and
also presume to say, that, if these are
your real sentiments, you never mean, I
suppose, to form any permanent engage-
ment in life?"

     "Oh! that is quite a different case,"
replied his lordship, rather confusedly:
                                   " we          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     219

"we were speaking of a sister, you
know."

   --"True, my lord; but you will par-
don me for saying, that I conceive an 
indifferent brother may not, in future,
prove either an affectionate husband, or
a tender parent--But this is, I am afraid,
rather too serious a subject for your
lordship:  give me leave to introduce my
young friends, Mr. Baldwine and Mr.
Bennet."

   William now received a slight incli-
nation of the head from his lordship;
but young Baldwine he addressed as
follows:

    "I think, Sir, you are the gentleman
to whom Caroline was so much obliged?
As I have never had an opportunity be-
fore, permit me to thank you." 

                              "Your 220     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  "Your lordship is very obliging,"
replied young Baldwine: "the small
service I was so fortunate as to render
Lady Caroline is scarcely worth notice,
especially as I conceive myself suffi-
ciently rewarded, in having been the in-
strument of saving so amiable a lady
from a fatal accident."

  The conversation was here interrupted
by the entrance of Miss Bab, who, after
having paid her compliments to my lord 
and Mr. Supple, began holding forth
with great volubility on her most fa-
vourite topics, viz. new novels and 
fashions, in which she was presently
joined by the noble pupil and his pre-
ceptor; but, whether this proceeded
from their politeness, or whether the dis-
cussion of such subjects was more cal-
culated for the meridian of their under-
standings, we will not positively de-
cide.

                                 While

           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         221

  While these weighty matters were
settling by the tonish triumvirate, a
party quarrée was formed by the rest of
the company, whose conversation, at
least to themselves, was to the full as in-
teresting as that of the more fashionable
party, two of whom, my lord and Mr.
Supple, soon after took leave, to the
no small mortification of Miss Bab, who
declared that my lord was a delightful
fellow, and Mr. Supple charming com-
pany--" Don't you thing so, Mem?"
said she, addressing Mrs. Neville.

  "Upon my word," returned that
lady, " I cannot descry any thing de-
lectable enough in either to induce me
to covet a second visit."

  "Oh! horrid!" exclaimed Miss Bab;
"why, isn't it one a lord, and the other
a clergyman?"

      VOl. I.         L        --" Which222     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  ---" Which distinctions I suppose you
would infer must, of course, entitle their
possessors to be received with all due
homage, merit out of the question.
However, as I unfortunately cannot, on
the strictest scrutiny I am capable of,
discover any laudable ingredient in the
compositions of either, I hope to stand
excused, for viewing one in the light of
a presuming young man, who thinks a 
title and fortune sufficient apologies for
any impertinence; but is not at all
amazing; for, sure, never had pupil so
confident a preceptor."


   " But I am glad, Madam, " said young
Baldwine, " you have not so unfavour-
able an opinion of all the family : report
bestows every praise on Lady Caro-
line."


  " It doth, replied Mrs. Neville;
" and I should be greatly pleased if an
intimacy could be formed between Flora
                                  and 
    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.   223

and her, as Lord Dalton has made over-
tures."

 "But, my dear Madam," interrupted
William, "will you forgive me for say-
ing, that, possibly, Lady Caroline's ac-
quaintance, though very desirable, may
also subject you to those visits, which
you just now seemed to disapprove?"

 --"It is always in our power to silence
impertinence, William."

 William bowed, blushed, and remained
silent.

 "What say you, Mr. Baldwine?"
continued Mrs. Neville. "Don't you
think that such an amiable acquaintance
will more than counterbalance the little
disagreeables we may have to encounter
from my Lord and Mr. Supple's visits?"

                   L2        "Abun224       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

     "Abundaintly, Madam, "eagerly re-
plied young Baldwine. 

     'I knew," said Miss Bab, sneeringly, 
"you would have my brother on your
side; for, he can neither talk nor think
of any thing but of Lady Caroline;
though, for the matter of that, I don't
see any thing in her to make a fuss about, 
for all she looks so demure, as if butter
would not melt in her mouth. I don't 
know but what other people may have 
as much pretensions to beauty, though
she is a lord's daughter. ---Don't you
think so, Mr. Bennet?"

     This was a question for which William was not prepared; he having, therefore,
first stolen a glance at Flora, answered, 
hesitatingly, "Yes." --Then turning his 
eyes on Miss Bab, he falteringly re-
plied --"No--that is to say---I---
I beg pardon, Miss Baldwine'what was
your question?"

                                 --"Why, 
         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     225

  —" Why, hey-day! sure, you are in
love, as well as Bob. What I was say-
ing is of no great signification, how-
ever; but this 1 will say—that I think
there is no more comparison between my
lord and his sister--—-"

  " Than between you and me," inter-
rupted young Baldwine.

  " I'll be hang'd if that wasn't in my
thoughts," replied Miss Bab, laughing.

  This little sally produced a smile from
the major part of the company; though
their sentiments were somewhat dissimi-
lar to those which had occasioned Miss
Bab's risibility.

  " But what, in the name of wonder,"
said Mrs. Neville, " makes William so
unusually grave? See, Flora, if you can-
not dispel it by the assistance of a little
melody."

                     L 3          Flora
426          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

Flora sat down to her piano-forte;
and, having selected several airs and
pieces of music, which she knew to be
particularly agreeable to young Bennet,
she played and sung them with such pe-
culiar taste and execution, as soon re-
called his native sprightliness and viva-
city. This was not a little encreased by
the kindness and attention of Mrs. Neville,
which made him ample amends for the
cool and contemptuous behaviour of the
young lord and his preceptor. Indeed,
the whole company, if we except Miss
Bab, appeared so happy in their absence,
that the hours insensibly glided away.
Miss Bab, indeed, was apparently out of
her proper sphere, and, therefore, took
the first opportunity to withdraw, hav-
ing previously declined her brother's
company, as The servants, she said, af-
forded sufficient protection; and, though
young Baldwine was by no means de-
void of fraternal affection, yet he was,
                                      at             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      227

at this time, willing enough to admit
excuse, being much better pleased with
the society at the village, then any he
had been used to in the town where his
father resided, or even in his own fa-
mily; on which account, since Mr. Bar-
ton's absence, he had been chiefly at
that gentleman's house, from whom he
had received a most cordial invitation
previous to his departure.

   Mrs. Nevile's company being again
reduced within its own proper circle, for
young Baldwine was considered as one
that merited her esteem, the conver-
sation became at once familiar and
friendly.

   " I cannot tell you," said Mrs. Ne-
ville, "how much I lament the absence
of our good friend, Mr. Barton. Under
his grave escort, we might have visited
the assembly, or rambled any where,
                              without228             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

without fear of insult, or incurring a
censure of impropriety."

    "I hope, Madam," Replied William,
"if Mr. Baldwine, or myself, were per-
mitted the honour of attending you and
Miss Neville, you do not think we would
permit any insult?"

    "Oh, no!" ansered Mrs.Neville,
smiling. "I have not the least doubt
that your heroism would be exerted to
the utmost stretch of knight-crrantry;
but, in these modern times, when scan-
dal and calumny have usurped the throne
of truth and candour, and ancient chi-
valry is also abolished, might not the
fame of the peerless Princess Flora, at
least, suffer in the dire contest? Now,
with Sage Barton, nothing of this sort
could be apprehended; for, he professes
that coolness to retort upon his adversa-
ry, without having recourse to violence;
                                witness 
               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     229

witness the rebuke he gave Mr. Supple.
I am amazed, after what passed on that
occasion, that we were ever favoured
with that gentleman's and his pupil's
company."

   "It evinces very little delicacy, or
even propriety," said Flora. "But nei-
ther of the gentlemen appears to have
much of either in his composition."

   "I am rather inclined to think," re-
plied young Baldwine, "that the greater
part of Lord Dalton's errors are owing
to Mr. Supple; for, I am informed, by
a person who is well acquainted with his
character, that his conduct at the uni-
versity was so loose and irregular, that
he would have been expelled, had it not
been for the art with which he contrived
to throw his faults upon others; to which
may be added, the base fawning and
flattery with which he used to pay court
                                      to230   MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

to his superiors. This last quality, I am
also told, he still exercises, by taking
every opportunity of feeding Lord and
Lady Atherstone's pride. On this ac-
count, he passes them for a pro-
digy of perfection; and, without being
suspected, he leads his young pupil into
every excess, helping him, at the same
time, to spend a most liberal allow-
ance."

  "But is it not amazing," said Mrs.
Neville, "that, in such a family, there
should be even an individual so very op-
posite? for, I suppose that no more at-
tention is paid to Lady Caroline than to
their hopeful heir."

  --"'Tis to that very cause, if we may
credit report, that she owes her improv-
ment; for, Lady Atherstone being too
proud, and too great, to inspect her
daughter's education, that duty has been
                                    left
               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      261 
       
     left to a foreigner, whom chance brought
     into the family. Fortunately for Lady
     Caroline, this woman, they say, not only
     possesses every virtue, but also has had a
     learned, as well as a polite, education;
     so that she has lost nothing by her pa-
     rents' inattention. What a misfortune,
     that Lord Dalton did not also fall into 
     good hands! I am sure I feel for him;
     and the more so, for being myself an in-
     stance of neglect, though arising from
     another cause."

         " At the same time, Mr. Baldwine,"
     said Mrs. Neville, "you may congra-
     tulate yourself in being one of the few
     instances that exhibit what energy the
     mind is capable of. This confirms me 
     in an opinion I have long since imbibed,
     That it is only necessary to earnestly de-
     termine to be any thing we wish. Hence 
     vice may be corrected, and arts and
     learning attained at any age, provided
                                      there
      
                                 
                                                            

232           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

there be a ray of genius, or that the
faculties be not impaired or debili-
tated."

  "I am convinced," returned young
Baldwine, " that I have a great deal to
learn; but I do not despair, as I meet
your countenance and encouragement,
and my friend William's assistance, whom
I love as a brother.  Mr. Barton has,
besides, promised me his kind tuition;
therefore, it must be my own fault if I 
make no progress."

  "There is very little danger," replied
Mrs. Neville; "for, without flattery, I
never saw so great an improvement in so
short a space.  Our diffident friend, Wil-
liam, must certainly possess as eminent
instructive powers as you do retentive
faculties."

  "I am very glad, Madam," said 
young Baldwine, "that you take notice
                                   of           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.           233

of his diffidence; for, I never saw any 
one who had so much right to pride
himself on his abilities, and yet so very
humble."


   " I have often remarked it, nay, have
even sometimes been grieved at it," said
Mrs. Neville, " as it appears to border
on a dejection of spritis.----What can
be the reason of it, my dear William?
I shall absolutely chide you, if you con-
tinue thus."


-" Indeed, Madam, if I refer to the
situation I enjoy from the bounty of
Mr. Barton, I ought to rest abundantly
satisfied; but, conscious as I am, that I
possess no merit to entitle me to his be-
nevolence, how can I, sometimes, pre-
vent uneasy sensations from intruding?
especially when I reflect that I can make
no return for his favours."


   VOL I.             M          --" I am234         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

   --"I am afraid you have a proud
heart, William: he! he!--because you
have no real troubles, you are diligently
studious to make artificial ones. I pro-
test, if you do not become cheerful, I
will tell Mr. Barton when he returns."

   "I know you are too good, Madam,"
answered William, "to say any thing
that would make me incur his displea-
sure. Believe me, it is not pride that
causes me, sometimes, to feel rather
awkward; but I cannot avoid thinking
that I have no right to be an idle or un-
employed member of society; and, should
any chance bereave me of Mr. Barton's
favour and protection, what but misery
must be the certain consequence?"

  --"I protext you are a mere vision-
ary; but, comfort yourself with the 
thought that these are matters very un-
likely to happen, and that you have
other friends; for, believe me, William,
                                   your


       MYSTERIOUS FRIENSHIP.     235

your welfare I am as much interested
in, as if you were my own."

  " And, if what you have said, Ma-
dam," replied young Baldwine, " will
not make him easy, I declare before you
all, nay, will give it under my hand,
that the moment which makes me inde-
pendent, renders him equally so."

  " Have my dear friends," said Wil-
liam, " so mean an opinion of me, as
to suppose my views are selfish and in-
terested? No; though'1 should rejoice
at an -independence arising from my own
efforts, for many reasons, the principal
of which arc to evince my gratitude,
and to shew how much 1 esteem my
obligations; but, 'tis impossible. For-
give me, then, my dear, honoured, and
revered friends: 110 signs of discontent
or uneasiness shall in future appear,
either in word or action. We will now
take leave; the pleasure we have expe-
                               rienced236          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

rienced in your company has made us forget the lateness of the hour"

  The friends then bade the ladies good night, and returned home.








              END OF VOL. I.











   Knight and Compton, Printers,
   Middle Street, Cloth Fair.