



^<mm 







mMM 






^^m 



r 



s 



THE UNIVERSITY 

dF ILLINOIS 

LIBRARY 



823 

G660 

v.i 



L_ 



\ 



<J*t 



The person charging ^"^^^T^^At&ryVom 
S°4^1^rs w^STawn ror beiore the 

JAN 2 41915 



L161-O-1096 > 



THE OPERA: 

A NOVEL. 

BY THE AUTHOll OF 

"MOTHERS AND DAUGHTERS." 



Ou les beaux vers, la danse, la musique, 
De cent plaisirs font un plaisir unique. 

VOLTAIRE. 



TN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. L 



LONDON: 
HENRY COLBURN AND RICHARD BENTLEY, 

NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 
1832. 



e. UHITJNG, BEAUFORT HOUSK RTRANO, 






THE OPERA, 



INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 

Few scenes of frivolous recreation afford so 
brilliant an episode in the monotony of human 
existence as the Parisian Opera. Presenting a 
succession of the most complete dramatic illu- 
sions, it exhibits at all seasons a sparkling chain — 
a flowery garland — uniting the willing muses in a 
single group, whose incantations 

— TaVfi thp imprisoned soul. 



And lap it in Elysium. 

To the natives of Paris the Opera presents a 
strong hold of national pride ; to travellers of all 
nations, a rendezvous of the most varying and 
exhilarating description. 

VOL. I. B 



543157 



THE OPERA. 



It was one night early in the carnival of the 
present year, that the Duchesse de Montemar 
and her English friend, Lady Welwyn, took pos- 
session of their box to witness a representation of 
" Le Dieu et la Bayadere," with a premeditated 
intention of flying into ecstacies at the sight of 
Taglioni's attitudes, and melting into the neces- 
sary rapture of enthusiasm at the sound of Nour- 
rifs voice ; even though the attention of the one 
was riveted by the languid whispers of Count 
Ugo Pignatellij and the admiration of the other 
lavished on the flippant sallies of the Chevalier 
de Villevargues. The Duchess had no ears but for 
the thrice-told tale of the young Neapolitan's 
drowsy homage ; — Lady Welwyn no eyes, save 
for the aff'ectation of the Chevalier, a sort of 
half-English, half-Parisian exquisite, who was 
just then wrapped in a luxurious reverie on the 
taste and fancy displayed in the last of his 
three hundred and sixty-five waistcoats. He 
smiled and bowed, and prated as usual ; but a 
solitary idea had possessed itself of his empty 
brain. 

'' And why were you not at Madame de Cha- 



THE OrERA. 3 

teauroche^s ball last night ?" inquired the Count, 
addressing himself to Lady AVelwyn. 

'' I was ill — or cross — or philosophical ; out of 
sorts, or out of health," sighed the fantastical 
beaut}^ 

*' Error of judgment I — You may believe me 
on my word of honour, dear Lady Welwyn, you 
were neither and none of these things. Your 
looks to-night contradict half your declaration : 
your amiabihty at all times refutes the rest." 

" What excuse then wiU serve me ? — Shall I 
say that Sir Robert refused me a new dress, — or 
that Alexandre disappointed me, — or that I had 
restive horses, or a perverse husband ?" 

" Bah — bah ! — Nothing, my dear, but your 
own vanity could prompt such suggestions," cried 
Madame de Montemar, somewhat indignant to 
find so much of Pignatelli's attention bestowed 
upon her fair friend. " You must be aware that 
the Count has nothing to reply to such equivoca- 
tions but that you require no aid of dress, new 
or old, to render you the pearl of the ball-room ; 
that Alexandre is only one of the thirteen hun- 
dred distinguished hair-dressers of the capital; 
b2 



4 THE OPERA. 

and finally, that when Sir Robert Welwyn or 
your coachhorses choose to be sulky, you cannot 
do better than leave them all three at rack and 
manger — the spot best calculated for the restora- 
tion of their good humour.'" 

" Admirable !" cried Count Ugo, with a pro- 
longed yawn of applause. " You surpass your^r 
self to-night, my dear Duchess. How delightful 
it is to those who live in your society to find their 
own crude notions emanate from your lips refined 
and polished, and glittering with wit and gaiety ! 
With you one need only exist ; you think and 
talk for us better than we can for ourselves :" and 
sinking back in his chair with a second yawn, he 
re-assumed his wonted air of supercilious listless- 
ness. 

" The Duchess, like our first of modern diplo- 
mates, acknowledges no use in words except to 
disguise her thoughts,"" cried Lady Welwyn, bit- 
terly. '' She espies treason lurking in ambush 
where there can be no motive for ajeii de cache- 
cache. — Why should I frame false motives for 
absenting myself from the best ball of the car- 
nival r 



A 



/ 



THE OPERA. 



'* Because you do not like to own your dis- 
inclination to be outshone by these EngUsh brides, 
who are just now creating so prodigious a sensa- 
tion in our gay circles. Even I, who am safe 
from the excitement of national competition with 
either, am somewhat jealous of the Duchess of 
Cardigan's diamonds, and of Lady Bruton's in- 
teresting cast of beauty." 

" I know nothing of either,'' cried Lady Wel- 
wyn ; '' and am therefore little interested by their 
attractions or proceedings." 

" And as little," observed her friend, Madame 
de Montemar, in a spiteful whisper, " by Sir 
Henry Bagot's devotion to Lady Georgina El- 
lerby ? — By the way, my dear, do you know that 
the marriage of the handsome attache is posi- 
tively announced, and it is said that the happy 
pair are to accompany the Duke and Duchess to 
Italy.?" 

** It was quite amusing," cried the Chevaher, 
determined not to observe the air of pique with 
which this piece of information was received by 
Sir Robert Welwyn's giddy wife, " to observe 
the awkward air with which several of your Eng- 



6 



THE OPERA. 



lish beauties greeted the Duke of Cardigan last 
night at the Palais Royal. It must be very- 
embarrassing, very humihating, to see the bird 
for which they have all spread their nets so long 
and so vainly, perched familiarly on the shoulder 
of another." 

*' And of one who seems so careless of the 
distinction." 

'' They say he was considerate enough to 
order a grove of willows to be cut down on his 
wedding-day, which he bequeathed at parting to 
those numerous belles of Almack's, whose pre- 
tensions he has amused himself by tantalizing 
ever since he came of age." 

" Let him not triumph too loudly," said Ugo 
Pignatelli, raising himself from his lounging po- 
sition, and firing up from his apathetic mood, on 
learning that another man presumed to affect a tone 
of impertinence still loftier than his own. " For 
my part I see nothing very brilHant in his grace's 
hymeneal wreath ; — the cypress has scarcely a 
less dingy branch than the willow." 

" The cypress ?" — inquired Lady Welwyn. 

" Yes ! — the Duke of Cardigan has been the 



THE OPERA. y 

hero of more than one extraordinary adventure 
since you quitted England. But that the story 
is connected -with reminiscences most afflicting to 
my own feehngs, I would recount it to you my- 
self." 

<' Ah ! my dear Count Pignatelli !'' pleaded 
the Duchess, who dearly loved a sentimental 
tale, more especially when the aid of a little 
fashionable scandal was dashed into the sherbet, 
to render it less cloying. 

''Ask Villevargues," said the Count, again 
relapsing into his dejected and disjointed atti- 
tude. '' He can tell you the whole affair if he 
likes ; and looks as if he would like to tell you." 

" What affair ? — You were talking just now 
of Bagot's marriage?" 

'' No — no ! — of the disasters connected with 
that of the Duke of Cardigan." 

" Ah ! la voila ! — See ! — the Duchess has just 
made her appearance in the box of the Ambas- 
sadress. How very lovely she is — how very 
graceful — what an intellectual expression in her 
eyes! Lady Bruton will not bear a comparison 
with her." 



8 THE OPE 11 A. 

" Poor thing ! — how clifFerent was hei' air and 
tone when I first met her at Naples !" cried Ville- 
vargues ; " how followed she was, how flattered, 
how admired ! — She is not yet three-and-twenty 
— and a complete wreck.*" 

" Nay !'' said Madame de Montemar, quite 
willing to take Lady Bruton's part when she 
heard her attractions decried by the Chevalier. 
'^ She is, after all, a very lovely creature — a line 
of poetry among all Lady AVelwyn's cold, hard, 
rigid, matter-of-fact fellow-countrywomen. There 
is an abandon^ — an air of gentle languor so 
wholly free from affectation about her, that it 
grieves me to think her doom is sealed. Ma- 
jendie has pronounced her to be in a decline ; 
and from his award there is no appeal." 

" Were I Lord Bruton,'' cried Villevargues, 
" I should* however exert my skill to prevail on 
so charming a wife to discredit that of the expe- 
rimentalist. It is true that horrible discovery 
concerning her odious mother was enough to 
break her heart, and then the dreadful event which 
shocked us all so much at the opera last year, must 
have been to her doubly distressing. But in our 



THE OPERA. 9 

time, broken hearts are as easily mended as broken 
limbs. Lady Bruton will put her's in a tourni- 
quet, and wear it in a sling for a year or two ; 
there is no possible occasion for her to go and 
die in Italy. — The days of enthusiasm are past ; 
no more crusading, — no more dying for love ! " 

" You forget that it is still easy to die of 
curiosity ,"'' cried the Duchess. " I shall certainly 
find my lungs affected before to-morrow, unless 
you unravel the mystery which envelopes this 
bridal Duchess of yours, and this beautiful friend 
of Sir Henry Bagot's — this pensive Lady 
Bruton.'' 

" Take me home with you then," said the 
Chevalier, " and oblige me with a glass of eau 
sucrte, and I will try to make the mystery as 
much more mysterious, — the explanation as ora- 
cular and incomprehensible as tellers of stories 
usually do. But prepare yourself for a lachry- 
mose tale ; — not unmingled with the flighty levi- 
ties of modern life, but almost too romantic for 
the age we live in." 

Reader! shall we follow the flij^pant Ville- 
vargues and Lady Welwyn to the luxurious 
b3 



10 THE OPERA. 

boudoir of Madame de Montemar? — No! — 
let us rather attempt in sober sadness or sober 
cheerfulness our own exposition of the business. 
The narrative may serve to prove that even 
a spot, devoted like " The Opera," to idle 
amusement — open to the approach of every vulgar 
footstep — and incessantly haunted by those both 
of the vulgar and illustrious — may be rendered 
a scene of interest of the most intense and excit- 
ing description ; — that the passions have at times 
been more actively at work within the familiar 
walls of the King's Theatre, than in the cabin, 
the dungeon, or the palace: — that they have 
witnessed the choicest sighs of love, and even the 
parting breath of mortal nature.— Listen ! 



THE OPERA. 11 



CHAPTER I. 



*• 'Tis neither a grave story nor a gay one," replied the 
corporal, '' but will suit your honour exactly." 

*' Then I'll thank thee for it with all my heart," cried my 
uncle Toby j " so prithee begin it, Trim." 

Sterxe. 



The most perverse or unobservant traveller, 
from Dan to Beersheba, will scarcely venture 
to deny that certain spots of earth convey a 
strong impression of local sanctity ; and that 
on others nature has affixed an indelible cha- 
racter of romance, not unfrequently heightened 
by the blunders of art, or the freaks of accident. 
It is not always the donjon or the fortaHce,— . 
" high towers or moss-grown steeples," which 
arrest the eye of the wanderer amid the wide 
landscape, and afford a theme to his evening 



12 THE OPERA. 

cogitations or midnight visions at his inn. The 
country snuggery — the vine-covered manse — 
the chateau with its gabled roofs — the villa with 
its platformed terraces, — sometimes acquire a de- 
gree of adventitious interest, derived from trifles 
but far from trivial in effect. 

It is probable, for instance, that no traveller 
beside the banks of the Traun, — whether the 
French savant^ en diligence, or the English 
sentleman released from the durance of an ela- 
borately convenient London travelling-carriage ; 
the German student, with his knapsack on his 
back, or the fierce Bohemian hussar spurring on- 
wards to his garrison at Verona, — ever passed 
the village of Elzbach, cozily niched into the 
acclivitous shore of that beautiful stream, with- 
out experiencing a peculiar sensation of sym- 
pathy. One among the number might be at- 
tracted by the aspect of its neat white quad- 
rangular monastery, perched like a dove's nest 
among the fissures of the cliff, (its spires just 
rising above the summit) looking tranquillity, 
and exhibiting the ascetic but erudite seclusion 
characteristic of the ecclesiastical estate through- 



THE OPERA. 13 

out Austria. A second might more partially 
incline towards the neat little village, gathered 
together beneath the very wings of the Kloster^ 
as if to derive shelter from its interposition with 
Heaven, and so compact in its economy, that the 
helmet of Otranto might have extinguished it, 
suburbs and all. While a third, particularly if 
a man of sentiment, would rather bend his predi- 
lections towards the Schloss, — the hard, stiff, un- 
gainly mansion of red granite — endowed with the 
privilege and dignity of its temporal protection ; 
and standing with an air of wild defiance, like a 
copper-coloured Indian, glaring from among en- 
tangled thickets of underwood. 

c 

This unostentatious abode, the house or as it 
was termed in the village, the Castle of Elzstein, 
possessed it is true among its attributes no air of 
jppandeur, antiquity, elegance, or even comfort. 
It was evidently a dwelling adapted to a family 
of moderate means and extent ; and disgracing 
by its inherent ugliness one of the most beautiful 
sites vouchsafed by the favour of nature. Yet 
many paused to gaze at leisure on the grotesque 
distribution of its gables with their sculptured 



14 THE OPERA. 

keystones; on the wild exuberance of its ne- 
glected gardens ; on its terraces overlooking the 
river and ornamented with clumsy statues of the 
worthies of antiquity, as curiously marshalled as 
those which adorn the ruins of the electoral 
palace at Heidelberg ; and few, very few, could 
succeed in thereafter obliterating from their re- 
collections the quaint and anomalous character 
of Elzbach and its Herrenhaus. 

Sometimes, indeed, that laudable thirst for mis- 
cellaneous information so remarkable in the tourists 
of Great Britain, would induce some gaping John 
Bull to inquire of his postilion or courier the name 
of that " queer-looking place ;" and in such in- 
stances great was the astonishment felt and ex- 
pressed on learning that it was tenanted by a 
" Milor." But this designation being in pretty 
general use on the continent to distinguish all 
sorts and conditions of Englishmen not of an 
absolutely menial degree, such an announcement 
could only lead to a demand for more specific 
intelligence ; and all that courier, or postilion, 
or even postmaster had to tell of the lord of 
Elzstein, was the fact that he had served with 



THE OPERA. 15 

distinction in the Imperial army, and the surmise 
that he was a widower. The prior of the adjoin- 
ing monastery of St. Florian would sometimes 
add that he was a good catholic, and therefore of 
necessity a worthy man; while the damsels or 
Elzbach, when interrogated on the subject, sel- 
dom omitted to record that the mysterious En- 
glishman was blest with an only son. But rarely 
had the investigation been prosecuted with suffi- 
cient zeal to ascertain that the name of the 
recluse was Count Maldyn, and that he was an 
Irish colonel, possessing only his wounds and a 
trifling pension in evidence of his services to the 
emperor ; — ^for after all it was Elzstein, and not 
its invisible master, which spoke so forcibly to 
the imagination. 

Now had Count Adrian, the son of this strange 
'' Milor," been personally introduced into the 
scene, his striking figure would probably have 
said more to the fancy of the traveller, if a 
female, and his accomplished address and intel- 
ligent countenance, if of his own gender, than 
could be discerned in the overgrown terraces 
and desolate courtyard of his paternal abode ; 



16 THE OPERA. 

for Adrian had as completely the air of a hero 
of romance, as Elzstein of affording its appro- 
priate locale. But the young foreigner was 
only an occasional resident on the banks of the 
Traun ; and had now been so long absent from 
Elzstein, as to have become an object of as much 
curiosity as interest to its inhabitants at large. 

At large ! — when there were only thirty-seven 
tenements, and seventy-two inhabitants in the 
whole community ! — among whom more than half 
were vintagers, devoted to the culture of the 
estates belonging to St. Florian and his tonsured 
sons ; while the other consisted in the female 
moiety of their several households — a simple race 
of beings, devoted to their distaffs and knitting, 
needles. Over these broad- visaged and broad- 
skirted individuals, the world and its rumours 
exercised little influence. To their perceptions, 
Vienna existed rather as a name than as an 
inhabited metropolis ; and even Linz, the yet 
nearer capital of their little district, appeared a 
remote and unapproachable Babylon. For in de- 
fiance of the progress of civilization, with its 
rail-roads and post-roads, its steam- carriages and 



THE OrERA. 17 

air-balloons, there still remain an oasis or two 
in the habitable desert, where conventional tram- 
mels have small authority ; where the alterna- 
tion of the seasons — of storm and sunshine, 
summer with its roses, and autumn with its 
vintage — afford the sole vicissitudes varying the 
monotony of existence : where the indulgence of 
simple appetites forms a paramount enjoyment ; 
where incessant occupation represses the growth of. 
luxurious vices or fruitless ambition ; where a 
life of privation is unimbittered by humiliating 
contrasts ; or is not unfrequently endured with 
triumphant patience, as a transitory passage 
to unlimited enjoyment. The Elzbacheners in 
question were especially contented with their 
picturesque village and abounding river — their 
Pumpernickel and Sauerkraut ; for they were 
neither harassed by the brutality of a feudal 
despot, nor insulted by the selfish luxuriousness 
of wealthy burghers. They were treated rather 
as brethren than inferiors by the saintly com- 
munity of St. Florian ; and had long appropriated 
Count Maldyn as a friend and father. 

If any anxiety disturbed the even tenour of 



18 THE OPERA. 

this peaceful existence, it arose from the 
visible and increasing decrepitude of the master 
of Elzstein, and from the prophecies usually put 
forth in similar instances by the elders of the 
people, his contemporaries — that the young 
lord would never prove worthy to fill the old 
lord's shoes. One or two ancient beldames had 
legends to relate of the wild feats of Count 
Adrian's boyhood; while jnore than one or two 
of the fair spinstresses, their grandchildren, were 
compelled, in their own despite, to add testi- 
mony that the discretion of his demeanour was not 
amended by his recent sojourn at the university 
of Gottingen. In short, whenever the dispiriting 
anticipation of a flood of the waters of the Traun, 
or the still more positive depression arising from 
an early frost during the vintage, sat heavy on 
the souls of the Elzbacheners, — or whenever the 
sinister auguries of some croaking village orator, 
or theoretical political economist, caused the fre- 
quenters of the hostel of the Gold Forelle to 
shake their heads over their thin potations, it 
was generally on the absent Adrian they were 
tempted to vent their ill-humour. 



THE OPERA. 19 

Yet such was the influence of his father's 
popularity, and such his inherited share in their 
allegiance and devotion, that whenever Hiob 
Armbrust — the major domo of the castle, — a sort 
of Corporal Trim, the faithful attendant on 
Count Maldyn's campaigns — dispensed from the 
Market-Cross of Elzbach intelligence that a 
letter had been received from Hanover, and 
that Count Adrian's arrival was expected at the 
castle, young and old renounced their enmities, 
and nothing was talked of during the remainder 
of the day, but the noble bearing, frank disposi- 
tion, and open countenance of the young English- 
man. Barbel and Gorgel, the fair Elzbacheners 
who had been involved in his frolic and its detec- 
tion, on occasion of the last vintage-feast, in- 
stead of being forced to bear further witness to 
his indiscretion, were now joked on his imputed 
partiality and reminded of the necessity of adding 
fresh ribands to their wide-winged coifs of the 
IAn%en7in fashion. Bl'aschel, the head fisher- 
man of the district, was advised to hold his 
nets and boats in readiness for an early expedition; 
and all the rumours of wonderful boar and 



20 THE OPERA. 

roebuck prevalent in the village for six preced- 
ing months, were now collected into a species of 
sporting magazine, with a view of gratifying his 
well-known propensities. Even at the monastery, 
the event of his return was hailed as of high 
importance ; and making all due allowance for 
the value of an incident of any description in a 
community thus singularly estranged from the 
ordinary interests of life, it must be admitted 
that the old count's enthusiastic attachment to 
his son seemed to have communicated its infec- 
tion to half the fathers, and all the daughters of 
Elzbach. 

It was one of those brisk transparent afternoons 
in October, when the mountain-ash and hawthorn- 
berries, lying half stripped on the ground beneath 
the trees from whence they have been shaken by 
early frosts, betray the approach of a severer 
season. The wine-press had done its work, and 
was now laid aside as lumber, till some future 
vintage ; the housewives of the village were busy 
with their troughs and chopping-knivcs, prepar- 
ing the kraut for their winter stores ; the 
beechen groves on the opposite bank of the 



THE OPERA. 



21 



Traun had assumed their mellow livery of red 
and yellow; while the bright-eyed robin was 
seen familiarly perched on the leafless twigs of 
the tenderer shrubs. The river ran hoarser and 
fuller in its channel than when reflecting the 
soft skies of the harvest month ; flights of wild 
fowl from the Styrian and Carinthian marshes 
occasionally darkened its waters; and in the 
distance, the mountains of the Salzburg defile 
displayed their silver crests in the clear horizon. 
A sprinkling of snow had already fallen in the 
vicinity of these Alpine heights; and already 
the woodstack of the Prlorey of St. Florian was 
laid under nightly contribution for the use of the 
huge stove gracing the great hall and refectory. 
The bleaching-ground through which the little 
rivulet of the Elz pours its tributary stream into 
the Traun— baptizing the village as it passes- 
was white with many a web, bearing witness to 
the industry of its female population ; and old 
Michelchen, grand-aunt to the Gorgel already 
aspersed in these pages by imphcation in the 
pranks of the young lord of Elzstein, was jusl 
closing the wicket of the meadow with a bundle 



22 THE OPERA. 

of half-bleached linen grasped beneath her arm, 
when the military step of Hiob Armbrust was 
heard ringing on the causeway. The military 
fumes of his meerschaum announced that the 
doughty corporal was on his evening march from 
the castle towards the village. 

'' A bright afternoon and the best of luck to 
you, corporal !" mumbled the ancient dame, 
quickening her pace with the view of reaching 
Elzbach in friendly companionship with the 
great man^s great man. 

The corporal nodded his head in acknow- 
ledgment, puffing forth a whifF of considerable 
volume, but uttered not a word in reply ; and 
though this species of dumb dignity might 
pass in any other man as a hint that he had 
nothing to communicate worthy a waste of breath, 
it was by no means the case with Hiob. He 
was never so loquacious as when he had nothing 
to say ; never so sparing of his speech as when 
he had a piece of important news in his keeping ; 
it was only with a treasure in the chest that he 
judged it expedient to apply a padlock for its 
security. On the present occasion, therefore, the 



THE OPERA. 23 

silence of the worthy corporal did not fail to excite 
a correspondent degree of interest in the ap- 
prehensions of Michelchen, who had lived her 
seven ty-tvo years in this world of craft and 
cunning, with some profit ; and who, having long 
discovered that the arts of the weaker sex are 
far more than a match for the stiffest resolves and 
most prudential scruples of mankind, now deter- 
mined to win by stratagem the secrets withheld 
from her participation. 

"As I was pottering down to the brook/' said 
the old woman with a sidelong glance towards her 
companion, " there met me brother Kemigius 
returning from Elzstein to the Priorey. Sorely 
grieved was the good man in noting the mcreas- 
ing infirmities of the noble count. No less 
than three fits of the gout smce St. John's day \ 
and our brother misdoubts him that we may 
even hear of a fourth before Candlemas." 

Corporal Armbrust puffed with still fiercer 
impatience at this announcement ; for it unfortu- 
nately chanced that the venerable fraternity of 
St. Florian maintained a far less distinguished 
place in his estimation than in that of the 



sf 



THE OPERA. 



Maldyn family, or of the villagers of Elzbacli. 
In the chances of his military career, he had 
fought side by side with reformers of every deno- 
mination. A long course of good fellowship 
with Lutherans, Calvinists, Moravians, and all 
the subdi visional sects of Northern Germany, 
had greatly tended to relax the severity of his 
early orthodoxy; and it was suspected among the 
old women on the banks of the Traun, including 
Brother Ilemigius and others of the Florianites, 
that the taciturn Hiob secretly indulged in lati- 
tudes of faith peculiarly unbecoming a veteran 
servant of the House of Hapsburg, and an active 
servant in the house of the bigoted Maldyn. A 
scornful elevation of the bowl of his pipe, his 
nose and mustached chin, now indicated to Frau 
Michelchen that he regarded Brother Remigius 
as an oaf, and his evil auguries as importunate 
and contemptible ; and the artful dame accord- 
ingly shifted her manoeuvres to a new position. 

" Verily it rejoiceth me. Corporal Hiob,'' she 
resumed, in a wheedling tone, " to learn, from 
the reverend father that the dispute between our 
good prior and the lord of Elzstein, touching the 



THE OPERA. 25 

toUage on the fish-boats going up to the city, is 
likely to be adjusted; and moreover, that his 
kingly and imperial majesty is about to — '''' 

It was useless to proceed ! — Even Michelchen, 
despite her three-score years and twelve, retained 
sufficient optical and mental perspicacity to read 
in the contemptuously deliberate puffs, emitted 
by Armbrust's meerschaum, that Remigius knew 
nothing of the matter of the tollage; or that the 
matter was one of perfect indifference to the 
corporal and his lord. "It must be something 
concerning Count Adrian," was her ultimate 
decision ; and she boldly plunged into the heart 
of the business. 

" And so our young lord is forbidden to 
pass his carnival at Elzstein this year ? — Well ! 
the season will be all the sadder for the old 
folks his goodness was wont to cherish with 
an extra cup of Kirschenwasser, that they 
might be better able to struggle with the January 
frosts ; but perhaps it may be all the better for 
those giddy hussies, whose flax is apt to grow 
stale upon the reel whenever Count Adrian 
deigns to amuse himself with their L'dndlers. I 

VOL. I. c 



26 THE OPERA. 

warrant me, how, that my grand-niece Gorgel will 
make up twelve ells of cloth the more against the 
fair at Linz, since my young lord has determined 
to pass the winter in the north !" 

'^ Stockfisch ! " cried the corporal, involuntarily 
removing the amber mouthpiece from between his 
lips, " Count Adrian will sup at the castle this 
Tery evening." 

No sooner was this piece of intelligence wrenched 
out of his obstinate heart, than he began most 
grievously to repent his infirmity of purpose; 
readily perceiving that instead of permitting him 
to exercise his ordinary and exclusive privilege 
of proclaiming the important fact — either in the 
market-place of Elzstein, or the eating-chamber 
of the GoldForelle — the unprincipled Michelchen 
was determined on following up her advantage. 
She not only accosted every individual who 
chanced to cross their path, for the pleasure of 
announcing the young count's visit ; but actually 
intruded her leathern visage into sundry dwellings 
and tenements by the wayside, in order that no 
one might remain in ignorance of the fact. 

'« My young lord Adrian is on the road !'' 



THE OPERA. 27 

cried she; '« Count Adrian will sleep to-night at 
Elzstein !'' 

Till at length the discomfited corporal, like a 
plenipotentiary despoiled of his credentials on the 
frontier of the country to which his mission is 
appointed, suddenly and sullenly turned upon his 
heel, and retraced his steps to the castle. 



c2 



THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER II. 



A stalwart, active, soldier-looking stripling, 
Handsome as Hercules ere his first labour ; 
And with a brow of thought beyond his years 
In his repose. 



Byron's Werner. 



Adrian Maldyn had just entered his twenty- 
third year. He was tall, well-formed, and grace- 
ful in his person ; while his countenance united 
peculiar regularity and elegance of lineament, 
with an intelhgent and animated expression. In 
his disposition he was rash, proud, and head- 
strong, with a head full of prejudice, and a 
heart full of romance ; warmly attached to a 
parent who was disposed to make every sacrifice 
in his favour, but incapable of disguising his 
disgust towards Elzstein as a residence, or his 
distaste for the monotonous tone of his father''s 
habits and occupations. It was wonderful that 
the granite gables of the old Schloss had never 
been moved from their high estate to crush the 



THE OPERA. 29 

arrogance of tlie fastidious boy, who presumed 
to utter his disparaging criticisms on that ancient 
structure, and on the antediluvian system of its 
sayings and doings. 

So long as the youthful days of the young 
count had worn away under the tutorage of 
Brother Remigius — whose lessons of divine phi- 
losophy and philosophical divinity were strangely 
intermingled with the military and equestrian 
exercises inculcated by Corporal Armbrust — 
Adrian was contented to pass his leisure hours 
in the forest with Hiob and his rifle, or on 
the river with Blaschel and his nets. But " there 
comes a time, a weary time," when fathers, as 
eccentric and independent of the prejudices of 
society as even Count INIaldyn himself, grow 
anxious that their heirs-apparent should add 
knowledge of the world to classical acquirements, 
the living to the dead languages, and the grace- 
ful arts to the useful sciences. Although, for 
reasons peculiarly his own, he had taken up his 
rest beside the waters of the Traun, and wasted 
his maturity in an obscure solitude, the count 
entertained far different views, and indulged in 



30: THE OPERA. 

better hopes for his son. Whatever might be 
the disasters which induced his own expatriation, 
or the afflictions which determined his seckision, 
they were not hereditary in their influence. He 
felt that Adrian was untouched by the bUght 
which had sufficed to wither his own existence ; 
that Adrian had still a country — still a home — 
to excite his ambition and reward his exertions ; 
and no sooner did the young count attain his 
sixteenth year, and as much Latin, mathematics, 
and historical erudition, as could be gathered 
from the tuition of the learned librarian of 
St. Florian, than he was despatched to the 
university for the completion of his education. 

It was many years since Count Maldyn had 
been called upon for so vast an expenditure of 
cogitation as it cost him to decide whether the 
journey of his son, on quitting Elzstein for the 
prosecution of his studies, should take a north- 
ward or southward — an eastern or western direc- 
tion. His religious prejudices strongly inclined 
him towards the latter; inasmuch as the 
universities of Vienna and Munich still boast 
their pristine odour of Catholic sanctity. But it 



THE OPERA. 51' 

Bappened that the prior of St. Florian's had a 
brother — a brother in the flesh as 'well as the 
spirit — officiating in a high station at the Ambro- 
sian College in Milan, and willing to bestow the 
tediousness and officiousness of his vigilance on 
the tyro of Elzstein. But just when Adrian had 
begun to flatter himself with a prospect of ex- 
changing the blue-eyed and flaxen-haired charms 
of Barbel and Gorgel for the raven tresses and 
dark-eyed glances of the glowing IMilanese, and 
the motetes of the monastery of Elzenkreuz for 
the cantatas of La Scala, his father decided that 
a competent knowledge of the English language 
was mdispensable to the well-being of his future 
fortmies ; and that the schemes hereafter to be 
perfected in Great Britain, could not be more 
auspiciously commenced than in Hanover. It 
w^as in vain that the prior shook his sanctified 
head, while Brother Remigius recapitulated 
the varieties of damnable heresy prevalent in 
Northern Germany : — to Gottingen it was de- 
termined that Adrian should go, and to Gottin- 
gen he went. 

It may readily be imagined that the whole 



32 THE OPERA. 

united PHorez/ of St. Florian could no longer afford 
a letter of recommendation to the young scholar. 
But Adrian was not destined to be launched on 
his new career without a pilot for its course. Even 
amid his desolate isolation at Elzstein, Count 
Maldyn had kept up an occasional correspond- 
ence with a certain Baron Adelberg ; a former 
companion in arms, who now filled an important 
office at the vice-regal court of Hanover, and 
maintained a connexion with the English world, 
such as assigned him somewhat of the interest of 
a fellow-countryman in the estimation of the re- 
cluse of Elzbach. An epistle, penned in all the 
fervour of paternal anxiety and addressed to this 
dignified friend, was accordingly appended to the 
letter of credit bestowed by Maldyn upon his son, 
preparatory to his departure in the " kingly and 
imperial Eilwageji''' in search after wisdom ; nor 
till the old man caught a last glimpse of that un- 
shapely vehicle, as it followed the windings of the 
river, along the post-road to Linz, had he ever 
.conjectured the degree of weariness and disgust 
which circumstances may lend to time and place, — 
aye ! even to the most favourite place. The first 



THE OPERA. 33 

four-and-twenty hours passed in absence from his 
son, imparted a lesson of self-knowledge more 
accurate than any which young Adrian was 
likely to acquire from the professional high- 
mightinesses of Gottingen. For the first time, 
Elzstein became less than a paradise in the eye 
of Count Maldyn. 

Adrian, on the contrary, after some few 
" natural tears," and natural regrets, which 
lasted during the first stage or two of his journey, 
rejoiced in an opportunity of extending his 
limited knowledge of the world ; and no sooner 
was he inaugurated into his novel career, than 
he began to exult hke an eaglet in its first 
flight from the eyry. In addition to the valu- 
able credentials with which he was furnished by 
his father to the baron and the banker, he had 
been loaded with ghostly counsels by his um- 
quwhile preceptors of the monastery, for better 
security agamst those heretical perils, the mere 
apprehension of which was terrific to their 
narrow souls. Much had they fovmd to say, 
touching Luther and Melancthon, John Huss, 
and Jerome of Prague; much concerning the 
c3 



34! THE OPERA. 

abominations of Wittenberg, and the absurdities 
of Herrnhut. They conceived no danger or 
temptation so Hkely to beset his path, as the 
solemn errors of heterodoxy ! 

The elder Maldyn, although better initiated 
into the mysteries of a university education, 
and fully aware of the nature of the snares 
likely to be spread for his youthful St. Anthony, 
uttered at parting only a few words by way of 
warning, and not a syllable by way of menace. 
He trusted that the precepts and example of six- 
teen years had not been thrown away upon his son, 
and wisely left the lesson to be completed by the 
schooling of experience ; satisfying his own mis- 
givings by a self-assurance that Adrian would not 
make the worse soldier, or gentleman, or man, 
for having occasionally heard the chimes at 
midnight ; and indulged in lapses of discretion 
such as must have condemned brother Remigius 
to the discipline, or the worthy superior of 
of St. Florian's to an expiatory pilgrimage to 
the shrines of Maria Zell or Alt Getting. 

Whether these lapses became more than 
occasional, rests in the bosom of the indulgent 



THE OPERA. 35 

father ; but certain it is that, more than once, the 
return of Corporal Armbrust from the Post Ami 
bearing a letter with the Gottingen postmark, 
sufficed to plunge Count Maldyn into silence and 
depression for the remainder of the day. These 
momentous missives were not, however, inscribed 
in the handwriting of Adrian ; — for Adrian's 
letters, whether long or short — grave or gay, 
lively or severe — never failed to bring a glow 
of pleasure to his father's cheek, and a glance 
of animation to his eyes ; and were, moreover, 
apt to find their way, in spirit if not in substance, 
to the ear of Hiob, and thence through his lips 
to those of all the ruling elders of the village. 
The mysterious communications, on the con- 
trary, were endited, either with a cleanliness of 
caligraphy characteristic of the banker, the 
notary, or the college tutor, — or in the official 
scrawl of his friend the baron ; and it was remark- 
able that the advent of Hanoverian despatches of 
this description, was invariably followed by som.e 
trifling personal sacrifice on the part of the lord 
of Elzstein. A favourite colt was despatched to 
Linz on the ensuing market-day for peremptory 



36 THE OPERA. 

sale ; — or an under-garden er was paid off and 
dismissed ; — or the bottle of Bisamberger placed 
on the count's dinner-table was so economized as 
to make its reappearance there for four succes- 
sive days. Nay I — upon one occasion — an occa- 
sion which brought to hand no less than three of 
these Gottingenian epistles (the last bearing 
testimony in its address to the tremulous condition 
of Adrian''s hand) — the epistolary Cerberus was 
matched in bvilk if not in multiplication, by a 
mysterious square parcel despatched in return by 
the recluse of the Traun, subscribed to '' His 
Excellency the Well-born Baron Adelberg :" — and 
it was considered by Hiob as a very remarkable 
coincidence, that from the day distinguished by 
this exuberance of foreign correspondence, he 
could never get sight of the great gold snuff- 
box set in brilKants, presented to Colonel Count 
Maldyn on the field of battle, by the Archduke 
Charles. It had certainly disappeared while 
the count was shut up in the solitude of his own 
apartments to grieve over those ill-boding 
Hanoverian letters ! — Misfortunes seldom come 
alone ! 



THE OPERA. 37 

But after the first vacation passed by Adrian 
at the castle, his father's epistolary intercourse 
with Gottingen rested wholly with himself, and 
produced nothing but agreeable impressions at 
Elzstein. The inexperienced boy became a man 
sooner than was to be expected from the tenour 
of his youth ; and whatever might be the follies 
in which he still continued to indulge, he took 
care that they should never again implicate his 
beloved and lenient parent in their results. By 
his careful management, even the idle adventure 
of Gorgel and Barbel, so familiar to every other 
inhabitant of the village, was prevented from 
reaching the ears of Count Maldyn. 

In the course of the five years passed by Count 
Adrian at the university, there was, however, one 
" untoward event,'' which, thanks to the officious 
zeal of Brother Remigius, penetrated the granite 
walls of Elzstein, although unwhispered among 
the clay tenements of the village — on other occa- 
sions so much more pervious to rumours of mis- 
chief Perhaps, after all, the ex-preceptor might 
be justified in his interference ; for Stephanine 
Hashnger, the heroine of the adventure, was un- 



38 THE OPERA. 

questionably a far more dangerous neighbour for 
the young student, than an uncivilized hoyden 
such as Barbel the pretty sister of Blaschel the 
fisherman. 

Stephanine was scarcely sixteen — ^brilliant with 
jiatural graces and talents — artful as she was in- 
telhgent, — and adding a syren^s voice to attractions 
of considerable personal beauty. On their first 
acqiiaintance, Adi-ian had been persuaded to 
give up the leisure hours of his vacation to 
her instruction in the science of music. But 
before she had wholly accomplished her purpose 
of entangling the young count, in return, in the 
perplexities of a secret marriage, Brother Remi- 
gius drew the attention of his astonished father 
towards the afiair ; when Count Maldyn, affect- 
ing to humour Adrian's project of accomplishing 
the lovely Elzbacliener as a professional singer, 
generously undertook the cost of her tuition in 
the conservatorio at Prague. In the course of 
a weekj the Fraulein Stephanine found herself 
placed as a boarder in the family of an eminent 
musical professor attached to that imperial esta- 
bhshment ; — an arrangement no less satisfactory 



THE OPERA. 39 

to the infirm grandfather, who had been hitherto 
burdened with her maintenance, than it was 
vexatious to the syren of the Traun. Nothing 
further was heard of her at Elzbach than that 
her talents had placed her on the road to prefer- 
ment ; and we are at Hberty to hope that more 
exphcit intelHgence on the subject did not even 
reach Gottingen. 

It was nearly four years after this memorable 
exercise of benevolence on the part of Count 
Maldyn, and Adrian had attained all the distinc- 
tions of the university, and all the polite accom- 
plishments which a month or two passed in the 
family of Baron Adelberg at the court of 
Hanover was likely to confer, when he found 
himself very unexpectedly summoned home by 
his father ; a provision having been made for the 
comfort and convenience of his journey, very 
different from that which had hitherto attended 
his vacation expeditions. By the old count's, 
especial desire, he found himself in possession of 
a handsome travelling-carriage, and an expert 
courier, as well as of a pocket-book so hberally 
furnished, as to ensure the payment of every 



40 THE OPERA. 

thaler of his debts — from his obligations to the 
learned Theban his college tutor, to his more 
occult engagements "with young Gustavus Adel- 
berg, the partner and companion of his boyish 
excesses. 

His entrance into Elzbach, therefore, as an- 
nounced on the present occasion, by Michel- 
chen's garrulity, afforded a far more imposing 
spectacle and ceremonial than any which, for 
years past, had graced the village ; and it is pos- 
sible, that had the Elzbacheners been led to anti- 
cipate the splendour of his new appointments, 
they might have been induced to welcome him 
under a triumphal arch. As it was, divers 
woollen nightcaps, and beaver-skin foraging-caps, 
were thrown up in honour of the occasion ; while 
a few ^' hurrahs" were wheezed and sputtered by 
the decrepit beings tottering to their doors to look 
upon the unusual magnificence of their patron's 
heir. But the labourers were in the fields, — 
Stephanine was still a resident in Bohemia, — 
Barbel, unwarned of his coming, had neglected 
to add fresh decorations to her butterfly-winged 
coif of gold ; and Adrian was of opinion that 



THE OPERA. 41 

Elzbach had never looked more cheerless and 
uninviting than on this occasion. 

But if no admiring populace were gathered to- 
gether in honour of his entree, the utmost extent 
of admiration they could have bestowed on the 
splendour of his Offenbach calash, the gold lace 
lavished on the jacket of his showy courier, or the 
coxcombical airs of his valet, would have been far 
less gratifying to his vanity than the open- 
mouthed wonderment with which his personal 
endowments were hailed by Hiob Armbrust, and 
the silent pride of affection with which they were 
noticed by his father. Count Maldyn, whose 
knowledge of the world had been acquired no 
less in courts than camps, did not fail to appre- 
ciate the suavity of tone, and elegance of address, 
which now tempered the animation of the hand- 
some Adrian ; and on laying his head upon his 
pillow, after the first evening passed in his son''s 
society, began for the first time to rejoice that all 
these attractions and accomplishments were not 
destined to be hidden in the obscurity of Elzstein. 

Meanwhile the midnight reflections of his son 
were scarcely of a less exciting nature. The mo- 



42 THE OPERA. 

tives of his mysterious recal to Austria, and the 
sources of his father's unwonted munificence, 
could not but occupy his conjectures ; more par- 
ticularly as no change or difference was percep- 
tible in the establishment of the castle, to justify 
his hopes that some wonderful event had swelled 
the revenues of his paternal estate. After being 
deprived of his night's rest by all the perplexity 
of guesses, misdoubtings, and visionary antici- 
pations of future prosperity, he made his appear- 
ance the following morning at the breakfast-table, 
overflowing with curiosity. A single glance at 
his father's face sufficed to dispel his uneasiness. 
The countenance of Count Maldyn was as annun- 
ciatory of family mysteries, and their elucida- 
tion, as any visage that ever wore the genuine 
and mournful pathos of romantic interest ; and 
Adrian had no patience with the unsympathizing 
voracity with which their visiter. Brother Remi- 
gius, fastened upon the Gratz capon he had 
been dissecting previous to the entrance of his 
quondam pupil, forbidding all immediate hopes 
of a tete-a-Ute between the father and son. 
The count found himself compelled to take 



THE OPERA. 43 

refuge in Hanoverian politics from the tedium of 
a dead silence, interrupted only by the good 
brother's audible labours of mastication. But 
while Adrian sat desponding over his anticipa- 
tions that the demolition of the unctuous Styrian 
dainty would be followed by an attack on a dish 
of trouts (the celebrated Lachs Forelle of the 
neighbouring lake of Gmund), which according to 
the fashion of the country, were swimming before 
him in a wide dish of raspberry vinegar garnished 
with rings of onions, on which the reverend man 
cast ever and anon a longing eye — the distant 
croak of the great bell of Elzenkreuz suddenly 
startled him from his sensual indulgences, with the 
remembrance that an extraordinary service was 
about to be performed at the monaster^-, in honour 
of a certain Cardinal Colloredo, archbishop of 
Salzburg, who had been enrolled in the list of its 
benefactors two centuries before. 

But the moment of explanation did not so 
speedily follow the hasty exit of his ex-preceptor, 
as Adrian could have wished. He was compelled 
to endure the importunate routine of the break- 
fast-table, and the orderly regularity with which 



44 THE OPE II A. 

Hiob Armbrust officiated in its accustomed duties, 
till he was sorely inclined to quarrel with the iron 
impenetrability of feature exhibited by the sober 
corporal in his leisurely proceedings ; nay, even 
when the military pantler and surveyor of the 
buttery had jingled the last tray out of the room, 
the young count's impatience was still to be ex- 
cited by the restlessness of the favourite wolf-dog 
lying at his father's feet. Draunzt, however, 
was insensible to the indignation wasted on those 
rustlings and shiftings with which he strove to 
render his snooze more comfortable, and the oc- 
casional snore which announced the perfect frui- 
tion of his endeavours ; till at length the younger 
Maldyn, perceiving that his father remained as 
silent and abstracted as though they had still 
been enciunbered with the presence of Remigius, 
Armbrust, the Gratz capon, and the savoury 
trout, strove to introduce some indifferent topic 
of conversation, by an inquiry respecting the quan- 
tity of wild boar destroyed in the Prince of Paar's 
last hattue. 

The attempt was eminently successful. Count 
Maldyn having nerved his fortitude to speak on 



THE OPERA. 45 

the subject nearest his heart, gladly accepted any 
opportunity to break the ice. After entering 
with apparent interest into every branch of the 
business, and listening to Adrian^s account of the 
pleasures of landrail-shooting on the Hanoverian 
levels, he observed, 

" And you will soon have occasion to extend 
your experience in field-sports; you will soon be 
able to decide between the attractions of an 
Austrian boar-hunt, and a Melton fox- chase. It 
is my intention, my dear son, that you should 
immediately visit England."*"* 

" England ! " involuntarily responded the 
young count ; who seemed to consider that 
Mecca or Skalholt, were just as germane to the 
matter. " I thought, sir, you had wholly re- 
nounced your interest in the country of your an- 
cestors ? — You have more than once assured me, 
that you consider Germany your native land. "*"* 

" My views for the welfare of an only son may 
chance to differ widely from those I entertain on 
my own account."" 

<* But surely, sir, you will accompany me to 
England .?'' 



46 THE OPERA. 

Count Maldyn replied only by glancing with 
a melancholy smile towards the crutches lying 
beside his easy chair. '' You will get on better, 
my dear son, unshackled by the decrepitude of 
such a companion. No ! Adrian ; my wounds, 
no less than my inclinations, have anchored me 
for the remainder of my days in the country 
in whose service they were acquired, and whose 
liberality has so honourably repaid the sacrifice. 
Ireland was pleased to bestow on me little beyond 
a birth-place ; from Austria I have received a 
tranquil home, a decent maintenance, an honour- 
able rank. If it pleases Heaven, I would also 
find in her bosom an obscure and peaceful 
grave.^' 

Adrian now placed himself on a seat nearer to 
his father, whose countenance bore witness to the 
excitement of his feelings. '' But your position," 
resumed Count Maldyn, " is widely different. 
No cankering wound has marred the vigour of 
your youthful frame; no disappointments have 
withered the sanguine impulses of your glowing 
heart. You have no enmities, no remembered 
injuries to alienate your destiny from that parent 



THE OrERA. 47 

country with whose well-being your own fortunes 
are so closely connected ; — ^no agonizing reminis- 
cences to render its aspect hateful — no grievous 
experience to make its flatterers contemptible. 
Go ! therefore, my dear Adrian, to England. 
Judge with your own judgment the land of your 
forefathers. Your imcle is no more; and you 
must henceforward remember, that instead of an 
Austrian soldier, you have a British viscount for 
your father." 

Poor Adrian I — this startling announcement 
was his first occasion for learning that he had 
ever been possessed of an uncle ; or was hkely 
to become possessed of a peerage ! 



48 THE OPEKA. 



CHAPTER III. 



Yet Syracusan, sav in brief the cause 
Why thou departedst from the native home. 
And for what cause thou cam'st to Ephesus. 

Comedy of Errors. 



" And this, then, my dear father," exclaimed 
the young man, after a few further inquiries into 
the nature and extent of his honours. " this was 
the origin of your anxiety to prevent my dis- 
honouring my family by a union with poor 
Stephanine .?" 

" No !" replied the count, " you mistake me ; 
had you been simply the son of Count Mai dyn, the 
Austrian veteran, instead of Lord Abbotscourt, 
— ^had you been merely heir to the savings of my 
pension, instead of to an estate of twenty thousand 



THE OPERA. 49 

a year — I should have entertained the same re- 
pugnance, and testified the same opposition. 
Stephanine Haslinger had no claim to the sacri- 
fice meditated by your partiality. Even had she 
been amiable and virtuous, you would have done 
rashly in elevating her so immeasurably above her 
proper sphere ; but as it was — for the measure 
of your folly was better known to me than you 
imagine — you had no excuse for presenting such 
a person in the circle to which of birthright you 
belong.'' 

" And may I — dare I ask," continued Adrian, 
imboldened by the indulgence with which his 
first indiscreet interrogation had been received by 
his father, " what inducements determined you 
to resign your own position in that circle, and to 
desert those privileges of station to which you 
affix so high a value .^" 

'' Perhaps I should have forestalled these in- 
quiries," repHed Lord Abbotscourt gravely ; "for 
I feel that it is time you should know something 
of your father, and — ^" 

" Do I not know him," interrupted the impe- 

VOL.I. D 



50 THE OPERA. 

tuous young man, " as the kindest and best of 
parents ?" 

" And of your mother ! " persisted his lord- 
ship ; and the tone of consciousness in which this 
word was pronounced, served to remind his auditor 
that the name had scarcely ever before been 
uttered in his hearing. " Your mother — to whom 
your lineaments bear so strong a resemblance ; 
to whose destinies, I pray that those of her child 
may afford no parallel ! The details by which 
I am about to make them known might appear 
prolix and tedious to other ears ; but remember, 
they have sacred claims upon the interest of her 
child !— 

" It is of myself, however, that I am first 
called upon to speak. I was born, Adrian, the 
third son of Lord Abbotscourt; — a nobleman 
deriving his dignity among his countrymen, less 
from the distinction of a Stuart viscounty, than 
from the Milesian descent boasted by the ancient 
house of Mauldwyne. He was a proud man, a 
bigoted Catholic, and a tenacious politician ; 
morbidly sensitive to the humihated condition of 



THE OPEKA. 51 

his native land, and detesting even a Protestant 
the more for being an Englishman. My father 
fancied, that his unconcealed contempt for the 
constituted authorities of the land arose solely 
from disaffection towards the house of Hanover ; 
but such was his natural haughtiness of character, 
that I doubt whether he could have maintained 
a loyal degree of humility in presence of those 
faithful sons of the true church, the exiled princes 
of the Stuart family. 

'' My eldest brother, heir to all the frailties and 
animosities of his line, was educated in the sullen 
reserve of a home education; and his austere 
and selfish disposition promised no diminution to 
the defects of character of the Viscounts Abbots- 
court. My second, my dear Wrottesley, who 
was brought up with a view to the dignities of 
the Roman Catholic church, would have made 
as urbane and intelligent a representative of the 
family honours, as Mr. Maldyn his becoming 
substitute in the stole or the mitre. Wrottesley 
seemed destined by nature for an amiable man 
of the world; while the firstborn of our line 
affected all the frigid severity of an anchorite. 
D 2 



52 



THE OPERA. 



Of the third brother — of myself — it is needless 
to say more than that Randolph Maldyn, some 
five-and-twenty years ago, exhibited both in 
person and disposition a pretty exact resem- 
blance to the Adrian Maldyn of to-day. You 
do not know yourself, my boy ; or you would be 
aware that this definition supposes your father to 
have been rash, ungovernable, prejudiced, — in- 
temperate in the pursuit of pleasure, — obstinate 
in adherence to predilections idly conceived, and 
dignifying the defect by the name of constancy ; 
— frank even to indiscretion, in word and deed, 
and claiming merit for the folly under the titles 
of candour and independence; — endowed with 
many of the best qualities that adorn the soldier, 
and many of the worst which incapacitate a 
citizen." 

" Your portrait, my dear father, is not a flat- 
tering one." 

" Let me, therefore, smooth down the ruffled 
plumes of your vanity, by informing you that I 
was considered the best-looking of my family ; 
and that the partiality entertained by Lord Ab- 
botscourt for his youngest son, was supposed 



THE OPERA. 53 

to arise from a foolish pride in the superiority 
of his external endowments. But whatever 
the cause of his unreasonable predilection, I 
was in no humour to be satisfied with the 
effect when, instead of permitting me to join 
my brothers in the European tour which was 
to complete their education, he announced his 
intention of retaining my society in Ireland 
during their absence. He did not choose, he 
said, to be left alone at Abbotscourt Castle ; and 
however unwiUingly, I was forced to concur in 
the decision. 

" My father had, however, no just grounds for 
his complaints touching the loneliness of his 
baronial residence; for although for many pre- 
vious years condemned to the desolation of a 
widower's condition, he possessed in my only 
sister a companion whose gentleness, cheerful- 
ness, and filial submission, might have afforded 
ample compensation for the departure of his 
sons. There exists not — there cannot exist 
— even among those favoured circles of your 
countrywomen to whose beauty, elegance, and 
intellectual endowments you will shortly devote 



54 THE OPERA. 

your homage, a more pure and captivating ex- 
ample of feminine excellence than was afforded 
by Florentia Maldyn. She was the darling of 
all our hearts; and richly did she merit their 
partiality. 

" But although Lord Abbotscourt made no 
secret of his contempt for the powers of compa- 
nionship of his beautiful daughter, I took care 
that he should have ample opportunity to form a 
truer appreciation of her merits. Seizing every 
pretext, reasonable or unreasonable, to absent 
myself from home, and exchange the monotonous 
routine of Abbotscourt for the gaieties of Dubhn, 
I succeeded, partly by soothing and partly by 
defying my father's anger, in establishing a sort 
of residence in the capital; and Lord Abbots- 
court was pacified during my absence by an 
assurance that the chief object of my visits to 
Dublin was to cultivate the friendships and con- 
nexions pointed out by his Milesian prejudices 
to my adoption. Whether in regard to my 
brothers, my sister, or myself, he considered it 
impossible that a child of his should presume to 
exercise its own free will and personal choice; 



THE OPERA. 55 

it was only by stealth or stratagem we ever ven- 
tured to indulge our natural inclinations. 

" For some time previous to the epoch to which 
I allude, the tone of Irish society had exhibited, 
in the most marked manner, the pernicious influ- 
ence of evil example in the high places of the 
land. A character of libertinism unblushingly 
estabUshed at the castle and in the vice-regal 
circle, afforded an apology for the vices of every 
rank of society; and the profligacy which held 
itself excused amid the refinement, brilliancy, 
fashion, and wit, of the English coterie collected 
round our luxurious lord lieutenant, exhibited 
only a coarser shade of licentiousness in its general 
adoption. Every moral obligation, every restric- 
tion of decency, was publicly outraged; and 
even my father's excess of disgust and detestation 
seemed justified by the insults offered to the Irish 
capital through the vices of the English rulers 
placed in authority over the land. But my father 
was by no means singular in his discontent. Mur- 
murs arose among husbands and fathers, who 
were not easily reconciled to those lessons of in- 
famy dispensed to their female relatives by the 



56 THE OPERA. 

smiling mischiefs of the Castle ; and very shortly- 
after my first visit to Dublin, the appointment of 
the Earl of Templeton to the viceroyalty at 
once removed all cause of offence, and was said 
to proceed from certain indignant remonstrances 
of the higher, or rather, the bette?' order of Irish 
society, which had reached the Royal ear. 

"It would have been difficult to find, through- 
out the whole range of the British nobility, two 
persons better skilled to attempt the reformation of 
the frivolous and licentious tone pervading the 
Irish court, than Lord Templeton and his wife. 
Harsh, cold, and stately, — both were too com- 
pletely self-engrossed to suspect or heed the dis- 
content with which their arrival was noted by the 
recent frequenters of the Castle; as well as by the 
bigoted remnant of national nobility, who re- 
garded his lordship's modern coronet with undis- 
guised contempt. They were eager, indeed, to 
impute to himself the rapacity by which his grand- 
father had contrived, in the course of a long offi- 
cial career, to win his way to opulence and dis- 
tinction ; but in this they overstepped the truth. 
Whatever might be the new viceroy's faults as a 



THE OPERA. 5J 

statesman, he was an upright citizen, a man of 
unimpeachable rectitude. 

" Perhaps he presumed too far on this unswerv- 
ing purity of moral conduct. Spotless and com- 
manding as a rock of adamant, he was scarcely less 
hard and unsusceptible ; and his severity of de- 
meanour, which was more than rivalled by the cere- 
monious formality of Lady Templeton, tended not 
a httle to augment the attractions of his young and 
lovely daughters. Lady Katharine and Lady 
Cecil Darley appeared almost too joyous and 
warmhearted to have been born and fostered amid 
the frigid stateliness of the Enghsh aristocracy ; 
and although, previous to the arrival of Lord and 
Lady Templeton, it had been estabhshed as a 
rule by the courtiers and friends of their prede- 
cessors that the new court should be rigorously 
shunned by its recent adherents, many found it 
impossible to resist the captivating manners of 
these lovely girls.'' 

" I conjecture,"" interrupted Adrian, " that my 
father was not remiss in rendering his homage .?" 

" I fear I must pronounce myself to have 
been among the first deserters from my party ; 
D 3 



58 THE OPERA. 

and though the gracious acceptance I met with 
from the first day of my presentation to the new 
lord heutenant, was evidently the result of policy 
(for the extent of my father'^s influence and of his 
opposition to the ruling powers, was duly under- 
stood and appreciated), the frankness with which 
I found my visits welcomed by his daughters, 
seemed to my boyish vanity a tribute to my own 
merit. Even Lady Templeton, their cold and 
self-sufficient mother-in-law, received my advances 
with an unusual degree of courtesy. Piqued 
by the neglect with which her debut in Ireland 
was greeted by the highest order of societ}', and 
finding it impossible to overawe the uncivilized 
inhabitants of Dublin by airs of hauteur unsup- 
ported by the presence and allegiance of her own 
order, she now strove to conciliate in my person 
the rebellious clan which still bade defiance to 
her supremacy. But with Lady Templeton and 
her policy, I had htlle sympathy ; or rather, 
encouraged by the distaste with which this recent 
mother-in-law was regarded by the daughters of 
her lord, I allowed my demeanour towards her to 
testify somewhat more than indifference." 



THE OPEEA. 59 

'' And Lady Katharine, my dear father — 
Lady Cecil? — Surely I am right in antici- 
pating — " 

'' Lady Katharine," resumed Lord Abbots- 
court, without noticing his son's interruption, 
'' although the eider of the two sisters, was by 
no means the one to whom a stranger would have 
assigned that seniority. Volatile and apparently 
inconsiderate as a child ; eager for amusement, 
and only prevented by the high-breeding of her 
address from betraying the heartless egotism of 
the mere lover of pleasure, she appeared formed 
for a life of prosperity and sunshine — a butterfly 
irradiating the genial atmosphere of a summer's 
day ! Nor was her sister's a much graver dispo- 
sition ; but Cecil had more of cheerfulness than 
levity in her disposition, and a degree of kindhness 
in her heart which prevented her from indulging 
in the satirical sallies enlivening the conversation 
of Katharine. — But even the most eager votary 
of laughing eyes and sportive tones, although on 
a first acquaintance he might be attracted by the 
buoyancy of spirit so bewitching in Katharine, 
was sure to find himself in the end permanently 



60 THE OPERA. 

attached by the docile and feminine character of 
her sister. 

" Such, unfortunately, was my own case. Dur- 
ing the early days of my intimacy at the Castle, 
I had not hesitated to distinguish Lady Katha- 
rine Darley by a preference so strongly marked, 
that the voice of society immediately hailed me 
as her lover — her suitor — her husband, — long 
before I dreamed of tendering more to her ac- 
ceptance than my hand in the dance, or the use 
of my favourite horse. But no sooner did I find 
myself congratulated on all sides as a successful 
pretendant to her hand, than I began to enter 
into a more careful investigation of my inclina- 
tions, and of the comparative merit of the two 
sisters ; — an investigation ending in the conviction 
that my fancy, and not my feelings, had been 
touched by Lady Katharine's charms ; and that, 
although she might claim a decided pre-emi- 
nence in point of beauty, she had no ulterior ex- 
cellence to oppose to the merit of the soft and 
gentle Cecil. Warned by my previous infir- 
mity of judgment, I refrained on this occasion 
from the rash impetuosity which had marked my 



THE OPERA. 61 

original preference. I was not sufficiently in- 
experienced in the ways of the world to imagine, 
that the younger son of an Irish viscount 
affi)rded an object of much consideration to the 
daughter of the wealthy and distinguished Earl 
of Templeton; I even knew with certainty 
that his lordship, on learning the Dublin reports 
of my union with Lady Katharine, had replied 
as an unanswerable negative, that ' Mr. Maldyn 
was a Catholic ;' while Lady Templeton evinced 
her still more decided contempt of my pretensions 
by observing that the tale required no refutation, 
for that I was a younger son and a beggar. I 
was aware, therefore, that I ran no risk of finding 
my attentions eagerly appropriated by the parents 
of the object of my admiration ; it was the de- 
meanour of Lady Katharine herself which taught 
me to moderate the rashness of my homage. 

''It was impossible to deny that however in- 
significant in her eyes my value as an adorer, 
she was prompt to notice and resent the change 
in my feelings. Few women have sufficient ge- 
nerosity of mind to despise a conquest — however 
despicable — awarded to them by the general opi- 



62 



THE OPERA. 



nion of the world ; and although to a girl fami- 
liar with the attractions and admiration of Lon- 
don society my pretensions as a lover probably 
appeared absurd, yet in the dearth of better 
suitors, and the absence of all but the super- 
annuated aid-de-camps selected by Lord Tem- 
pleton's prudence to become the partners and 
companions of his daughters, the spirited Lady 
Katharine decided that Mr. Maldyn, a popu- 
lar member of the coterie which frowned de- 
fiance at her mother-in-law, was the only man in 
the circle of the Castle worth flirting with, — or 
worthy to be entrusted with the secret of her 
contempt for the Hottentots, his fellow-country- 
men, — and her detestation of Lady Templeton, 
the precisian. If she did not encourage me as a 
suitor, at least she adopted me as a confederate ; 
and gladly would I have maintained myself on 
that footing in her favour. 

" Scarcely, however, did I become enlightened 
as to the degree of influence exercised by Cecil 
over my bosom, when I perceived that Lady Ka- 
tharine was equally discerning on the subject ; 
and that her resentment of the offence, instead 



THE OPERA. 63 

of exhibiting itself in the ordinary airs of disdain 
reserved by women for such occasions, took a far 
more perilous shape. In becoming my enemy 
for life, she assumed a familiar tone of confidential 
regard ; while far from resuming the frankness of 
her criticisms on Lady Templeton, she affected 
to recognize a thousand new and amiable qualifi- 
cations hitherto overlooked in her mother-in-law ; 
and far from pursuing her raillery on the dul- 
ness and vulgarity of the viceregal court, be- 
came all courtesy to its guests — all submission to 
the etiquette exacted by her father. Without 
immediately perceiving the drift of these changes, 
I had a vague presentiment that their result 
would prove inauspicious to my views. 

" Cecil meanwhile, the lovely and gracious 
Cecil, deigned to encourage the idolatry of her 
acknowledged votary with a degree of frankness 
arising no less from the artlessness of her mind 
and manners, than from the slighting tone in 
which, in their sisterly intercourse. Lady Katha- 
rine had originally affected to speak of my pre- 
ference ; — making no secret of her intention to 
discard the romantic and presuming young Mile- 
sian should a more appropriate dangler present 



64 THE OPERA. 

himself to her acceptance, and deriding my pre- 
tensions to her favour as troublesome and vexa- 
tious. Single-minded beyond the common sim- 
plicity of her sex, poor Cecil regarded these mur- 
murs as genuine, and fancied she was conferring 
a favour on her sister by accepting my rejected 
regard. Nay ! so little did she attempt to disguise 
the emotions of mutual affection with which she 
repaid the gift of my whole heart, that I soon 
lost sight of all my prudential resolves, and with 
a full consciousness of the impossibility of obtain- 
ing the sanction of our families to such a mea- 
sure, sought and obtained her promise to become 
mine for ever. 

" Madman that I was ! — While I placed on 
the finger of my dear Cecil a solemn pledge 
of our betrothment, I acknowledged and be- 
lieved myself the happiest of men ; overlooking 
at that moment my incapability to provide a 
maintenance for my wife ; and forgetting that the 
secret of our mutual tenderness — a secret com- 
prehending the happiness of our future life — 
was entrusted to the sister whose weakness we 
had laid bare — the woman whose pride we had 
piqued into the worst passions of her sex ! " 



THE OPERA. 65 



CHAPTER IV. 



Oh ! rake not up tlie aghes of our fatliers, 
Implacable resentment was their crime. 
And grievous hath the expiation been. 

Joanna Baillie. 



'^ It was but a few days, my dear Adrian, 
after the formation of this rash engagement, that 
a manifest change occurred in Lady Templeton^s 
demeanour towards her daughter-in-law and my- 
self. Instead of restraining our intercourse, as 
formerly, by the prudish severity of her matronly 
decorum and viceregal dignity, Lady Cecil was 
thrown as if by preconcerted intention into my 
society ; and, had I not been rendered suspicious 
by the almost unnatural cordiality with which 
Lady Katharine affected to enter into our pro- 



66 THE OPERA. 

jects, I should have readily fallen into the snare. 
Riding parties, and water parties, and excursions 
into the lovely scenery of the county of Wick- 
low, were arranged by Lady Templeton, as 
though for the sole purpose of favouring our in- 
terviews ; for it was always my arm to which 
Cecil was consigned for protection, my skill as a 
charioteer which was supposed to reassure her 
apprehensions. But fully aware of the danger 
of a premature discovery of our attachment, I 
was on my guard; and, instead of profiting 
by the facilities thus afforded, resumed in pub- 
lic my tone of intimacy with Lady Katharine, 
and thus still farther aggravated her resentment 
by rendering her the screen of my real passion. 
She did not remonstrate ; — ^but the silent indig- 
nation of a vindictive woman is like the deadly 
vapour haunting the flowery savannahs of a pes- 
tilential climate. I watched the scrutinizing 
glances of Lady Templeton, and fancied it suffi- 
cient if I could mislead their inquisition ; but it 
was Katharine — the slighted Katharine — ^from 
whom I had most to dread. 

" In the midst of these raptures and perplex- 



THE OPERA. 



67 



ities, I received a letter from my father, request- 
ing my immediate presence at Abbotscourt ; and, 
as it was not only couched in his usual terms of 
parental interest, but alluded to the infirmity of 
his own health as his motive for deshing to see 
me at the castle, I entertained no suspicion that 
any thmg was wrong. After a hasty farewell to 
Lady Cecil, and an entreaty to her sister that she 
would watch over the happiness of my beloved 
during my short absence, I flew to testify my 
obedience to my father's commands. 

" Unfortunately it was the dmner-hour at 
Abbotscourt when I made my appearance; so 
that I had no opportunity for a moment's inter- 
view with Florentia, or with Father John (Lord 
Abbotscourfs confidential chaplain), to warn me 
of the approaching storm. I was received with 
his lordship s accustomed abruptness of do- 
meanour ; — nothing unusual in the tone of his 
interrogations concerning Dublin, its politics, its 
diversions, and society, induced me to more than 
my usual caution in reply. I said little of the 
Castle, for it was never included in my father's 
line of inquuy ; but much— ^o much— of the 



68 THE OPERA. 

antiquated dowagers and noble malcontents with 
whom I knew he was anxious I should associate. 
Unwilling to proclaim my neglect of his recom- 
mendation, I was so engrossed by my awkward 
endeavours to appear familiar with their habits, 
and versed in their opinions, that I did not even 
perceive the uneasiness of my sister, who repeat- 
edly interrupted my replies by allusions to my 
brothers — to their tour — and other topics likely 
to attract my attention. 

'' ' Y ou are probably in correspondence with 
Wrottesley?" inquired Lord Abbotscourt. ' Have 
you heard from him since his arrival at Rome ? ' 

" ' So often and satisfactorily,' I replied, 
^ that I am more than ever tempted to regret 
your lordship's disapprobation of my anxious 
desire to bear him company in his continental 
tour.' 

'' ' Indeed!' exclaimed my father, incredulous- 
ly ; — so incredulously, that I was beginning to 
utter vehement affirmations of my sincerity, 
when again, and in the harshest manner, he in- 
terrupted me. 

" ' You are an infernal hypocrite, my precious 



THE OPERA. 69 

Randolph !' he exclaimed, fixing his eyes fiercely 
upon my face. < By heavens ! I blush to find a 
son of mine so determined, and yet so inexpert 
a liar! — Here has been your sister Florence, 
grimacing at you for the last half hour, to put a 
stop to your romances respecting that circle of 
my friends, which you presume to call your own, 
although for weeks and months past you have 
been contemptuously rejected from their society.^ 
'' ' It is true, my lord,' I replied — swelling with 
the conviction of having somewhat exceeded the 
measure of fact in my allusions to the courtesies 
of his favourites — ' it is true that I may have 
lately testified some degree of neglect towards 
persons whom your advice has made it my duty 
to conciliate, but — "* 

" True r ' interrupted Lord Abbotscourt — 
' true ! — and asserted by you-^-hj Mr. Randolph 
Maldyn ? — by the minion of my right honourable 
Lord Grizzle, of Dublin Castle — the esquire of 
these still more honourable dames, who conde- 
scend to initiate the honest women of Ireland into 
the filthy vices of ancient Rome and modern Lon- 



70 THE OPERA. 

don! — True! — ^are you sure that you remember 
the meaning of the word ? ' 

"• For a single moment I fancied my father's 
violence must proceed either from insanity or in- 
toxication ; but a deliberate survey of his coun- 
tenance having sufficed to convince me that his 
fury was perfectly methodical, I rose to leave the 
room. I felt that I was not sufficiently master 
of myself to listen with patience to similar up- 
braidings. 

" ' Stay ! young man,' said Father John, laying 
his hand detainingly on my arm. ' A father has 
an unlimited claim on the forbearance and sub- 
mission of his child. The time may come when 
his lordship will listen to your vindication.' 

" ' It must come — it shall come ;' I faltered 
with quivering Ups. ' In my own behalf I have 
nothing to urge : — I have but one reply for the 
man who stigmatizes my honour ; and that reply 
is not for a parent. But for those others — those 
women — those Englishwomen whom Lord Ab- 
botscourt has thought proper to asperse — ' 

<««Fooir exclaimed my father, stamping im- 



/ 



THE OPERA. 71 

patiently on the floor, while Florentia vainly in- 
terposed to moderate his vehemence, ' will you 
attempt to deny a proposition echoed from one 
end of the island to the other ? — will you affect 
to disclaim a charge, the objects of which glory 
in i'.s notoriety ? — Go, go ! Randolph ! — these 
Lady C — s and Lady R — s of your's will re- 
nounce your friendship when they hear that you 
have been presuming to bleach the stains of their 
infamy ! ' 

«' ' I am completely puzzled by your allusions,' 
said I, secretly delighted to find that his angry 
retort referred to the circle of the former court 
instead of to the Darley family. ' The ladies, 
my lord, of whom you speak have so long 
been strangers to the Castle, that I had almost 
forgotten their existence, nor have I the shghtest 
motive for advocating their cause.' 

" ' I was sure of it !' exclaimed my sister, dry- 
ing her tears. ' My dearest father ! deign to 
listen to Randolph's exculpation. I am per- 
suaded you will find him innocent in every other 
particular.' 

" « Innocent !' cried Lord Abbotscourt, tremb- 



72 THE OPERA. 

ling with rage, and striking on the table a letter 
he drew from his pocket — ' Can he prove himself 
innocent of having exposed me to the insult of 
this? — to the shame of being cajoled by the con- 
descensions of an English ' 

" ' My dear father !' again expostulated poor 
Florence, dreading from experience the sound of 
those coarse invectives suggested by his intempe- 
rate fury. ' Lady Templeton is recognized as a 
woman of the highest honour and virtue, even by 
those who abhor the politics of her lord and his 
party.' 

" ' A woman of honour and virtue ! — the super- 
annuated maiden-daughter of an upstart law-lord, 
purchased by the high and mighty Lord — 
Templeman — Templetown — whafs the fellow''s 
name ? — as a duenna for his scapegrace daugh- 
ters ! — She, to presume to address her glozing 
condescensions to the son of '' 

" ' Twenty generations of pure Milesian blood!' 
I rashly ventured to observe. ' It is indeed a 
strange presumption on the part of the represen- 
tative of majesty.' 

" « Young sir !' remonstrated Father John, 



THE OPERA. 73 

' must I again remind you of the filial du- 
ties ' 

" ' Silence !' cried my father : — ^ I have no 
longer a claim on his filial duty — I disown him 
as a son.' 

'' ' Then is it time for me to quit this place !' 
said I, moving towards the door. ' I came 
hither, my lord, in obedience to your com- 
mands ; and, at the same suggestion, shall wil- 
lingly quit Abbotscourt for ever. I should in- 
deed be unworthy the name of Maldyn, did I 
remain in your presence to provoke you into fur- 
ther forgetfulness of what is due to me and to 
yourself.*" 

" On quitting the chamber, I could not close 
my ears to the burst of vituperation with which 
this intemperate sally was received by Lord Ab- 
botscourt ; and as the horses which conveyed me 
from Dublin had not yet left the castle, I was 
about to fulfil my announcement of immediate 
departure, when Florence, who had wisely left 
my father to the consolations and spiritual 
counsels of his chaplain, joined me in the hall 
and drew me towards her own apartments. At 

VOL. I. E 



74 THE OPETJA. 

the soothing of my sister's gentle voice, my anger 
subsided. Florentia was several years older than 
ii^yself-— old enough, indeed, to have blended in 
my early years somewhat of the tender authority 
of a mother with her sisterly caresses. But a 
short time since, and I had been " little Ran- 
dolph" in her chidings and endearments ; and I 
became again, as it were, a child — while I lis- 
tened to the remonstrances, half inaudible through 
her tears, with which she strove to tranquillize 
my ungovernable temper. 

" The mystery of Lord Abbotscourt's excite- 
ment was soon explained. He had received, on 
the preceding day, a letter which the viceregal 
seal of office on the envelope might perhaps 
have condemned unopened to the flames, had it 
not been addressed by a female hand. The cun- 
ning Lady Temple ton, ignorant I presume of 
the implacable nature of my father''s political and 
national animosities, had seized on what she con- 
sidered a favourable opportunity to conciliate the 
gratitude of one of the staunchest opponents of 
her lord and his government, by acquainting him 
in a tone of affected candoiu: and interest, that his 



THE OPERA. 75 

son — " a young man for whom Lord Templeton 
and herself entertained the warmest regard, and 
whom they had received into their family on the 
most affectionate footing, had recently betrayed 
sentiments of a strong attachment to one of its 
members; and that, without referring to their 
own disapprobation, she considered it her duty to 
forestal that of his lordship by apprizing him of 
the fact. ' She was satisfied,"" she said, ' that 
the well-known opinions of Lord Abbotscourt 
would suggest the propriety of immediately 
recalling Mr. Maldyn from a circle to which 
henceforward his society must be unaccept- 
able.' 

" This last uncourteous phrase was, in fact, the 
true source of my father''s displeasure. He was 
indignant, it is true, to find himself addressed in 
a tone of patronage by one whom he regarded as 
an upstart ; but he could sooner have forgiven 
me my passion for the daughter of an English 
Tory, the upholder of the Orange faction, than 
for having exposed myself and him to the con- 
tumely of this tacit rejection. To find his favou- 
rite son disdained in the paltry circle of Lord 
e2 



^6 THE OPERA. 

Templeton^s Birmingham courts was to him as 
the bitterness of death. 

'^ Alternately cursing the importunate and ill- 
bred officiousness of Lady Templeton, and the 
indiscretion of Lady Katharine, who I doubted 
not had betrayed our secret to her mother-in- 
law, I now applied to Florence for her opinion as 
to my chance of hereafter obtaining my father''s 
sanction to my union with Lord Templeton^s 
daughter. 

" ' Perhaps,'' she replied, ' I should show more 
wisdom in discouraging your hopes by an asser- 
tion that the thing is impossible. But I know 
my father. Like all persons at the mercy and 
impulse of strong passions, he is easily influenced 
by those he loves ; and were he once convinced 
that the happiness of his favourite is dependent 
on this connexion, I am far more inclined to be- 
lieve that you might win his consent than that 
of Lord Templeton's worldly and mercenary 
family.' 

" ' If / know any thing of his lordship''s tem- 
per,' said I, ' their opposition would tend to 
soften his own.' 



THE OPERA. 



77 



" ' Perhaps so ; but you have other obstacles to 
contend with — other adversaries to overcome."* 

" ' Indeed ! To whom, excepting my dear 
Florence, can the affairs of so unimportant a 
person afford a subject of interest ?"* 

" Florentia hesitated. ' I am unwilling," said 
she at length, '• to give utterance to what you 
may estimate only as an ungenerous suspi- 
cion ' " * 

" ' Speak out, my dear — dear sister," cried I, 
apprehending an interruption to our interview. 

" ' You must have noticed," she replied, ' the 
asperity with which my father alluded to the 
female inmates of the castle. You are aware, 
that every day — every hour — serves to diminish 
his intercourse with society. Of the few guests 
of our own creed and degree formerly admitted 
at Abbotscourt, scarcely one now finds admit- 
tance into its gates.' 

'^ < So I might have concluded from his lord- 
ship's strange misconception of the nature of 
Lady Templeton's coterie. The schism between 
the party of the present lord lieutenant and the 
libertine associates of his predecessor, is an affair 



78 THE OPERA. 

familiar to every haberdasher in Dublin, although 
totally unsuspected by my father.' 

" ' He is more than ignorant — he is deceived,"* 
said Florentia, mildly. ' The infirmity of his 
health renders him chiefly dependent for amuse- 
ment on the companionship of Father John, who 
abuses his confidence by distorted representations 
of all that is passing in the world.' 

" ' Maldyn,' I observed, ' entertains the 
highest opinion of my father's chaplain.' 

'' Florentia shock her head. ' As the tool of 
his own purposes ! Do you remember my 
brother's vehement opposition to Lord Abbots - 
court's proposal that Father John should accom- 
pany him on his continental tour? — No! no! — 
he was left here, my dear Randolph, only to cir- 
cumvent your influence over my father's mind. 
Attached to Maldyn by ties of interest, as well 
as by a persuasion of his zeal in the cause of the 
true church such as he has little reason to attri- 
bute to yourself. Lord Abbotscourt's chaplain be- 
lieves he is serving the family of his patron, while 
he favours his own views, by exciting a prejudice 
against you in my father's mind. Not content 



THE OPERA. 79 

with narrating every offensive anecdote current 
respecting the late lord heutenant and his set 
and transferring its odium to the Templeton fa- 
mily, he has taken care that a hundred vile pam- 
phlets and lampoons should reach the castle, such 
as could not fail to irritate my father against the 
society to which you have attached yourself 

" 'I will see Father John — these nefarious 
practices must be explained.' 

'' ' No ! my dear brother,' resumed Miss Mal- 
dyn, ' you must do nothing to expose our con- 
federacy. Confide your interests to my hands, 
and obey Lord Abbotscourt's injunctions by quit- 
ting us for a time ; but do not aggravate his dis- 
pleasure by a renewal of your offence.' 

" « How can I do otherwise.^' I exclaimed. ' My 
dear Cecil expects me, and — ' 

" ' Loving you with only half the tenderness 
you ascribe to her, and adorned with only half the 
virtues your letters have taught me to believe her 
own, Lady Cecil will readily forgive your ne- 
glect. Go, go, my dear Randolph ! my father 
approaches.' 

" I submitted myself, however unwillingly, to 



80 THE OPERA. 

Florentia's guidance. I quitted my father's house, 
and prudently absented myself from that of Lord 
Templeton ; nay, for some days after my return 
to Dublin, forbore attempting even a clandestine 
interview with his daughter, although I beheved, 
and not without reason, that the feelings of my 
poor Cecil would be severely wounded by this 
apparent ahenation. No sooner, however, did 
she learn that I was present in every scene of 
fashionable amusement, than she surmounted her 
reluctance and accompanied her sister and Lady 
Templeton to various places of public resort. 
This was too much for me. To behold Lady 
Cecil's pale face, and suppress the inquiries urged 
by my throbbing heart, — to encounter her melan- 
choly smile without presuming to whisper a single 
word of tenderness or sympathy, was an effort 
beyond my strength. Was she not mine — ^my 
own — ^my betrothed.'^ — In the irritation of my 
mind, after witnessing one night at the theatre 
the change that a few short weeks had wrought 
in her appearance, I addressed a few rash incon- 
siderate lines to my future wife ; which, as I 
might have anticipated, were intercepted, placed 



THE OPERA. 81 

in the hands of her mother-in-law, and by Lady 
Templeton's malicious intervention, in those of 
her lord. Following her previous line of policy, 
she even persuaded him to address to my father a 
dignified rebuke for his neglect of her counsels ; 
while to myself he forwarded a remonstrance 
which was any thing but dignified, accusing me 
of a base breach of hospitahty, and forbidding me 
all further intercourse with his family. 

''But although thus excluded from the pri- 
vate circle of the Castle, I maintained suffi- 
cient communication with divers of its mem- 
bers to discover that Lady Cecil Darley, al- 
though in a declining state of health, was about 
to be removed from her family, and placed in the 
household of some distant relative in Scotland ; 
and that she was subjected in the mean time to 
the harshest usage. The consequences of this 
injudicious severity were only too favourable to 
my wishes. She consented to elope with me, — 
she became my wife in all the shame and con- 
fusion of a clandestine marriao^e ; — and on awakinsr 
from the madness of my dream of triumphant 
passion, I found myself the husband of a lovely 
E 3 



82 THE OPERA. 

and helpless woman, reared in all the delicacy of 
splendour and refinement, to whom I was inca- 
pable of affording the common necessaries of 
life ! Lord Templeton's rage at the public in- 
sult thus offered to his family and the dig- 
nity of his office, expended itself in coarse in- 
vectives which rendered it impossible for me to 
humiliate myself by seeking his forgiveness ; and 
as to my father, I knew him too well to believe 
he would do otherwise than exult in the disastrous 
consequences of my disobedience. It was even 
with some difficulty that my kind Florentia found 
means to evade the espionage of Father John, 
and supply me from her private allowance with 
the means of present subsistence. 

'' But time passed on ; weeks and months came 
and went ; and at length even these were exhausted. 
We were too proud to seek pecuniary assistance 
from those who, obsequious to the will of the man 
in power, affected to emulate Lord Templeton's re- 
sentment; and the remote cottage in which imme- 
diately on our marriage we buried ourselves from 
the observation of society, soon became degraded 
by the galling humiliations of abject poverty. My 



THE OPERA. 83 

father publicly proclaimed my disinheritance ; my 
sister was placed in a provincial convent of pecu- 
liar strictness, to prevent all further communi- 
cation between us ; and through the interference 
of Father John with their tutor, my letters to 
my brothers were returned unopened. I had no 
longer a friend from whom I could hope for suc- 
cour in my distress. 

'' Adrian ! you have been educated in habits of 
frugality ; you have seen your father restrict him- 
self to homely food and simple raiment ; you 
have often grieved over his abstinence from the 
ordinary indulgences of his station in life. — But 
you have never felt the chilling grasp of actual 
privation ; you have never submitted to the taunts 
of an insulting creditor ; you have never seen the 
wife of your heart struggling with the mortifi- 
cations of penury ; you have never watched the 
features you love sharpening beneath the touch of 
want, Adrian ! while you were yet an unborn 
and expected treasure, your mother laboured for 
you, laboured for her own subsistence, laboured 
for the fever-struck and feeble husband, who lay 
like a crushed snake, cursing his own infirmity 



84 THE OPERA. 

and the triumph of his enemies. I then thought 
no human suffering could exceed the anguish 
with which, from my humble bed, I watched the 
frail and delicate form of the highborn Cecil, en- 
gaged in menial offices for my sake ; but I have 
since recognised my error, and learned to sigh for 
a renewal of that season of ruin and affliction. 

" Unable to endure the spectacle of her wretch- 
edness, the first voluntary act of my recovery was 
to address a letter to Lord Templeton, acquaint- 
ing him with his daughter's actual condition. I 
cared not in what opprobious terms he might 
upbraid me in return ; I cared not for Lady 
Templeton's sneers, nor even for the gratified 
malice of Lady Katharine, who had long since 
overtly enlisted in the ranks of our enemies. A 
remittance of money, sufficient to afford to my 
wife those luxuries, those necessaries, now so 
painfully needful — yes ! a paltry and reluctant 
pecuniary dole — would have reconciled me to 
the most injurious accusations heaped on myself. 
But, alas ! a still severer penalty was to be at- 
tached to the concession. 

" In the letter addressed to me by Lady Cecil's 



/ 



THE OPERA. 85 

father, no tone of harshness or of contempt was 
discernible. It was cold and formal, but cere- 
moniously courteous ; and after pointing out to me, 
that in consequence of my father's renouncement 
it became my duty to assist by my personal exer- 
tions in the maintenance of my expected family, 
he tendered to my acceptance a commission in 
a dragoon regiment commanded by a distant 
connexion of the Darley family, then on the 
point of embarkation for India. In the event, 
and only in the event of my concurrence with his 
lordship's views, Cecil was to be received into his 
house, pardoned her former trespasses, and che- 
rished during my absence with parental and 
sisterly tenderness. 

" My heart misgave me ! — I foreboded some la- 
tent mischief from this extraordinary change of 
tone ; nor did I dare confide to Lady Cecil a propo- 
sal which her tenderness for the originator of all her 
sufferings might induce her to reject. But after 
gazing through my tears at her altered counte- 
nance, and at the squalid abode to which she 
would be confined by opposition to Lord Tem- 
pleton's will, I addressed him a few hasty words 



86 THE OPERA. 

of acceptance, trusting that necessity would 
eventually reconcile her to the measure. 

" Adrian, I dare not dwell on the scenes which 
followed our arrival in Dublin. Your poor mo- 
ther ! — 'So ! — I dare not dwell on the subject. 
Suffice it that I was held by the Templeton 
family to the very letter of my agreement ; and 
that they continued to deceive Lady Cecil into 
ignorance of the motive and moment of my de- 
parture.'' 



THE OrERA. 87 



CHAPTER V. 



Is there a cause in nature 
For these hard hearts 1 

Lear. 



It was not till evening that Count Maldyn 
was enabled to resume the narrative which proved 
so exciting to his own feelings, and to those of his 
son. But Adrian had little leisure for the in- 
dulgence of his anxieties. All the thrones and do- 
minions of Elzbach — from the venerable superior 
of Elzenkreuz, down to the young and vivacious 
Bl'aschel — made it their duty to intrude upon him 
with their congratulations on his return, — their 
regrets at his approaching departure; besides 
divers inquiries tending to draw forth the nature 



THE OPERA. 



of his business in England, and the origin of the 
changes in the establishment at Elzstein. The 
curiosity of the fisherman was most unsatisfactorily- 
appeased by the intelligence that the young 
count had fixed on too early a day for the com- 
mencement of his journey, to admit of a previous 
expedition to the Traunsee; while that of vhe 
dignitary of the church was forced to content it- 
self with an assurance, that Adrian would pass a 
social evening at the Prior ey^ previous to his de- 
parture for the land of heresy. Had either 
Barbel or Gorgel been despatched by the elders 
of the village on a similar errand of diplomacy, it 
is possible that their discoveries might have been 
of a more comprehensive nature ; jut ever since 
the notice bestowed by the young count on the 
fair Stephanine became matter of public scandal. 
Barbel had transferred her smiles to the gardener 
of Elzstein; and Gorgel, half sulky — ^half jealous 
— was supposed to be bent upon the conquest of 
the surly Hiob. 

At length the importunate ceremonies of greet- 



THE OPERA. 89 

ing and well-wishing were at an end ; but when 
dinner-time arrived. Count Maldyn and his son 
found themselves too much engrossed by the 
train of domestic images roused by their morn- 
ing's conversation, to indulge in their usual socia- 
bihty. Both eagerly hailed the arrival of that 
tY'ihght hour, when the disturbances of the 
f^^ day subside into confidential tranquillity. The 
^^mbers were glowing in the stove, and Draunzt 
had settled himself close beside it for his evening 
doze, when Adrian, after a meditative pause, ab- 
ruptly exclaimed, 

'' And did you attempt no communication with 
Abbotscourt Castle, my dear father, previous to 
your departu-: for India .^" 

" To what avail ?" replied Count Maldyn. 
" No sooner did I arrive in Dublin, than I learned 
that during the year of our provincial seclusion, 
and from the very period of my marriage, my 
petulant father had seized every opportunity to 
harass and molest Lord Templeton in his offi- 
cial career ; and that, on more than one occasion, 



90 THE OPEHA. 

he had been at the trouble of petitioning parlia- 
ment, in order to expose certain petty abuses and 
errors of judgment by which the lord lieutenant 
had laid himself open to rebuke. Unfortunately, 
his lordship's chief vanity lay in his impeccability 
of office. Priding himself, Hke many of his spe- 
cies, on his very weakest point, Lord Templeton 
fancied himself endowed with legislative talents 
of the first order ; and of all the oifences that 
could have been levelled at his character, that 
of displaying to the world the inefficiency of 
his administration was by far the most unpardon- 
able. He was one of those persons who prefer 
the reputation of being a knave to that of being 
a fool. 

" Perhaps no greater misfortune can befal an 
official man, than that an enemy should detect 
a similar foible. Lord Abbotscourt having ascer- 
tained the extent of his own powers of persecu- 
tion, employed his time, his agents, and his 
money, in seeking occasions for their exercise ; 
and the irritated Templeton found himself un- 



THE OPERA. 91 

remittingly and unsparingly shown up for the 
diversion of the Irish and English public, till 
the very name of Maldyn became loathsome to 
his ears. 

" This intelligence was doubly grievous to me. 
It served to prove at once the Uttleness of my 
father's character, and the implacabihty of his 
anger against myself; and to assure me that I 
had less chance than ever of pacifying the resent- 
ment of the Darleys. Our feuds had become as 
notorious as the rivalship of the Capulets and 
Montagues ; and as Ireland was at that period 
roused to the highest pitch of political excite- 
ment, it was apprehended that blood would yet 
be spilt ere the fierceness of their hatred was 
appeased. As in every other private quarrel of 
that kingdom at that epoch, politics were made a 
mask to screen its true motive ; and the names of 
Whig and Tory, — tyrant and slave, — Catholic 
and Protestant, — were bandied between the 
Orange party and the Abbotscourtfaction,simply 
because an elopement had disgraced the Temple- 



92 THE OPERA. 

ton family, and because my father chose to resent 
the silly officious letter of a busy woman. 

'^ Previous to quitting Ireland, I consulted a 
young friend or two whom I still ventured to call 
my own, on the eligibility of attempting a recon- 
ciliation between these irritated adversaries ; but 
I was advised that it would be better to try the 
influence of a short absence on my father's feel- 
ings. Reassured by the certainty that Lady 
Cecil was once more safely and prosperously set- 
tled in the bosom of her family, I resolved to 
trust to time for the event ; and leaving with my 
agent a letter of explanation and submission to 
be delivered to Lord Abbotscourt, in case of my 
death, tore myself from DubHn, embarked at 
Cork, and " 

" And my poor mother — ^poor Lady Cecil ?'''* 
exclaimed Adrian. 

" Do not mention her — do not mention her ! " 
faltered the count in a low voice. " The want 
of judgment which had marked my previous con- 
duct, was as nothing compared with the folly of 



THE OPERA. 93 

this precipitate departure. It was an act of posi- 
tive frenzy to leave my wife surrounded by my 
bitterest enemies." 

" But surely," cried the young count, with 
rising colour and throbbing temples, " surely her 
own nearest relatives — persons of high station 
and character in the world — could never be 
tempted by family dissensions to behave with 
barbarity towards a helpless woman solemnly be- 
queathed to their protection ? " 

'^^ Adrian, Adrian ! " replied his father, " va- 
rious are the disguises under which cruelty dis- 
sembles its purposes. Stripes and blows, priva- 
tion or insult, do not fulfil its worst intentions. 
It was with a smiling countenance and affable 
demeanour that Lady Katharine Darley under- 
took the task of blighting her sister's peace of 
mind." 

" My poor mother ! " 

" At the time of my embarkation, Cecil was, 
as I have already mentioned, on the eve of her 
confinement; and naturally of a nervous and 



94 THE OPERA. 

susceptible temperament, her constitution had 
been so fatally impaired by twelve months of pri- 
vation and anxiety, that her mind and body were 
now equally enfeebled. Apprehensions were en- 
tertained for her safety ; and it was at this criti- 
cal season that Lady Templeton and her daughter- 
in-law, outraging every better impulse of woman''s 
nature, began to practise upon her weakness by 
hints of my desertion — assurances that I had 
eagerly solicited the appointment which ensured 
our separation — and declarations that I had 
passed my last few days in Dublin in riot and 
intemperance. By Lord Templeton's advice I 
had bidden her farewell, in a slight and cheerful 
manner, on pretence of proceeding to Abbots- 
court and seeking an interview with my father. 
He promised me that the truth should be ex- 
plained to her by slow and careful degrees ; and 
eventually confirmed by a letter of which Lady 
Xatharine Darley undertook the delivery, in 
which, at his suggestion, I acquainted her in the 
tenderest manner with the sacrifice I found my- 



THE OPERA. 95 

self compelled to make to her welfare. — Adrian ! 
— that letter never reached the hands of my poor 
Cecil I— 

^« The levity of my demeanour in our last inter- 
view, was again and again pointed out to her recol- 
lection ; and thus, finding herself abandoned and 
beheving herself forgotten by one for whose sake 
she had endured and sacrificed so much., it was not 
wonderful that she should fall into the most afflict- 
ing state of despondency, and eagerly welcome the 
hour which she trusted would put an end to her 
blighted existence. Under these circumstances, 
my dear son — these miserable circumstances — 
your eyes first opened to the light .' — Yet even in 
the depth of her despair, the appeal of nature 
wrought its accustomed miracle in your mother's 
heart. Cecil had prepared herself to die — had 
prayed for death ; but scarcely did the first feeble 
wailing of her infant reach her ear, when the soul 
within her was changed. A new light of joy and 
tenderness was kindled in her desolate bosom- 
life itself became irradiated with the promise of 



96 THE OPERA. 

pleasures hitherto untasted ; nay, iii the fulness of 
her happiness, even the imputed treachery of her 
husband was forgotten. She did not — she could 
not think evil of the father of her child ! 

'^ For this change of sentiment on the part of 
Lady Cecil, Lady Templeton^s natural hardness 
of heart had left her unprepared. But Katharine, 
like a minister of mischief, was at hand to suggest 
a remedy ; and it was agreed between them that 
after a few days — a few days which they judged 
requisite to secure the feeble sufferer from the 
perils of any trying emotion — the little nursling 
which promised to become so sweet a pledge of 
domestic peace should be withdrawn from her for 
ever ! They knew that the numberless disorders 
of infancy would suggest a ready excuse for its 
disappearance ; and it was arranged that a confi- 
dential nurse named Wallace, already enlisted in 
their plans, should undertake the announcement 
of its decease, and its conveyance to England. 
' Be assured,' was Lady Katharine's convincmg 
argument, ' be assured that my sister will never 



THE OPERA. 97 

be wrought upon to coincide in our views, so long 
as the existence of their child forms a bond of 
union between herself and Randolph Maldyn.' 

" And what were these views — ^you are about 
to inquire ? Black, my son, black and iniquitous 
as the bosom in which they were framed ! But 
let me not indulge in invective ; let me rather 
strive to moderate my indignation while I ac- 
quaint you that Lady Katharine's pretended sus- 
picions induced Lord Templeton to acquaint him- 
self minutely with the mode and ceremonial of 
my marriage with his unfortunate daughter ; that 
an important formality connected with our differ- 
ence of religious profession was said to have been 
neglected in our precipitate union; and finally, 
that the contract proved null and void — and our 
son, illegitimate ! 

" This discovery was effected by Lady Katha- 
rine, my dear Adrian, many months previous to 
your birth ; so that had Lord Templeton con- 
ducted himself on the occasion with the 
liberality of a man of honour, the last and worst 

VOL. I. F 



98 THE OPERA. 

evil might have been prevented by a second cere- 
mony, anticipatory of the event. But my father's 
vexatious animosity so roused the demon within 
his heart, that instead of attempting to forestal 
the injury inadvertently offered to his house, by 
legalizing my m^arriage with Lady Cecil, he lent 
a ready ear to the suggestions of his worldly- 
minded wife and her daughter-in-law, that an 
effort should be made by the family to separate 
my poor girl from the needy papist with whom 
she had rashly connected herself In pursuance 
of this villanous scheme, the overtures necessi- 
tated by our destitute condition were warmly 
welcomed by the Darley family ; — my commission 
was procured — my wife received back with gra- 
ciousness into her paternal home — her heart 
estranged by the basest misrepresentations — her 
mind poisoned by the vilest calumnies ; — her in- 
fant surreptitiously withdrawn from her arms, 
conveyed to a strange country, reared in a de- 
graded home ! Such, Adrian, such is the mea- 
sure of cruelty and wickedness for which the 



THE OPERA. 99 

pride of the Templetons has rendered them 
accountable ! 

" ' I can think of nothing but my mother^s 
sufferings, my father's injuries !' replied the 
young man in a broken voice. ' And yet I can 
scarcely believe that even the false witness borne 
by her parents and sister, would suffice to alienate 
Lady CeciFs affections ?'' 

*' Fortunately for the triumph of their machi- 
nations, a new and unexpected ally was afforded 
them by the arrival in Dubhn of Lady Temple- 
ton''s sister ; the wife of a highly respectable, but 
weak and prejudiced man, deeply imbued with the 
doctrines of the evangelical church, and as eager 
in the task of conversion as Father John, or any 
other devotee of the Roman communion. 

" His influence in the private circle of the 
castle, enabled him to commune with the bereaved 
mother, the deserted wife ; and in offering such 
consolations as the peculiar character of his reli* 
gious opinions would permit, he did not scruple to 
attribute my worthlessness to the creed in which I 
f2 



100 THE OPERA. 

was nurtured, and to ascribe the death of her child 
to the shame of its birth. It was a judgment of 
the Almighty, he said, in visitation upon her pre- 
sumptuous secession from the church of her fore- 
fathers ; and without regard for the wounded deli- 
cacy of the gentle and feminine Cecil, he cited 
the untimely end which befel of old the unlawful 
offspring of the wife of Uriah the Hittite. 

" In the season of affliction, the threats and pro- 
mises of scripture assume a double importance in 
our ears. The mind of Cecil enfeebled by 
disease and sorrow, became deeply impressed by 
superstitious terrors ; and readily adopting the 
misinterpretations suggested by Mr. Percevars 
peculiar views, she learned to tremble at the re- 
collection of her union with a member of the pol- 
luted church of Rome, and no longer marvelled 
at my enormities, or at the heavy judgments 
which had befallen herself. Within six months 
after the arriva. of Lady Templeton's evangelical 
relatives, a packet was despatched to me by his 
lordships man of business, under the written 



THE OPERA. 



101 



sanction of Lady Cecil, containing a legal de- 
cision on the informality of our marriage, and a 
renunciation on her part of all further intercourse 
between us. Lady Templeton had taken precau- 
tions that this should be the first communication 
from my wife which reached my hands ; her own 
had been hmited to a formal announcement of the 
birth and death of my child : and, as to my 
letters, be assured that not a line of my writing 
was permitted to appear in her presence. 

" « My mother imagined herself then to be ful- 
filling your own wishes, and justifying your own 
desertion by this formal disavowal of her claims? 
— Believing that you had wilfully and dehberately 
rejected her from your heart, surely she may be 
forgiven for having fallen into the pit dug for her 
by the deceiver .^' 

" Forgiven ! — Alas ! she was herself the most 
mjured of victims ! — Forgiven ! — my son ! I 
have long learned to look upon her memory as 
upon that of a saint and a martyr ! But when I 
first received that horrible missive, without ex- 



102 THE OPERA. 

planation or a single soothing word to lessen my 
anguish, judge how different were my views of 
her conduct. From the period of my quitting 
Ireland, not one line had I been allowed to re- 
ceive of all the tender upbraidings and wife-like 
remonstrances addressed to me by my poor Cecil I 
till at length, in the desolation of my exile, I ac- 
cused her of levity, indifference, inconstancy, 
— ^infidelity ! In the madness of my despair, 
I fancied her heart had become corrupted by 
prosperity; that the brilliant profusion of her 
father's court had taught her to despise her beg- 
gared husband ! — But I disdained remonstrance 
— I scorned the idea of pleading for a renewal of 
the connexion she had voluntarily resigned. 

" Still, had it been in my power, had the chances 
of war permitted me to absent myself with honour 
from my regiment, I should have flown back to 
Dublin to assure myself of the legal validity of 
her opposition to my rights, and to meet with be- 
coming dignity the overtures of Lord Templeton. 
For the present, however, such a measure was in- 



THE OPERA. 103 

compatible with my professional responsibility; 
and in the mean time, instead of giving up my 
whole heart and soul, as I could have wished, to 
the honourable duties which though thrust upon 
jne fulfilled every desire of my earlier life, I grew 
daily more incapable of exertion. Existence be- 
came a biurden to me ; and willingly — how will- 
ingly — would I have laid it down amid the 
struggle of the first action in which it was m/ 
fortune to engage ! 

" It has been said that this is precisely the state 
of mind most propitious to the vocation of a 
soldier I And such might be indeed the case in 
the desperate service assigned to me at that cri- 
tical period ; for my advancement in my profession 
outstripped not only my own hopes, but all 
former precedent. 

" But it is unnecessary, my dear son, to inter- 
rupt the details of my narrative by further allu- 
sions to my military career: — a subject, from 
your boyhood till now, so frequently discussed 
between us without reference to the calamities in 



104) THE OPERA. 

which it originated. You will probably recollect 
that my patron, Colonel Darley, fell gloriously in 
the storming of Asulipatam, a few months follow- 
ing my arrival in India ; and that, on a cessation 
of hostilities nearly three years afterwards, I ob- 
tained leave of absence for the restoration of my 
health ; an indulgence due no less to the severity 
of my wounds than to my increase of military 
rank. 

"Alas ! alas ! how joyful would have been this 
triumphant return to the land of my forefathers, 
could I have flattered myself that the prize-money 
arising from the plunder of Asulipatam, the un- 
anticipated product of my professional exertions, 
would secure the comfort and prosperity of a be- 
loved wife ; — or that in Cecil's smiles, I should 
obtain a reward for my sufferings. A thousand 
times rather would I have remained the obscure 
and pennyless cornet I quitted Ireland, blest as I 
then believed myself in the affection of a faithful 
companion, than return to find the weight of my 
unexpected honours and unsought opulence, un- 



THE OPERA. 105 

shared by a single individual to whom my pros- 
perity was likely to prove a source of gratification. 
In defiance of the allotted ties of nature, I was 
now worse than alone in the world! — ^The only 
friends I could boast, were a few military comrades 
endeared to me by the perils we had shared toge- 
ther ; one of whom, an officer of my own regi- 
ment, named IManningfield, having been sum- 
moned to England by family business, chanced to 
be the companion of my voyage.'' 



F 3 



106 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER VI. 



Scarce able to believe my journey o'er, 

And that these eyes behold thee safe once more, 

This — this alone is wortli an age of toil ! 

Hail, lovely Sirraio ! — Hail, paternal soil ! — 

Joy, my bright waters, joy! your master's come. 

Laugh every dimple on the cheek of home ! 

Trans, from Catullus. 



"Even under the happiest auspices," continued 
the count, after a pause arising from profound 
emotion, " it is a terrible ordeal to approach our 
native land, after a long cessation of intercourse 
with those whose ties upon our hearts form the 
true bond uniting us with our country and its in- 
terests. The ordinary casualties of human des- 
tiny, and the fatal progress of time, acquire a 



THE OPEKA. 107 

iiew and ominous importance when thus connected 
with the beloved beings, the light of whose coun- 
tenance has been denied to our eyes ; and never 
shall I forget the vague but oppressive apprehen- 
sions that assailed my mind on hailing the coast 
of Ireland, lest some horrible mischance should 
have befallen the woman — beloved in spite of all 
her treachery — who had spurned me from her 
bosom ; — the brother who had renounced me; — 
or the sister — the dear kind sister — whose pre- 
sence it was forbidden me to approach. For 
eighteen months, no intelhgence, either public or 
domestic, had reached me from Ireland; and 
having once more set foot upon its shore, as an 
unrecognised and nameless individual, I attempt- 
ed with fear and trembling an inquiry concern- 
ing the families of Temple ton and Abootscourt 
— both of which I knew must afford a familiar 
subject of public discussion. 

" Even previous to my departure for India, I 
was aware that the political as well as personal 
temper of the lord lieutenant, had attached an 



JOS THE OPERA. 

unusual degree of unpopularity to his office, and 
rendered his name a byword among the people. 
He was regarded as a personification of the selfish 
and defying hauteur of his country, and as a pri- 
vileged enemy of that over which his authority 
was ajjpointed. It was therefore no matter of 
surprise to me to learn that the excitement of the 
public mind had necessitated his lordship's pre- 
mature removal ; and that the name of Darley was 
pronounced with avowed detestation, with curses 
as loud as they were deep. The prejudices of an 
ignorant and misguided populace aggravated, as 
you may suppose, their opinions and details of the 
ruin wrought in the kingdom by the obstinacy of 
the late lord lieutenant ; but it was with a sigh I 
remembered how much of that very obstinacy 
owed its existence to my father's fractious opposi- 
tion ; and how much of that very opposition, to 
the disobedience of his son. 

^' On venturing, however, to mention the name 
of Lord Abbotscourt, in the expectation of find- 
ing it hailed with the plaudits usually lavished 



THE OPERA.* 100 

by the lower orders on those whose injudicious in- 
terference in their behalf is the source of their 
worst grievances, I was answered with indifference 
that, ' they had heard nothing lately of my lord ;' 
and finding that no further intelligence was to be 
obtained in Dublin respecting the family of Lord 
Templeton, than that he was resident at his family- 
seat in the county of Derby, I set off immediately for 
my paternal estate. I was satisfied that the miser- 
able alteration in my appearance would secure me 
from recognition in the adjoining village, where I 
determined on taking up my temporary abode, 
in thehope of finding some favourable opportunity 
to attempt a reconciliation with my father. 

" Absence, and that impartial self-examination 
inseparable from the approach of death, had, dur- 
ing my residence in India, considerably diminished 
my resentment, and softened my feelings towards 
him. I had been taught to know that the faults 
and frailties of a parent should have no existence 
in the recognition of a son. I remembered his 
early partiality, his fond confidence in my boy- 



110 THE OPEEAi 

hood, his predilection for my society ; and esti- 
mating with better judgment the extent of his dis- 
appointment at my subsequent disobedience, for- 
gave all his harshness, and resolved to humble 
my proud spirit at his feet. Now that fortune 
had placed me beyond the necessity of ap- 
proaching him as a needy petitioner, I felt 
it unnecessary to place any limit on my sub* 
mission. 

*' I cannot suppose, my dear Adrian, that this 
homely residence of Elzstein, an adopted home, 
without any of the intense claims of nationahty 
on your heart, has inspired you with a just esti- 
mate of that fond and partial weakness which 
attaches the exile to his birthplace. In the petu- 
lance of boyhood, I had been apt to inveigh 
against Abbotscourt as a dreary prison, shut out 
from intercourse with even such society as an 
obscure provincial residence might have afforded 
to a man less affected by Milesian and Cathohq 
prejudices than its hereditary lord ; and had often 
pointed out a mixture of Gothic pride and Gothic 



THE OPERA. Ill 

barbarism in its aspect and customs, as a suffi- 
cient motive for my ill-omened residence in the 
capital. But the desolate n of my sea voyage, 
and the still more painftd estrangement from 
civilized society attendant on a military career 
in India, soon caused me to renounce this 
unnatural affectation of refinement; and the 
solemn gloom of Abbotscourt, with its ancient 
quadrangles and turrets, its lofty woods and 
princely domain, had long assumed a sort of reli- 
gious sanctity in my remembrance. Often during 
the breathless stillness of an Oriental night, had 
I summoned these images around me, till the 
arid sands whereon our tents were pitched be- 
came green with the verdure of a happier climate ; 
often, amid the cheerless and objectless dreariness 
of the waste of waters, had I enlivened the dul- 
ness of a calm, by picturing my return to the 
house of my forefathers, — the blessing wrung 
from my reluctant father'*s heart by the humble 
appeal of a son no less repentant than the pro- 
digal of Scripture commemoration ;~often, — often 



112 THE OPERA. 

— ^had I woke from my dream in the agitation of 
believing myself locked in his arms ! — 

" Remembrances such as these, and new emo- 
tions still more touching, arose in my bosom while 
I traversed the well-known road conducting me 
towards him ; and I even forgot to notice and 
welcome its familiar sounds and sights, in the in- 
tensity of delight with which I anticipated the 
forgiveness of a parent and the renewal of a sis- 
ter^s friendship. On reaching the confines of the 
park, I despatched my carriage by a circuitous 
route to the village, that I might approach the 
castle without the possibility of recognition. 

'' How readily do I recal to mind every trivial 
incident connected with that visit ! — I felt and 
feel it to be one of the most important events of 
my life ! — On passing the footgate connected with 
the great entrance of the domain, I noticed that 
the lodge which, during Florentia's residence at 
Abbotscourt, had been kept by a protege of hers, 
and rendered a model of rustic neatness, now 
afforded a genuine specimen of national disorder. 



THE OPEEA. 113 

Its garden was uprooted by the swine that revelled 
in the filth of the half-ruined tenement; and the 
bare-legged urchins who stared out upon me as I 
passed, were as completely strangers to me as I 
could wish. 

"For a moment, I was startled by this extra- 
ordinary change ; apprehending that my father's 
singular indifference to the aspect of a place 
which he once prided himself on maintaining with 
baronial splendour, must proceed from domestic, 
or mental affliction. But it was one of those 
bright and balmy days in June, which seem 
to deny the existence of evil ; as if the brilliant 
array of nature were incompatible with the livery 
of human affliction. The foliage of the woods 
displayed all the freshness of its early verdure ; 
save here and there an oak whose tardy russet 
shoots scarcely yet sufficed to disguise its sturdy 
outline. The hawthorns were white as with 
sprinkled snow; and their spicy fragrance per- 
vaded the glowing atmosphere, breathing upon 



114 THE OPERA. 

the earth as if to draw new treasures from 
its swelling bosom. The grass, instead of 
being cropped into turfen smoothness by the 
deer which it was my father'*s pleasure to leave 
in undisturbed possession of the place, had 
grown up, and withered in seedy exuberance un- 
der the hot sunshine — untouched either by 
human or animal intrusion; while the whirring 
wings of a thousand insects flitting among the 
tall weeds and wild flowers, seemed like the hum 
of distant habitation, and formed a singular con- 
trast with the manifest loneliness of the place. 
The sweetness of summer, in short, was around 
me with all its beautiful renovations and exhila- 
rating sounds ; and my heart bounded within me 
when at length, as I emerged from a shrubbery 
of larches and acacias skirting the flower-gardens, 
the mansion, in all its stern and solemn antiquity 
stood before me. But I shuddered and reeled 
on the path, when, having glanced towards the 
massive portal, I perceived it to be surmounted 



THE OPEBA. 115 

by a funeral escutcheon bearing the family em- 
blazonments. — I had come too late, Adrian ! — 
my father was no more ! — 

" I scarcely recollect how I endured my first 
consciousness of the event ; my first remembrance 
is of rising from a bank by the wayside on which 
I had thrown myself, and advancing towards the 
house, with a desperate determination to see and 
hear every circumstance calculated to augment 
the anguish of my feelings. The day must have 
passed away during the suspension of my facul- 
ties of heart and mind, for the sun was setting 
gorgeously on the windows as I approached the 
stately courtyard ; and I now welcomed the wild 
and disorderly aspect of the place, as consonant 
with the events with which it was connected, 
and with the emotions arising from them within 
my own bosom. At first, indeed, the hoarse 
echo of my summons upon the barred and pon- 
derous door which had been wont to stand hospi- 
tably open during the lifetime of its lord, grated 
in my ears like a voice of accusation from the 



116 THE OPERA. 

grave ; but when, after many a renewal of the 
sound, I found myself compelled to seek a more 
humble mode of entrance through the offices, and 
encountered only a strange Enghsh domestic to 
whom the care of the premises was exclusively 
committed, I experienced an inexphcable gratifi- 
cation in the wretched isolation of my position. 
Regarding me with an eye of suspicion, the man 
hastened to inform me that Lord Abbotscourt's 
orders expressly forbade the intrusion o^ strangers 
during his absence; that although himself and 
his wife were the sole inhabitants of the castle, 
the denuded state of the place since the sale, 
rendered even their guardianship superfluous ; 
for nothing now remained but bare walls to attract 
the evil-disposed or inquisitive. 

"Without inquiring to which class I was assigned 
by his misgivings, or even explaining the peculiar 
nature of my interest in the scene, I found means to 
propitiate the man by a degree of liberality which 
might well have served to augment his suspicions ; 
and he not only permitted me to enter the home 



THE OPERA. 117 

of my childhood, but soon proved to me, by ocu- 
lar demonstration, that the dismantled condition 
he had described was not a fable invented to serve 
as his defence against knavery and pillage. Ren- 
dered communicative by my retaining fee, he in^ 
formed me, that since the decease of the late lord, 
the present representative of the family had only 
once visited the estate ; when, by giving orders 
for the peremptory sale of the personalty, includ- 
ing the furniture of the castle, and such of the 
family plate and pictures as were not strictly in- 
cluded in the deed of entail, he tacitly avowed his 
intention of quitting Abbotscourt for ever. In 
reply to my further inquiries, the man stated him- 
self to have been appointed to his office by an 
English solicitor to whom the absentee lord had 
recently assigned the agency of his estates ; a 
personage whose growing unpopularity with the 
tenants was likely to prove ruinous to the Maldyn 
family, and perhaps fatal to himself. 

" It was neither the present proprietor of the 
castle, nor his delegates, who engrossed my 



118 THE OPERA. 

interest ; but it grieved me to discover that the 
ill-blood existing between the English bailiff and 
his Irish neighbours, was not only the motive of 
his churlishness of demeanour towards myself 
and every other stranger seeking admittance to 
the castle, but that it must ensure his ignorance 
touching the late lord and his family. He knew, 
indeed, from the report of his patron — the agent 
of Lord Abbotscourt — that the old man had died 
broken-hearted, on account of the marriage of his 
son with an Enghsh lady ; — but he knew no more. 
" This, however, was enough ! — I asked no fur- 
ther questions ; and declined the offer I had pre- 
viously sought, of visiting in detail the desolate abode 
I had approached with such different anticipations. 
It would have seemed like sacrilege to intrude 
into the lonely chamber of the parent I had has- 
tened to the grave — of the sister whom I had 
rendered an orphan. The very atmosphere of the 
cold dismantled mansion became oppressive to 
me ; nor could I endure the thought of passing 
the'night in the village, with the risk of hearing 



THE OPERA. 119 

my family affairs discussed by vulgar lips. By 
the intervention of my astonished companion, my 
carriage was summoned to meet me at the lodge ; 
and in the dusk of twilight I recommenced my 
journey, cheered only by the vague hope of re- 
ceiving from Mr. Butler, Lord Abbotscourfs 
agent, who had been driven by the ill-usage of 
the tenantry to reside in Dubhn, a clue to the 
residence of my sister, and a less dispiriting pic- 
ture of the family affairs. Of my father, I dared 
not even think ! I felt myself incapable of pro- 
nouncmg his very name. The guilt of the parri- 
cide was heavy on my soul ! "" 

" ' Do not distress yourself by reverting to 
these agonizing details ! ^ exclaimed Adrian, per- 
ceiving that the lips of the count were quivering 
with emotion. ' Tell me, in one word, whether 
your interview with my uncle's man of business 
was satisfactory ; and — ' 

" One word, my son, will scarcely suffice to 
unravel the numerous interests connected with 
my visit to Mr. Butler ;— in whom I instantly re- 



120 THE OPERA. 

cognised, with amazement, a person employed 
in a very menial capacity by Lord Temple- 
ton, during his viceroyalty. Astonished to find 
the patronage of my brother bestowed upon any 
man connected with the family from whom I had 
received such bitter insults — such cruel injuries— 
my inquiries concerning the welfare of the present 
Lord Abbotscourt were sufficiently slight and 
cold, while my reception of his agenf s obsequious 
familiarities, probably tended to betray the mo- 
tive of my reserve. But, without noticing the 
fellow's air of pique, I hastened to speak of Flo- 
rentia, and even incoherently jittered the name 
of Wrottesley. 

" It was now his turn to assume a tone of 
coldness and reserve. I must excuse him, he 
said, from entering into any particulars concern- 
ing persons, whose conduct towards his lord had 
been the cause of so much scandal and dissension. 
He knew nothing more of them than that they 
had recently set off for Italy, where the state of 
Mr. Maldyn's health required them to pass the 



THE OPERA. 121 

winter; for further details, he referred me to 
Lord Abbotscourt, and tendered me the address 
of his London abode. 

'' I had very little inclination to loiter in Dublin 
— a residence to which a thousand painful asso- 
ciations were attached by the conduct of the Tem- 
pleton family ; and though I would have given 
worlds to obtain information respecting the being 
who — to my shame do I own it — was still dearest 
to my heart, I had not courage to articulate her 
name in Butler's presence. Immediately on 
quitting him, I made arrangements for my de- 
parture from Ireland ; and, within a few days 
from this unsatisfactory interview, installed myself 
in a fashionable hotel of the British metropolis. 

'^ In London, my acquaintance was of course 
even less extensive than in my native city; 
but having been compelled immediately on my 
arrival to accept a visit from my friend, Colonel 
jManningfield, for the discussion of important 
professional business in which we were mutually 
interested, wc agreed to dine together ; and I re- 

VOL. I. G 



122 THE OPERA. 

solved to defer till the morrow, my visit to 
Lord Abbotscourt. Notliing indeed resembling 
brotherly cordiality, had ever subsisted between, 
us ; and the recollection of Florentia's warnings 
touching the enmity of Father John had so long 
rankled in my heart, that I could not but invo- 
luntarily refer to the same origin the misunder- 
standing described by Mr. Butler, as existing be- 
tween his lordship, my brother and sister. I knew 
that the latter was my friend, and had reason to 
suspect that the former was my enemy ; and my 
only object m seeking an interview was to obtain 
the desired intelligence respecting Florentia, and 
some insight into the general state of our family 
aftairs. Although my poor father had publicly 
announced my disinheritance, I had claims on 
the Maldyn property, which though slight 
were inalienable. 

" Meanwhile my friend Colonel Manningfield, 
having noticed during dinner the depression of 
my spirits, renounced his intention of passing the 
evening at the Opera, in order to bear me com- 



THE OPERA. 123 

pany ; while I, finding it doubly irksome to en- 
dure his restless flow of spirits, proposed in my 
turn that we should visit the King's Theatre 
together ; — the noise and animation of a place of 
public resort are at all times less oppressive to the 
feehngs than the vivacity of a single companion. 
On our way to the Opera^ IVIanningfield casually 
announced that he was in possession, for that even- 
ing, of the box of his sister, Mrs. Fitzgerald ; and 
as we were making our way leisurely along the 
passages of the theatre, his eyes became directed 
towards the names of their female proprietors 
which, according to the English custom, are 
affixed above each several door. ' Lady Abbots- 
court ?' he exclauned — reading aloud, and point- 
ing out one of these superscriptions to my notice ; 
' Maldyn I you never told me that your brother 
had married during your absence ? — I suspect you 
have this morning been introduced to the bride ; 
and that your imusual melancholy arises from 
the loss of your prospects of inheritance — 
eh ! my dear fellow ? Must you subside for 
G 2 



124 THE OPERA. 

the remainder of your days into the beggarly 
obscurity of a younger brother's destiny ? — Come 

come ! After all, you may as well return with 

me to Bengal, and pursue your way towards a 
yard of red ribbon, and a liver-complaint. A 
quelque chose malheur est ho7i ; you have lost 
your estate and the king has gained a soldier. 
But tell me, is your new sister-in-law pretty, 
agreeable^ fascinating ; and if so, cannot we pre- 
sent ourselves in Lady Abbotscourt's box, in- 
stead of climbing up into my less fashionable 
sister's attic altitudes ?' 

" However reluctant to acknowledge my total 
and almost suspicious ignorance of the domestic 
position of my nearest relatives, I was now obliged 
to confess that till that moment I was wholly 
unaware of my brother's marriage. 

*' ' Come then,' cried the volatile Mamiingfield, 
*■ since we are not privileged to obtain a sight of 
this fair unknown by the commonplace method 
of turning the handle of a door, let us hasten to 
acquaint ourselves at a respectful distance, whether 



THE OPERA, 



the house of Maldyn derives any accession of 
beauty from this mysterious alliance, VoyoJis I 
her ladyshij^s box is situated next to that of my 
beautiful friend the Duchess of Cardigan. Come 
with me into the pit ; and I will point out your 
sister-in-law to you in a moment.' 

" Mechanically I followed his directions ; and 
in a few moments found myself standing in the 
lobby beneath; while IManningfield, directing his 
glass from tier to tier, at length discovered the 
object of our curiosity. 

" ' There !' whispered he, fixing his eyes as he 
spoke on a lovely woman, magnificently but fan- 
tastically arrayed. ' The lady in the purple 
dress with her hair drawn back from her ivory 
forehead, is the Duchess of Cardigan ; and the 
beautiful creature in the box to her left must 
consequently be the new Lady Abbotscourt.'' 

" * Percy,' he continued, addressing a fashion- 
able young man who stood near, ' you who are the 
court calendar of this breathing world, reveal to 
us the name of yonder charmer in the diamond 
tiara T 



126 THE OPERA. 

" « Talking to Russell of the Guards ? Is it 
possible that you do not know Lady Abbots- 
court ? — the ascendant star of fashion — the ' 

" I heard no more ! — Judge, Adrian,— judge 
of my feelings on recognising in my brother'^s wife 
the features of — Katharine Darley ! "" 



THE OPERA. 127 



CHAPTER VII. 



The sweetest things turn sourest hy their deeds. 
Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds, i 

Shakspeare. 



'' My first emotion on recovering from the shock 
of this discovery, was gratitude for the chance 
which had prevented me from visiting my bro- 
ther's residence, and finding myself unexpectedly 
in the presence of his wife : my second arose from 
the possibility — the remote chance — that this new 
connexion between the Darley and Maldyn fa- 
milies might reveal to me some favourable change 
of feeling on the part of Lady Cecil, or even some 
explanation of her antecedent conduct. But the 



128 THE OPERA. 

last, and best, and only pleasing certainty sug- 
gested by the marriage of Lord Abbotscourt, was 
a persuasion of its fatal influence on my father's 
mind. I felt assured that it was my brother's un- 
accountable renouncement of his family princi- 
ples, and not my own, which had hurried our 
mortified parent into the grave. 

" But how to account for that renouncement — 
that sudden change ? My brother, the most 
bigoted member of the church of Rome, — opposed 
almost unto treason, to the representatives of 
English sovereignty in his native land — my bro- 
ther, to espouse the offspring of a man of the 
high church, and high Tory school, such as Lord 
Templeton ! — It was incomprehensible ! — Far bet- 
ter could I understand the motives of the Darley 
family in sanctioning this strange alliance, and 
marking a due distinction between the Catholic 
Lord Abbotscourt, with an estate of twenty thou- 
sand a-year, and the Catholic Randolph Maldyn, 
his younger and disinherited brother ; and with 
respect to Lady Katharine herself, I doubted not 



THE OPERA. 129 

that her own inclination to the match, had been 
in no small degree excited by the triumphant su- 
premacy it must afford over myself. 

'•At first I was puzzled to decide whether my 
brother would affect to maintain his resentment 
towards me, on the original grounds of my having 
sought an alliance with the abhorred family of 
Templeton ; and whether the offences imputed 
by his agent to AVrottesley and Florentia, had 
any reference to myself. In this uncertainty of 
the state of his disposition, I felt reluctant to 
address him in a tone of brotherly affection ; and 
by way of ascertaining the character of his in- 
tentions, contented myself with leaving my card 
at his residence on the following dav. 

" The formal announcement of my arrival in 
England produced, however, no result; and 
even when repeated, to prevent the possibility of 
mistake, Lord Abbotscourt deigned not to take 
the slightest notice of my visit. I had unfortu- 
nately no family connexions in London, whose 
interposition could prociu'c me the information I 
g2 



130 THE OPEKA. 

sought, without the humiliation of a further 
appeal to my ungracious relative ; and it there- 
fore became necessary to address myself to 
him by letter. But to my inquiries respecting 
Florentia's present abode, no answer was vouch- 
safed. 

" I had already placed my friend, Manning- 
field, in my confidence ; and now besought his 
advice respecting the further measures to be 
taken. 

" ' I have little doubt,' was his reply, ' that 
Lord Abbotscourf s amiable wife is the origin of 
the mischief, and that she has been the evil ge- 
nius of yoiu: destiny throughout its changes. But 
what is to be done ? I cannot carry a hostile 
message between brother and sister, any more 
than between brother and brother; and pacific 
overtures seem out of the question. What say 
you to addressing the lady yourself, and on neu- 
tral ground ? — Let us retiu^n to-night to the Opera, 
and if you have courage to enter her box, she 
cannot refuse to answer your questions. Or, shall 



THE OPERA. 131 

I accept the introduction proffered me by my 
friend, Sir Henry Percy, and act as your ambas- 
sador extraordinary ? '' 

'- ' Perhaps,' said I, ' it will be better to trust 
to my own eloquence in an affair of so much deli- 
cacy. This artful woman would never forgive me 
for having confided to a third person, a family 
feud of so peculiar and complicated a nature. 
But the Opera is too public a spot to provoke the 
scene which may ensue between us.^ 

'''No, no!' cried Manningfield. ' Artful 
women are never provoked into scenes. This 
sister-in-law of yours has too much self-posses- 
sion to be betrayed into hysterics; nor have you 
the least chance of exciting so much as a paltry 
fainting-fit, unless with a view to rouse your 
brother's indignation against you. But fear no- 
thing on that score : I have already ascertained 
that Lord Abbotscourt never makes his appear- 
ance at the Opera."* 

" I still demurred; but the irritation pro- 
duced by my anxiety respecting Florentia, even- 



132 THE OPERA. 

tually determined me to hazard the attempt. On 
the following Saturday, having secured for my 
use an opposite box, from which I could inspect 
that of Lady A., and ascertain the propitious 
moment for intrusion, I took my seat at an early 
hour ; and had soon the satisfaction of noting 
her ladyship's entrance, accompanied only by a 
beautiful boy, of about three years old. Seating 
him on her knee, she caressed him with such an 
air of maternal tenderness, and exerted herself so 
earnestly for his amusement, that but for the 
certainty that her union with my brother was 
scarcely of a year's standing, I should have be- 
lieved him her own. Such a witness was at least 
no obstacle to my purpose ; and summoning all 
my courage, I prepared myself to meet unmoved 
her utmost scorn and indignation ; and, accord- 
ingly, desired the box-keeper to admit me to her 
presence. 

'' Mistaking me for one of the intimates she was 
accustomed to welcome on such occasions. Lady 
Abbotscourt turned courteously towards the door, 



THE OPERA. 133 

as I stepped beyond the crimson curtain ; when, 
perceiving that the darkness of the box prevented 
her from recognising the intruder, I strove that 
my voice should announce me, by uttering a few 
cold words of salutation. But there was neither 
indignation nor scorn — neither artifice nor dissi- 
mulation — in the start of terror and suppressed 
shriek with which she marked her consciousness 
of my presence, or in the rigid immobility into 
which she subsided on my proceeding to address 
her. In the agony of her trepidation, she even 
strained the child by which she was accompanied 
closely to her bosom, as if in the belief that its 
innocence would protect her from some actual 
danger. 

" ' Do not imagine. Lady Abbotscourt,' said I, 
with the view of reassuring her, ' that I am 
here to upbraid or molest you. My brother de- 
clines all intercourse with me; and I have no 
means of acquainting myself with the welfare of a 
brother and sister, who I trust are more kindly 



134 THE OPERA. 

disposed towards me, unless through your inter- 
position.' 

" Instead of uttering a word in reply to this 
address. Lady Abbotscourt grew paler and paler, 
and was so evidently on the verge of insensibility, 
that pity took place of disgust in my bosom. Her 
respiration was impeded, and the tears began to 
steal through her half-closed eyelids ; yet she 
attempted not to withdraw herself from public 
observation — a proof that her emotion was un- 
feigned and all-absorbing. 

" ' Katharine ! ' said I, compassionating her 
distress, ' we were once friends. Speak to me, 
I conjure you. Forget, for a moment, how deeply 
you have plotted against my peace — forget my 
widowed pillow — forget your sister's injuries and 
my own — forget every evil thought you have 
cherished against me — forget my sentence of ba- 
nishment — my alienation from my father's death- 
bed ; — and tell me where I may find the friends 
whose arms are yet open to embrace me. Where 
is Florentia Maldyn ? ' 



THE OPERA. 135 

^' Still she replied not ! — Gasping for breath, 
and bewildered beyond all recovery of her self-pos- 
session, she seized my hand, and by her inco- 
herent expressions of tenderness, betrayed at once 
that she was guiltless of all participation in my 
brother's unkindness, and that she had been 
kept in ignorance of my arrival in England. 

'' ' You do well to hate me,' cried she, among a 
thousand other exclamations equally inexplicable, 
' for I have injured you beyond your worst sus- 
picions. You first excited my tenderness, Ran- 
dolph, by the rash warmth of your professions, — 
you deserted me, — scorned me, — transferred be- 
fore my eyes your affections to another. Could 
I bear this, — could I witness your mutual hap- 
piness without attempting to avenge my own 
cause ? Randolph ! while my heart bled for 
every pang inflicted on yourself, I ceased not 
from my task of vengeance ! I deprived you of 
your wife, your child, your country, your birth- 
right. I drove you into exile, — 1 rendered you 
hateful to her who loved you, — I provoked your 



136 THE OPERA. 

father's curse, — I wedded with one who was loath- 
some to me, only to obtain a mastery over your 
destiny. I have it, — I hold it, — I have loved, 
and I can now abhor, as never earthly woman 
loved or hated. But do not accuse me. It is 
you who have done this ; it is you who have in- 
stigated all my errors, all my crimes ; you alone 
are accountable, — and upon your own head, and 
the heads of all who are dear to you, has the 
measure of retribution fallen. Amid the flush of 
my worldly prosperity, dearest Randolph, my 
heart is broken, and my soul accursed ; and you 
alone must bear the penalty of both."* 

'•Awed by the concentration of voice and almost 
maniacal vehemence v,ith which Lady Abbots- 
court gave utterance to these terrible confessions, 
I sank into a chair ; while the child — the boy — 
whom she had now removed from her bosom, in- 
voluntarily betrayed his alarm by burying his 
little face in the folds of her dress. But no sooner 
was she sensible of his terrors, than she snatched 
him into her arms, and covering him with kisses, 



THE OPERA. 137 

wept aloud ; till at length the reality of her emo- 
tions so far wrought upon my commiseration, 
that I advanced towards her, and would have 
taken her hand. Deride my weakness, Adrian, 
if you will; but I own that the sight of Lady 
Abbotscourt's tears obliterated from my mind all 
remembrance of my own injuries. Yes ! I ad- 
vanced towards her, and would even have taken 
her hand. 

" ' Go — go !"" she faltered incoherently, repel- 
ling the attempt ; * the time is past for recon- 
ciliation ; a gulph, an eternal gulph is placed be- 
tween us ! The hatred of the betrayer for the 
betrayed, no less than the horrible relationship in 
which we stand, condemns uc to perpetual estrange- 
ment. Go ! Randolph Maldyn, go ! it will not 
lessen the measure of your brother's detestation 
to know that we have exchanged even these sen- 
tences of mutual upbraiding ; Lord Abbotscourt 
has betrayed some discernment in seeking to pre- 
vent all further intercourse between us ; although 



138 THE OPERA. 

Others might have scrupled to expose the detected 
weakness of a wife.' 

*' A new light broke in upon my mind as she 
uttered these words. My brother^s want of com- 
mon courtesy towards me might, indeed, proceed 
from his detection of Lady Abbotscourf s fatal 
partiahty ; and I could almost forgive the abhor- 
rence, which a man of his intemperate passions 
must necessarily conceive under such circum- 
stances. His jealousy was far more excusable 
to my feelings than the unbrotherly coldness I 
had ascribed to him. 

" Hastily rising from the seat I had usurped, as 
this new view of his conduct presented itself, I 
obeyed the injunctions of the unhappy woman 
before me, and bade her a hurried farewell ; re- 
solving to seek some other mode of acquainting 
myself with the situation of my family. I own 
I was touched when, as I quitted the box, the 
child by whom Lady Abbotscourt was accom- 
panied, raising its innocent face from her shoulder. 



THE OPERA. 139 

as she bowed haughtily at parting, greeted me 
"with a smile of the gentlest interest, and uttered 
a few infantine words of adieu. But when I had 
quitted the presence of his patroness, I forgot 
even his ingratiating countenance and courtesy, in 
my regret that I had not found courage to utter 
the name of Cecil, and inform myself of her wel- 
fare. Although it was her pleasure to reject the 
hallowed bonds by which we were once united, 
and to become towards me as a stranger, / could 
not forget that for twelve happy months she had 
pillowed her head on my bosom, — had loved me, 
had laboured for me with more than the tender- 
ness of a wife. She had ceased to be mine, in- 
deed, but I felt that I was still hers, and hers for 
ever. 

" On the following day I was still more inchned 
to lament my false delicacy on this point, when 
rallied by Colonel Manningfield on the ill-success 
of my mission. « I do not wonder,' he observed, 
' that the Darley family should glory in loading 
you with acts of injury and oppression, since you 



140 THE OPERA. 

choose to repay them with such acquiescent pa- 
tience. A fevr ready tears have disarmed your 
best resolves ; and I have learned more of your 
family concerns frorn vulgar rumour, than you 
have been able to force — either by menaces or 
concessions — from the lips of your perverse sister- 
in-law/ 

'• I implored him to explain himself; hoping 
that these allusions might refer to Wrottesley 
and my sister. 

'^ ' Nay!' replied Colonel Manningfield, ' I 
have discovered only what all the world besides 
yourself appears to know ; that your brother's 
connexion with Lady Katharine Darley com- 
menced in his advocacy of your own cause. On 
arriving in Ireland, it appears that Mr. Maldyn 
and his younger brother were pleased to resent 
the conduct held towards you by Lord Temple- 
ton on occasion of your union with his daughter ; 
and that in the course of certain interviews of 
explanation which arose between them, his lord- 
ship had not only the art to persuade them he 



THE OPERA. 141 

had acted towards you with ahnost paternal in- 
dulgence, and had reluctantly profited by the 
informality of your marriage in compliance with 
the religious scruples recently conceived by Lady 
Cecil, but to engage Mr. Maldyn's attentions for 
her sister. Many persons believe that Temple- 
ton was prompted to this measure by a desire 
to thwart and harass your father; but the heir of 
Abbotscourt was also an object worthy the solici- 
tude of the flighty Lady Katharine Darley ; 
who, moved either by your brother's personal 
attractions, or by some other latent motive, 
spared no pains to subjugate the haughty young 
Catholic' 

'* Nor can I wonder at the success of the at- 
tempt. Katharine in her happier moods, is as 
captivating in her address as she is beautful in 
her person; while my brother's natural reserve 
places him at the mercy of any woman, who will 
be at the pains to exert herself for his attrac- 
tion. His vain self-confidence, too, must have 
tended to throw him off his guard. 



142 THE OPERA. 

^' * His vain self-confidence sufficed to persuade 
him that Lord Templeton's daughter was dying 
for love of him, and that it was his duty as a 
preuoG chevalier to sacrifice himself in her favour. 
But after having actually committed the rash 
act — after renouncing his indignation on your be- 
half — driving his old father to distraction — and 
perpetuating a breach with your brother and 
sister, I fancy, he has found occasion to recog- 
nize his error. Lord and Lady Abbotscourt are 
supposed to live on the most unhappy terms ; 
and since the birth of her little girl, he has been 
heard to reproach the mother with a degree of 
bitterness, which promises little for the future 
harmony of their menage. Were it not for the 
splendid fortune Lady Abbotscourt will inherit 
from her father, he has httle reason to exult in 
his inconsistent choice ; but while she is able to 
increase his rent-roll by estates to the amount of 
thirty thousand per annum, even the Papists of 
his party forgive him that base desertion of his 
principles^ which tends to augment the import- 
ance of their tribe.' 



THE OPERA. 143 

'^ ' Forty thousand per annum !" I exclaimed. 
' You forget, my dear Manningfield, that Cecil 
Darley's renunciation of her husband has sufficed 
to restore her to her father's favour ; and that wliile 
my disinheritance was the consequence of our 
transient connexion, it has wrought no evil in 
her destiny.' 

'•' ' Such, however, is not the opinion of her 
nearest relatives. Lord Templeton, it seems, 
had fully persuaded himself that after his suc- 
cess in invalidating her marriage, Lady Cecil 
would at some future period consent to reappear 
in society, and lend herself to the aggrandize- 
ment of her family, by forming some more pro- 
pitious connexion.' 

'• And may she not still fulfil these disinterested 
expectations "H 

" '^ Unfortunately for Lord Templeton's views, 
ho consented to employ Perceval's intervention, 
m order to disunite his favourite child and the 
son of his enemy ; and — ' 

" Perceval! who is Perceval ? 



144 THE OPERA. 

" ' How ? — during your domestication in Lady 
Templeton's family, had you the good fortune to 
escape your share of her brother-in-law's pious 
documentations ? — Perceval, my dear Maldyn, is 
the high-priest of the ultra-godly in the Dublin 
world ; and was precisely the person who drove 
your father to distraction by announcing (prema- 
turely as it now appears) your brother's conver- 
sion to the evangelical church. But with respect 
to his influence over Lady Cecil Darley, I can 
scarcely satisfy you. Nothing seems known in the 
London world, except that she has secluded her- 
self from all society since your departure for 
India, and is now residing in the strictest retire- 
ment at Havresbury, her father"'s mansion, in 
Derbyshire ; declining to join even its family cir- 
cle, and studiously shunning the observation of 
visitors.' 

"And Lord Templeton himself? 

" ' Is said to have received a severe shock on 
hearing that the dying words of Lord Abbots- 
court denounced a solemn curse on himself and 



THE OPERA. 145 

his children. Already stung to the quick by the 
circumstances of his removal from the lord- 
lieutenancy, it is probable that he would never 
have attempted a re-appearance on the stage of 
public life : but since the period of Lady Ka- 
tharine's marriage, and its fatal influence on the 
mind of his ancient adversary, he has not even 
visited the metropolis. Instead of pursuing his 
schemes for the establishment of his favourite 
daughter. Lady Templeton and himself appear to 
have renounced the aspirings of their worldly- 
vrise ambition; and to limit their pleasures within 
the park paling of Havresbury. 

" I did not venture to acknowledge to Colonel 
Manningfield the extent of my interest in these 
details ; nor the wild and visionary hopes they 
excited in my bosom. To know that Lord Tern- 
pleton's character had undergone so singular a 
revolution, that his political violence had been 
quelled by the decease of the opponent by whom 
it had been chiefly stunulated, while his views for 
Lady Cecil's aggrandizement were frustrated by 

VOL. I. H 



146 



THE OPERA. 



her obstinate self-seclusion, was sufficient to inspire 
me with a chimerical idea, that he might eventu- 
ally reconcile himself to our connexion. The 
family which had withdrawn its religious scruples 
in sanctioning the union of Lord Abbotscourt 
with Lady Katharine Darley, could no longer 
affect to regard with horror the difference of pro- 
fession existing between myself and Cecil ; and 
even the original obstacle, my poverty, although 
magnified by subsequent disinheritance, was in 
some degree removed by the lucrative successes 
of my military career. 

" With respect to her own disavowal of our 
union, I had ever flattered myself that an undue 
influence must have been exerted over her mind to 
produce such a miraculous change of feeling; 
and satisfied by the mode of life she had adopted, 
that she was guiltless of all intention, such as in 
the bitterness of my disappointment I had been 
tempted to impute to her, I trusted, — I hoped, — I 
even believed — that her feelings might secretly in- 
cline towards me. She was now relieved from 



THE OPERA. 147 

the mischievous influence of Lady Katharine's 
society, of Mr. PercevaFs arguments ; even Lord 
and Lady Templeton had experienced a change 
of position highly favourable to my views ; and 
at length I persuaded myself that I should only 
fulfil a duty towards all parties concerned, by 
taking some measure to ascertain the nature of 
Lady Cecil's sentiments. Recalling to mind the 
thousand precious instances of her former attach- 
ment, and connecting them with her present re- 
nouncement of the world and its pleasures, I pre- 
sumed to indulge the hope that she might have 
repented her concurrence in the hostile measures 
of her family, — that she might have learned to 
regret the man whose devotion had been so fondly 
her own, — that in her widowed solitude she might 
still regard me with interest, — with affection. 

" No sooner did this flattering delusion obtain 
possession of my mind, than I resolved to visit 
Havresbury, demand an interview of Lord Tem- 
pleton, and with the frankness of a soldier lay 
before him the state of my own feelings and my 
h2 



148 THE OPERA. 

own fortunes. I felt that he could not refuse me 
access to the presence of his daughter ; nor pursue 
a system of persecution towards one so closely 
connected with the son-in-law he had courted into 
his family. My father's death, and my brother's 
marriage, could not fail to secure me against all 
further injury from the house of Darley." 



THE OPERA. 149 



CHAPTER VIII. 



Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge. 
It could not move thus 1 

Hamlet. 



There was one inconsistency connected with 
Count Maldyn's personal revelations which, as it 
may be imagined, produced the most painful per- 
plexities in the mind of his son. The invalidity 
of his marriage, and the consequent illegitimacy 
of the child born to Lady Cecil Darley during 
his campaign in India, appeared incompatible 
with the tone in which he affected to treat the 
claim, s of Adrian ; and burning with anxiety to 



15a 



THE OPERA. 



reach that point of explanation in his father''s 
history which he still trusted would suffice to 
remove the stigma from his birth, and the strug- 
gling sense of shame from his soul, the young 
count had need of all his self command to ab- 
stain from those inquiries which must still further 
aggravate his father's distress. 

For some time, indeed, Count Maldyn appeared 
unequal to a renewal of his narration ; but at length 
the anxiety visible in the countenance of his son 
urged him to a desperate effort, and in a subdued 
voice, he resumed the course of his explanation. 

" It was not till I approached the confines of 
Havresbury Park,'' said he, " that I became 
fully sensible of the trying nature of the task I 
had undertaken. In the first happy season of 
my admittance into Lord Templeton's domestic 
circle, while I was sunning myself in the smiles 
of his beautiful daughters without a suspicion of 
the influence that both were likely to obtain over 
my future destiny, one of our favourite topics of 
discussion was the spot I was now about to visit. 



THE OPERA. 151 

Whenever I ventured to cite in their presence 
the beauties of my native country, the scenery 
of Avoca or Killarney, Cecil would smilingly 
stand forth as the champion of her own Derby- 
shire, and Katharme half angrily assert the un- 
rivalled charms of their English birth-place. 
Havresbury had been their residence during the 
life -time of their mother ; and the cold and repellent 
disposition of the present Lady Templeton soon 
gave them ample reason to lament their happy 
childhood and its home. But in the course of 
my still more intimate association with my dearest 
Cecil, — of my wedded year of mingled pain and 
rapture, — how familiar did I become with Havres- 
bury and its scenery ! How often, in the wretched- 
ness of our narrow home, did she cheer her spirits 
by affecting to initiate her half-savage Irish hus- 
band into the pohshed and peculiar habits of an 
English country residence ; how often, during the 
continuance of her father's harsh estrangement, and 
amid the heaviest privations of our penury, did she 
recur with regret to the condition of his poorest 



152 THE OPEPvA. 

tenants, and wish, with a melancholy smile, that 
Lord Templeton would vouchsafe us some humble 
tenement among the picturesque vallies of her 
native county ! — So familiar had her descriptions 
rendered me with all its scenery, that on ap- 
proaching Havresbury, I fancied my self returning 
to some long-lost home. As I recognised the 
various haunts her eloquence had formerly 
brought before my eyes, I felt as if gazing upon 
her face, or listening to her voice. It was like 
the re-perusal of a favourite page of poetry once 
known by heart ! 

" Yet every pleasing emotion, every sanguine 
anticipation, deserted me when I found myself on 
the threshold of the library in which, under the 
formal announcement of ' a gentleman on busi- 
ness," I was about to enter the presence of my 
father-in-law. I had prepared myself to en- 
counter with patience and forbearance any want 
of courtesy in his mode of reception ; and to in- 
vite, by my facility in overlooking his former 
misdoings, a gradual progression towards mutual 



THE OPEHA. 153 

reconciliation. I was almost willing to acknow- 
ledge mrjself the offender, rather than irritate 
him anew by compelling him to appear in the 
wrong. Summoning to my remembrance the 
lofty bearmg and supercilious countenance worn 
by Lord Templeton during our last interview, 
I advanced towards the table beside which he 
was seated. 

" His jfirst glance was one of mere indifference ; 
but the exclamation of surprise and sympathy 
which burst from my lips as I noted the altera- 
tion in his own person, revealed me to him in a 
moment. 

" ' Randolph Maldyn !' he exclaimed, clasping 
his withered hands together, and gazing piteously 
in my face, ' alive, in England ! — alas, what evil 
destiny has brought you hither "t ' 

" For many minutes I found it impossible to 
reply to this apostrophe. There was something 
in the tone of Lord Templeton's voice, and the 
change in his appearance, which touched me to 
the soul. It seemed as if the influence of my 
h3 



154 THE OPERA. 

father''s dying curse were already operating upon 
him ; as if the blight of a premature old age had 
dried up the current of his blood. On my de^ 
parture for India, I left him in all the vigour of 
manhood; stern, erect, florid, and portly. But 
his hair was now silvery white — his figure bowed 
by feebleness — ^his brow careworn and sallow — 
his voice tremulous, his eye dim ; an age of sor- 
row appeared to have rolled over his head ! As 
I said beforcj there was something irresistibly 
touching in his appearance ; and I could scarcely 
refrain from tears while, having seated myself 
unbidden beside him, I entered into a hurried 
explanation of my errand. 

'' It was some time before he attempted to utter 
a syllable, but sat concealing his face with his 
hands, as if unwilling to betray, in my presence, 
the extent of his embarrassment. At length 
he inquired, but with a countenance still averted, 
whether I was aware of Lord Abbotscourt's^junion 
with his daughter ; and in reply to the question, 
I acknowledged that it was from the sanction be- 



THE OPERA. 155 

Stowed by him on that very alliance I derived 
my chief encouragement to visit Havres- 
bury. 

" ' Would — would to Heaven !' he exclaimed, 
in a broken voice, ' that you had previously 
sought an interview with Katharine or her 
husband/ 

'* ' Lady Abbotscourt's demeanour towards me, 
during the short period I ventured to intrude 
upon her presence,' said I, ' was little calcu- 
lated to encourage my confidence. I know her 
to have been grievously my enemy durmg my 
ill-omened connexion with your lordship's fa- 
mily ; and have now learned from her own lips 
that she glories in the fact.' 

'' Lord Templeton seemed startled by this as- 
sertion ; and a thoughtful expression tempered 
the previous anguish of his countenance. ' But 
surely, IMr. Maldyn,' said he, attempting to 
recover his self-possession, — ' surely you did 
not announce to her the motives of your journey 
hither. Surely Katharine had not the cruelty 



156 THE OPERA. 

towards both yourself and me — to promote your 
^isit to this house of mournmg ?' 

" ' Agam too late!' I exclamied, claspmg my 
liands together, m sudden despair. ' My 
lord !— it is you who have done this ! — yoti, who 
condemned me to that banishment from my na- 
tive country, which alienated me from my fa- 
ther's death-bed and has admitted my return 
only to weep over the grave of my beloved 
Cecil. My lord ! my lord ! it is you who have 
done this.' 

" ' Mr. Maldyn,' rephed Lord Templeton, 
wearing in the venerable dignity of his grief a far 
more imposing air than had ever invested his 
person among the trappings of his viceroyalty, 
' I can forgive your violence — ay ! — and even 
your injustice; for I know that you loved my 
child— my dear child— my afflicted child. But 
spare me the fruitless misery of Hstening to the 
recapitulation of your wrongs. They have been 
bitterly repented — heavily atoned ; and nothing 
now remains for us but to bow with humble sub- 



THE OPERA. 157 

mission to the dispensation of the Ahnighty. 
"\Mien I was persuaded to insist on the illegality 
of your contract with my daughter, I knew not 
the motives of those who were so eager to prove 
its invalidity, nor the fervour of the attachment 
by which you were united. I was taught to be- 
lieve that the levity of your own character and 
the submissive docility of hers, would soon re- 
concile you to the separation, and incline you to 
seek elsewhere a more proportionate alliance ; I 
dreamed not — I guessed not that the curse of a 
broken heart was about to cleave to my house. 
Yet I ought to have been spared my present 
trial. It was the duty of Lord or Lady Abbots- 
court to acquaint you that liady Cecil Darley''s 
present state of mind is such as to forbid all pos- 
sibihty of your reunion.** 

'• Believing the afflicted father to refer to the 
religious scruples which had been described to 
me as originating in the influence of Mr. Per- 
cival's peculiar opinions, I assured him that I 
was fully aware I had difficulties to contend with. 



1 58 THE OPERA. 

and was prepared to wait with patience some fa- 
vourable turn in the mind of his daughter, ere I 
profited by his sanction to renew my claims upon 
her hand. Lord Templeton, still more surprised 
and distressed by this declaration, persisted in 
assuring me that the case was hopeless. ' You 
cannot,' said he, ' have been made acquainted 
with the full extent of the evil.' 

" Again I represented that time might do much 
in such a case ; that time and my own assiduous 
attentions might counteract the effect of her early 
vexations. ' Have I, my lord,' I inquired with 
increasing eagerness, ' have I your permission to 
make the attempt ?' 

" Lord Templeton shook his head mournfully. 

" ' If you have courage to see her,' was his re- 
ply, ' I will myself conduct you to her presence. 
One moment's interview will suffice to satisfy you 
of the groundlessness of your expectations.' 

" Rising from the library table beside which we 
were sitting, but with an air of reluctance and 
mortification visible in his countenance which I 



THE OPERA. 159 

.attributed to his secret opposition to my views, 
the old man motioned me to follow him, and 
led me through a splendid suite of apartments 
and a succession of intricate passages, towards a 
narrow staircase. 

" ' Would it not be better,' I whispered, my 
whole frame trembling with emotion at the idea 
of finding myself in Lady CeciFs presence, ' to 
announce our visit ? — Shall we not startle her by 
this intrusion ? ' 

'' But instead of replying to my interrogation, 
Lord Templeton took a key from his pocket, and 
carefully unlocked a door in the corridor we were 
traversing. — I started ! — Was I about to visit a 
prisoner ? — or did his lordship entertain a design 
against my own hberty ? 

" ' Wallis ! ' said he, in a low subdued tone, to 
an elderly woman employed in some household 
occupation in the chamber we now entered, ' Is 
she asleep — can we be admitted ? ' 

" The woman moved on tiptoe towards an inner 
room, and having opened the door and surveyed 



160 THE OPERA 

the interior with an air of anxiety, nodded an 
affirmative ; when Lord Templeton, taking me 
by the arm as if to support his own feeble frame, 
led me into the chamber of his unfortunate 
daughter. — Adrian ! an ominous chill palsied my 
heart as I approached that fatal spot. 

'•It was a large airy chamber, destitute of all 
furniture but a bed and a few chairs ; and for a 
moment I was unable to discern the person of its 
inmate. But the gratings affixed to its lofty 
windows, and the presence of a man of harsh and 
peculiar aspect, immediately revealed to me the 
origin of its desolate nakedness: — I was standing 
in the retreat of a maniac ! 

" ' Let us leave this place !' I faltered, stag- 
gering towards the wall ; while Lord Templeton, 
with clasped hands and rigid features, stood by 
like a person who has inured himself to some ha- 
bitual penance. But at that moment the sound 
of my voice penetrated the ears, the heart, the 
mind, of the wretched sufferer ; and rising from 
the obscure corner into which she was cowering 



THE OPERA. 161 

in the attitude of some irrational being coiled up 
for repose, she crept stealthily towards us, and 
gradually assumed something of a human atti- 
tude : — as she raised herself to confront us, her 
long hair, unbraided and uncurled, fell like a veil 
round her person till its tresses swept the floor. 
Involuntarily I recoiled as she advanced, for it 
seemed as if the grave were giving up its dead ; 
the fixed glare of her glassy blue eyes, and the 
inexpressive immobility of her features, were 
corselike and terrific. But her attendant attri- 
buting my retreat to personal fear, now lifted up 
his hand forbiddingly to arrest her approach; 
assuring me in the harsh, callous tone of his call- 
ing, that ' she was quite harmless."' Judge of 
my anguish, Adrian, on hearing such words 
uttered in her unconscious presence, without a 
chance that her feelings should be wounded by 
the announcement. 

''Unaccustomed, however, to the afflicting spec- 
tacle. I could not forbear commanding the fellow 
to silence ; and once more the sound of my voice 



162 



THE OPERA. 



produced a startling effect upon the unhappy 
being before me. She drew herself up as if to 
listen; a gradual hectic overspread her face, 
which had previously worn the paleness and opa- 
city of death ; and at length a smile, a wild and 
unnatural smile, broke over her features. 

" ' Do you hear him, Katherine ?' — said she, in 
a hollow voice. ' I told you he would come 
again ; I always said he would come again, and 
bring me food and clothes. He was half famished 
when we parted ; — and there was scarcely straw 
for our bed ; — and my father refused us bread. 
What could he do, poor fellow ? — He went out 
to beg, Katherine — to beg for his wife and child; 
but I always said he would come again.' 

'' Compassionating Lord Templeton's emotion, 
the attendant — the /ceepe?' —approached Lady 
Cecil with the view of terrifying her into silence. 
" ' Molest her at your peril !' I exclaimed, while 
a burst of tears relieved my overcharged feelings. 

*' ' There again !' cried the maniac, with an 
incoherent laugh ; ' said I not that my true 



THE OPERA. 163 

champion would one day appear, and relieve me 
from my house of bondage, and bring my father 
and his cruelties to shame?' 

" ' Maldyn !' faltered the agonized Templeton, 

* you have satisfied yourself of her condition ; 
let us quit this dreadful spot!' 

" ' I cannot leave her ! ' I exclaimed, half 
frantic with the excitement of the moment. 

* You once compelled us to part, and leaving 
her prosperous and at ease, I was quiescent. But 
I will not abandon her in this hour of affliction. 
Resign her to my care ; I will watch over her, 
tend her, soothe her — ay ! and love her with all 
the tenderness I once vowed to her in the pre- 
sence of God. Give her to me again, Lord 
Templeton, — and all her former sacrifices shall be 
repaid by my devotion to her now in the day of 
her humiliation.' 

'« ' The gentleman does not know what he un- 
dertakes,' interrupted the keeper, with a con- 
temptuous laugh ; and he began to enter into 
a thousand disgusting details respecting his un- 



164 THE OPERA. 

fortunate charge. At that moment Lady Cecil 
herself invokmtarily justified his accusations of 
her occasional violence by rushing upon him in 
order to silence his statement; hut just as her 
uplifted arm was about to fall on his head, a 
single glance of his eye sufficed to awe her 
into tranquiUity: — again she stood pale and 
trembling before him. 

'' ' Fear nothing,' said I, addressing her in a 
soothing voice ; ' no one shall touch you — no 
one annoy you." 

" A sort of hissing, gibbering laugh mingled 
with her reply. 

" ' You do not know that man ; you do not 
know the ways of this place. See !' she whis- 
pered, disentangling her arm, still fair and lovely, 
from the long tresses in which it was enveloped ; 
' look at these bruises — these stripes. They care 
not how they beat me, so they can prevent my 
crossing the sea to tell Randolph I am still his 
wife. First came Katherine with her malignant 
slanders against him, piercing my heart while she 



THE OPERA. 165 

smiled in my face; — then came Perceval, the 
priest of Baal, with his menaces of hell and judg- 
ment ; — and my father with his scornful pride, 
and Lady Templeton with her cold austerity ; — 
and they took my babe from my bosom, and put 
a fiend into its place ; and I nourished the imp 
on my Hfe's blood till it grew into yonder mon- 
ster. — They tell me it was Randolph sent it hither 
to punish me for having listened to his enemies ! — 
But Randolph was never stern and cruel like the 
rest of them ; and just now I seemed to hear his 
voice, and I hoped he was coming to set me 
free.' 

'^ ' I am — I am come to set you free !' I ex- 
claimed, clasping the unhappy creature in my 
arms. ' Do you not know me, Cecil ! Do you 
not recognize your husband ?' 

'' ' I have no husband !' she answered, trying 
to disengage herself from my embrace. ' Once 
I was married to Randolph Maldyn ; but Pro- 
phet Perceval said that such marriages were sin- 
ful in the sight of Heaven — and so they brought 



166 THE OPERA. 

me to this prison for the remainder of my days ; 
and now they beat me and starve me as a punish- 
ment for — but you are weeping ! — Why should 
you weep for poor Cecil ? — Katharine will mur- 
der you when she discovers that you pity me. 
Come closer, that I may hide you with my hair, 
and she will not find you/ 

" ' My beloved — my own — my only Cecil !' I 
exclaimed, again folding her to my bosom ; 
' Randolph is indeed come home to alleviate 
your sufferings ! Randolph is by your side — 
at your feet ! Look upon him — recognise him, 
dearest ! — and all will yet be well." 

'^ The unwonted tone of tenderness in which 
these words were pronounced appeared to touch 
anew that invisible chord which my voice had 
already caused to vibrate. She dragged me 
towards the window, and putting back her hair 
from her face, perused my features with the most 
searching earnestness. She uttered not a word ; — 
scarcely breathed ; — while, as she gazed upon my 
well-known lineaments, reminiscences of the past 



THE OPERA. 167 

gradually dawned upon her mind. At length 
tears came into her eyes, and rolled slowly over 
her wasted cheeks ; and placing her deathlike 
hand upon my forehead, she appeared to pro- 
nounce an inward benediction. Still she spoke 
not ; — and the vivid flush which for a moment had 
overspread her countenance subsided into a livid 
paleness doubly appalling. 

*' ' Place her on this chair ! lay her on the 
bed!' suddenly exclaimed her attendant, rush- 
ing towards her, as she was on the point of fall- 
ing to the ground. ^ Open the doors — the win- 
dow — give her air, or it will be too late ! — she is 
dying !^ cried he, applying his fingers to her 
pulse. But instead of obeying his commands, 
I hung over her recumbent figure, chafed her 
hands within my own, and imprinted on her 
quivering lips a thousand kisses of hallowed and 
agonized affection. The breath of life was de- 
parting from them ; but in that last tremendous 
struggle of nature, I saw that I was fully recog- 
nized. Her closing eyes were turned in tender- 



> -^v 



168 THE OPERA. 

ness upon me, and with a perfect restoration of 
every faculty. There needed no words to tell 
me that she knew me — that she loved me — that 
she would willingly live for my sake. — But it 
was not to be ! — A fatal spasm impeded the 
powers of life — the heart ceased to beat — a 
horrible sound sobbed from her throat. Why do 
I speak of this ? — She died, Adrian ! she died ! — 
Just when new hopes were dawning around us, 
the overwrought sensibilities of that delicate 
frame were snapt asunder. In a few minutes my 
arms encircled the breathless remains of my 
wife!"— 



THE OPERA. 169 



CHAPTER IX. 



Che lo spirito lasso 

Non poria mai 'n piu riposato porto, 

Ne 'n piu tranquilla fossa 

Fuggir la came travagliata, e I'ossa. 

Petrarca. 



" Were I to seek throughout the world a spot 
sanctified as if by the especial favour of Heaven, 
wherein to deposit those precious reliques," re- 
sumed Count Maldyn, after a pause, during 
which he appeared absorbed in a mental recapi- 
tulation of every circumstance connected with the 
fatal event, although too deeply abstracted to 
give utterance to the detail, " it would have been 
that very church of Havresbury, to which it was 

VOL. I. I 



170 THE OPERA. 

the pleasure of Lord Templeton that they shouli 
be consigned. Unwilling to draw the attention 
of the neighbourhood towards the unhappy des- 
tinies of his daughter, it was decided that her in- 
terment should be immediately solemnized in the 
most private and unostentatious manner, without 
even the attendance of his household or tenantry. 
For myself, I was too much overpowered in mind 
and body by the agitating scene in which I had 
recently borne a part, to be consulted on the sub- 
ject. In spite of Lord Templeton's remonstrances 
I persisted in occupying the chamber adjoining 
my Cecil's desolate retreat, till her remains should 
be removed to a last and more peaceful home ; 
and in the stillness of the night, when those who 
watched by her coffin were overtaken by the 
heaviness of sleep, I hung over it, — I communed 
with her, and breathed a vow I have held sacred, 
that no other wife, no other woman, should ever 
replace her in my bosom. 

V But on the evening preceding the ceremony, 
when the hirelings connected with its details be- 



THE OPERA. 171 

gan to pollute my solitude by investing it with 
the trappings of funereal array, I quitted the 
chamber — the house; and bending my steps 
across the park towards the valley where a spire 
rising above a grove of beautiful beeches revealed 
the position of the church of Havresbury, I 
attempted to render my eyes famihar with the 
fiiture resting-place of my beloved. 

" Situated within the confines of the park, upon 
a rocky knoll, at the foot of which a shallow 
brook ran murmuring towards the channel of the 
Derwent, the venerable structure was sheltered 
on the northern side by a grove of lofty trees, 
now enriched by their utmost luxuriance of sum- 
mer foliage. The paths leading to its boundaries, 
which were unfrequented as an ordinary village 
haunt, gave it the appearance of standing in a grassy 
field ; and all was softness and tranquillity around. 
At the extremity of the valley, the entrance towards 
a narrow defile through which the waters of the 
brook seemed to have forced a way, was marked 
by a barrier of cliffs half clothed with stunted 
i2 



172 THE OPERA. 

pines ; and beyond these, nothing was visible but 
the clear atmosphere and its floating summer 
clouds. There was not a sound nor a breath to 
interrupt the holy harmony of the scene. 

" With every thought and every feeling ab- 
sorbed by its auspicious loveliness, I stood beside 
the low stone wall separating the church-yard 
from the domain, contemplating the solemn an- 
tiquity of the little church, which stood an en- 
during and unbroken seal of the covenant between 
God and his people — an unviolated pledge of the 
stability of the Christian faith. To such a 
temple, even though devoted to the ritual of Pro- 
testant worship, I felt willing to bequeath the 
ashes of one who had imparted to a few short 
steps of my earthly pilgrimage the foretaste of a 
better land ; when, perceiving that its portal was 
still unclosed, I nerved my courage to enter and 
gaze on the gloomy cavern about to receive so 
precious a deposit. I conceived that some per- 
son connected with Lord Templeton's establish- 
ment had been stationed in the church to prevent 



THE OPERA. 173 

unprivileged intrusion ; but on reaching the 
chancel, above which a variety of monumental 
trophies, bearing the emblazonments of the Par- 
leys, proclaimed the vicinity of their mouldering 
remains, I was struck by the venerable figure of 
Lord Templeton himself, — kneeling beside the 
rails of the altar, — and praying aloud with un- 
controlled fervour, — that the cup of bitterness 
might pass away from him and from his race. 

" Unwilling to intrude on his devotions, I re- 
mained motionless till he rose and advanced 
towards the mouth of the family vault, already 
laid open for the ceremony of the morrow ; then 
slowly and reverently followed. 'My son!' 
said he, instantly recognizing his partner in 
affliction, and extending his hands affectionately 
towards me, ' we are well met here, in the pre- 
sence of the dead — in the house of God — in the 
mansion wherein I shall soon set up my rest. 
The worst sins of my mortal pilgrimage have 
been connected with you and yours; and me- 
thinks I could sleep more peacefully in yonder 



174 THE OPERA. 

desolate grave, were I to hear my forgiveness 
pronounced by the lips of a Maldyn. Randolph, 
your father breathed a solemn ciu-se on me and 
on my race ; — you have witnessed in part its con- 
summation ; — you have seen my young and inno- 
cent child bowed down to the dust — you will 
soon hear of my own departing struggle. Vouch- 
safe me the consolation, Randolph, of knowing 
that your enmity will not outlast that hour : pro- 
mise me that you will retvu-n hither and lay my 
grey head in the grave beside that of Cecil.' j 

" ' You have still a daughter. Lord Temple- 
ton,'' said I, sternly. 

'* ' I have still a son, if you do not spurn the 
title ; had Cecil been restored to me, she should 
have rendered it a distinction precious in your 
eyes. But her hour has struck — my own is ap- 
proaching; and fervently have I prayed, and 
earnestly do I trust, that in our destinies the 
judgment may be accomplished. Henceforward 
may the enmities of the houses of Maldyn and 
Darley subside into the holy charities of family 
union.' 



THE OrERA. 175 

" My heart and lips could not refuse to sanctify 
this prayer of peace and goodwill at such an hour 
— in such a spot ; — but an involuntary impulse 
whispered to me that an atonement might yet be 
demanded of a future generation. 

" As we returned together in mournful compa- 
nionship towards the house, Lord Templeton de- 
clared himself unequal to attend the ceremony 
of the morrow, and expressed his regret at my 
obstinate determination to be present. He even 
reminded me that the rites of the Protestant 
church could be but as a mockery in my sight. 

'' ' My lord !"* said I, with firmness, ' you have 
been pleased to declare that it was your intention 
to sanction my re-union with your daughter. 
Grievous has it been to me to restrain the ex- 
pression of my indignation against those by whom 
she was hastened to the grave ; do you, in turn, 
abstain from opposing my wishes, and permit 
me to supply your place in the funeral proces- 
sion.' 

" ' Be it as you will !' was his reply ; and in 



176 THE OPERA. 

the grey morning twilight I once more entered 
the little church of Havresbury, and beheld the 
stone of the sepulchre rolled back to receive the 
dead. But notwithstanding the precautions taken 
by Lord Templeton to render the solemnity pri- 
vate, the day and the hour were noted by many 
to whom the childhood of Cecil Darley had been 
endeared by her beauty and gracious disposition, 
and her maturity by a thousand acts of mercy 
and beneficence. Unbidden and undesired, the 
tenants had gathered together to follow her to 
the grave ; and many an honest tear was shed, 
and many a grey head uncovered, when one who 
had been dead to them for years was brought 
forth once more into the light of day on her 
passage to the tomb. 

" But there was one among the mourners assem- 
bled by that solemn rite, whose presence I as 
little anticipated as desired. Lady Abbotscourt, 
warned by express of the dissolution of her un- 
happy victim, had hastened down to Havresbury: 
and it was perhaps the expectation of her arrival 



THE OPERA. 177 

which. had instigated Lord Templeton''s anxiety 
that I should absent myself from the funeral 
service. I did not note her, indeed, among the 
muffled mourners by whom the aisle was crowded ; 
but on turning from the vault, Adrian, into which 
your mother's coffin had been lowered, my seared 
and dilated eyes encountered those of Katharine. 
Scarcely did I attempt to control the emotions 
of abhorrence with which her presence inspired 
me ; and I saw her shudder and conceal her 
face in her mother-in-law''s bosom, as she marked 
the ferocity of my glance ! 

" But with her and hers I had nothing now in 
common ; and hastening from the church door at 
the conclusion of the ceremony, was soon on my 
way to London. — Alas ! what new lessons of an- 
guish had been inflicted upon me during my short 
absence ! — Even the gay and thoughtless ]\Ian- 
ningfield was startled into sympathy on beholding 
my care-«'orn countenance, and listening to the 
tremulous tones of my voice ; and finding me bent 
upon an immediate departure for Naples, where, 
I 3 



178 THE OPERA. 

according to Lord Templeton's intelligence, I 
found that my brother and sister were settled for 
the winter, he would not suffer me to undertake 
the journey alone. His leave of absence extend- 
ing till the following spring, he had still several 
idle months at command ; and now kindly affected 
a sudden eagerness to make the tour of Italy, in 
order to become my companion. My health was 
indeed in a precarious condition ; and I had soon 
occasion to recognize the truth of Manningfleld's 
assertion, that I was not fit to travel without a 
companion. Never did I close my eyes for the 
night, but the afflicting scene at Havresbury rose 
before them in all the intensity of reality ; — 
again the incoherent laugh of Cecil rang in my 
ears — again her ghastly smile thrilled through 
my soul — again she seemed to point out to my 
commiseration the wounds and bruises by which 
she was disfigured. And in the paroxysm of dis- 
tress which followed these horrible visitations, I 
had often reason to acknowledge the value of the 
soothing counsel of a friend. Colonel Manning- 



THE OPERA. 179 

field, roused from his rest by my frantic exclama- 
tions, would listen patiently to the outpouring of 
my despair, and attempt to restore my reason by 
gentleness and expostulation. He was a kind 
comforter to me, Adrian, in all my affliction; 
but I had still a kinder and a better — even 
that Almighty Father whose hand is over all his 
children ! 

" It was no matter of surprise to me to learn, 
on arriving at Naples, that my brother and sister 
had quitted it ; for I had begun to beheve my- 
self environed by a spell of fatality ensuring the 
frustration of all my wishes, the disappointment 
of all my hopes. Manningfield had many friends 
among the English visitants ; and a near con- 
nexion attached to the mission, from whom I as- 
certained without difficulty that Mr. and Miss 
Maldyn had been many months resident in 
the city, where they associated chiefly with its 
ItaHan circles ; but that they were gone to pass 
the autumn and winter on the coast of La PugHa 
with the family of Prince Bagnagliori. It ap- 



180 THE OPERA. 

peared that Wrottesley had been scarcely visible 
to his countrymen, excepting in the public drives 
and walks ; for his sacred calling, and the infir- 
mity of his health, alike prohibited his participa- 
tion in scenes of ordinary dissipation : but Miss 
Maldyn had occasionally attracted public admira- 
tion by her appearance at St. Carlo with the 
Bagnaglioris. The intelligence I gained respect- 
ing them, though far from unsatisfactory, was 
not sufficiently detailed to allay the eagerness of 
my anxiety ; and being unwilling to deprive my 
friend of the gratification he had promised him- 
self in reviewing the city and its monuments, I 
succeeded in persuading Manningfleld, after a 
few days' sojourn at Naples, that my strength 
was sufficiently restored to admit of a solitary 
excursion. After obtaining his promise to rejoin 
me in the course of the autumn, I set off for 
Bajabella. 

" The chances of my eastern campaign had 
somewhat famiharized me with the wild and won- 
derful, — whether in scenery or its human popula- 



THE OPERA. 181 

tion ; yet I own I was strangely impressed by 
the savage simplicity of Calabria and La Puglia. 
Austere devotion, or rather the superstitious 
bigotry which usurps its place in ignorant minds, 
seemed to have affixed an iron limit to the 
perceptions of the people ; the humanized inha- 
bitants of our provinces in the east were incom- 
parably more advanced in civilization than these 
denizens of one of the loveliest kingdoms in 
Europe. But I forgot all my astonishment at 
their brutality in the surprise with which I gazed 
on the beauty of the land, on approaching its 
southern coast. My mind was scarcely susceptible 
of agreeable impressions. I looked upon the 
earth, and saw that it was good ; but what were 
to me its loveliness and fertility ? I hastened 
onward through its picturesque scenery, to re- 
fresh my eyes with the sight of those dear 
familiar faces, whose aspect, although it could 
not renew in me the love of life — might render 
the last stage of my pilgrimage less painful and 
less desolate. 



182 THE OPEKA. 

*^ The evening which brought me to Bajabella, 
Adrian, was bright with that unruffled and cloud- 
less serenity which imparts to Southern Italy a 
character of almost poetical fascination; and a 
climate justifying those pictures of pastoral exist- 
ence, which are estimated by the inhabitants of 
our less genial country as the exquisite creations 
of a Theocritus or a Virgil. The rude mountain 
roads by which I had penetrated to the coast 
were now exchanged for woodlands of the most 
romantic beauty ; where the dark and glossy 
evergreens of the south, the bay, arbutus, and 
ilex, were contrasted with the lighter verdure of 
the chestnut, and variegated masses of underwood; 
and it was on emerging from these shadowy 
groves, which seemed to lend reality to the 
idealisms of mythological fiction, that the Palazzo 
Bagnagliori, planted on a rocky eminence over- 
looking the waves of the Mediterranean, stood 
before me. Thrown out into prominent relief 
by the calm blue waters and calm blue sky 
against which its lofty outline was defined, I was 



THE OPERA. 183 

strongly impressed by the dignity of its Palladian 
architecture, and the magnificent style of the 
approach leading landward to the platform of 
rock on which it was erected. 

" Quincunxes of lofty trees were planted at 
regular intervals on either side the paved cause- 
way ; and within a mile of the grand entrance, 
these were interspersed, at corresponding inter- 
vals, with magnificent pedestals of marble, bearing 
colossal statues. 

" In this and other specimens of aristocratic 
residences in Italy, there exists a character of 
nobleness accordant no less with the beauty 
of the land, than with the mightiness of its 
ancient name ; but afibrding an almost ludicrous 
contrast to the humiliation of its present con- 
dition, and the debased nature of its population. 
Such palaces as those of Florence, such gardens 
as those of the Roman vDlas, although uncharac- 
teristic of a free and manly people, are at least 
worthy of the refined, the opulent, and the luxu- 
rious, the restorers and fosterers of ancient art ; 



184 THE OPERA. 

and only serve to exaggerate the tone of little- 
ness and the habits of meanness peculiar to the 
degraded nobles of modem Italy ; — those pigmies 
encaged in mockery among the temples of the 
Titans. The Palazzo Bagnagliori, for instance, 
was a structure worthy the throne of the Caesars ; 
but wholly unfitted to the revenues of an obscure 
Calabrian baron, incapable of maintaining among 
the squalid and impoverished vassalry of his do- 
mains, that feudal pomp and privilege, originally 
won by his ancestry in the fierce struggle of the 
Angevine wars. On a nearer inspection of its 
lofty facade and magnificent quadrangle, the de- 
features of time, and a general disregard to the 
decencies of civilized life, soon dispelled the 
illusion of its coup cTceil. An air of loneliness 
and dilapidation about its courts and corri- 
dors was almost as dispiriting as that of the 
dismantled castle of Abbotscourt ; while the little 
fishing town of Bajabella, sloping on terraces of 
the cliff towards the shore beneath, might have 
vied in its disorderly wretchedness with any 
village on the Maldyn estates. 



THE OPERA. 185 

'* But all this was far more in unison with 
the state of my own feelings, than the splen- 
dour I had at first anticipated. Having re- 
ceived no answer to the letter announcing to 
my brother and sister a visit from their long 
estranged and perhaps forgotten Randolph, and 
grown experienced in the lessons of adversity, I 
checked the warm emotions of my bosom lest 
they should be met with the coldness of worldly 
formalities, or perhaps be crushed at once by the 
still severer shock of mortal bereavement. — Every 
human thing seemed gradually deserting me ! — 
Had I yet a brother ? did Florentia still survive ? 

*' As we paused beneath the lofty portico wait- 
ing the arrival of the domestics so scantily pro- 
vided in the niggardly households of the Italian 
nobles, I succeeded in repressing the palpitation 
of my heart sufficiently to frame my inquiries 
touching the English family resident with the 
prince ; and contrived to follow the aged menial 
who presented himself, across a gigantic marble 
hall emulating the vestibule of some enchanted 



186 



THE OPEKA. 



castle. But when I found myself ascending a 
lofty staircase towards the suite of apartments 
described by the old porter as occupied by the 
* noble foreigners/ a sudden recollection flashed 
across my mind of my visit to Havresbury, — and 
my presentiments on the threshold of its fatal cell. 
— My heart grew sick ; — and as I clung to the 
gilded balustrade, my vague apprehensions were 
tranquillized by total insensibility." 



THE OPEEA. 187 



CHAPTER X. 



I have no home, no kin, 
Xo kind — not made like other creatures, or 
To share their sports or pleasures. 

The Deformed transformed. 



*' It was only from the tears shed upon my hand 
by the lovely woman who held it clasped in her 
own, that I knew myself— on recovering my be- 
wildered senses — to be in the presence of my 
sister. I was lying on the sofa of a lofty saloon ; 
where the uncertain light dispensed through the 
closed jalousies served to disguise the mouldering 
antiquity of its hangings, and the faded ghastli- 
ness of its frescoes. By my side knelt the gentle 
Florentia, — in silence and in tears, — and my 



188 THE OPERA. 

brother? I strained my dazzled eyes round 
the vast apartment in search of Wrottesley. 
Again my heart sunk within me as I dreaded to 
find myself alone with the sister I loved. 

" But no ! — he was there! — My brother was 
there ; and although I knew not how to interpret 
the emotion which kept him aloof from my couch, 
I felt that my own blood was throbbing in his 
veins, my oivn name attached to his destinies, and 
was satisfied that the call of nature would soon 
summon him to my arms. 

'' But was it indeed the companion of my child- 
hood who turned his cadaverous face from the 
wall against which he had been leaning, when I 
faltered out the name of Wrottesley, and ex- 
tended my hands imploringly towards him ? — 
Pale, attenuated, bowed by the feebleness of pre- 
mature decay, the wasted figure which obeyed 
my call was clothed in an ecclesiastical robe ; and 
had acquired a foreign air which I could not im- 
mediately reconcile with those impulses of con- 
sanguinity so warm within my own bosom. 



THE OPERA. 189 

" ' Speak, dearest Wrottesley !' I exclaimed ; 
'^ speakj that I may know my brother's voice.' 
But alas ! the hoarse and hollow tones which re- 
plied to my eager invocation, were scarcely less 
changed than his outward aspect. 

" ' Till this day,** interrupted Florentia, com- 
passionating our mutual distress, ^ we knew not 
of your coming ; or I should have gone forward 
to meet you by the way. But the communication 
with this secluded place is uncertain ; — so uncer- 
tain, that it is only a few days since we first heard 
of your arrival in Ireland.' 

" ' We believed you — we hoped you to be still 
in India,"* said my brother, striving to recover his 
composure ; * for alas ! there was ample reason 
to suppose you might have already ceased to 
exist. Three years have elapsed since we were 
comforted by the sight of your hand-writing ; and 
the disastrous chances of the late war, though 
known to us only through the newspapers, were 
such as to justify a gloomy view of the case. But 
it is now many months since even these reached 



190 THE OPERA. 

our hands ; and I had begun to renounce all ex- 
pectation of meeting my brother on this side the 
grave.'' 

" ' Do not sadden our re-union by painful 
retrospects/ said Florentia. ' Let us remem- 
ber only that it is five years since we parted ; 
but that we have met, and I trust to part no 
more. We may yet live for each other and be 
happy.' 

''The word ' happy' sounded gratingly on 
my ear ; — even with the hands of my dear Flo- 
rentia and Wrottesley united in my own. ^ My 
first steps on the path of life,"" was my involun- 
tary reply, ' have been appointed in a rugged 
career. Many are the scars and heavy the weari- 
ness it has left ; 1 may live to become resigned, 
Florentia, but I cannot again be happy? 

^' ' My brother,' said Wrottesley, in the same 
low sepulchral voice, and devoutly crossing him- 
self, ' in resignation to the will of Heaven, hes our 
best happiness, our best virtue. Amid the crowd 
of cities, we acquire other aspirations and wider 



THE OPERA. 191 

ambition ; — ^but their result is emptiness and 
strife." 

" There was something in the solemnity of 
Wrottesley's 'manner, which — although myself 
labouring under depression of spirit — seemed un- 
natural and oppressive. His youth — the buoyancy 
of disposition, for which he had been formerly so 
remarkable, seemed blighted by some preterna- 
tural operation ; — and the feebleness of his frame 
to have arisen less from disease than from the 
withering influence of mental anguish, /had 
suffered more than falls to the lot of most men ;— 
had braved the hard life of a soldier, the perils 
of an unwholesome climate; had endured the 
pangs of absence, of exile, the galling sense of 
injury, — the loss of all I loved, — the triumph of 
my enemies. My hair was grizzled, and my 
cheek furrowed by the iron which had entered 
into my soul ! But Wrottesley's locks, where 
they had escaped the tonsure of his sacred calling, 
"were still black as jet, and clung closely to the 
clammy brow whose sallow and hollow tern- 



192 THE OPERA. 

pies they overhung; — and his lips, though 
parched with fever, retained even in their mourn- 
ful rigidity a character of extreme yoiithfulness. 
His countenance was that which we attribute to 
the fallen father of mankind; — still young, still 
beautiful, but withering beneath the conscious- 
ness of sin. It was a relief to me when he 
quitted the room, that I might converse with my 
sister unrestrained by his presence. 

"Much indeed had I to relate, and much to 
inquire : — my father^s death-bed — Lord Abbots- 
court^s marriage — my own most bitter fortunes ; 
— what themes for sorrow, for interest, for accusa- 
tion ! And yet it seemed unfair to repress the 
impulses of delight which beamed on my sister'*s 
countenance at this unexpected meeting with her 
favourite brother, by reverting to our common 
sources of affliction. I even forbore to question 
her concerning Wrottesley^s prospects and condi- 
tion ; and gave my whole attention to her ani- 
mated expressions of joy, and anticipations of 
future comfort in my society. 



THE OPERA. 193 

" ' Why should we not settle in Italy ? We are 
not rich, but wq have enough for happiness, my 
dear Randolph,' she exclaimed. ' This land is 
a land of plenteousness ; and surely Bajabella 
and ils enchanting landscapes are preferable to 
the dreariness of Abbotscourt. The peculiarities 
of my father's opinions fortunately prevented 
my forming connexions in my native country, 
such as might cause me to regret Ireland ; and 
as to my poor brother, I am persuaded he has 
renounced all interest in his birth-place. It is 
long since he has permitted me to name either 
his home or family in his presence.' 

" ' But the Bagnagliori ; — / cannot intrude 
into the household of your Italian friends ?"" 

" ' You do not know the habits of this 
country,' said Florentia, smiling at my scruple. 
' We are only visiters a la mode cC Italic. These 
apartments are our own for the time being ; and 
although I doubt not you will find in Princess 
Bagnagliori and her daughter Dorothea agreeable 

VOL. I. K 



194 THE OPERA. 

friends and acquaintance, you are to consider 
yourself as Wrottesley's guest and inmate.'' 

" These terms did but increase my satisfaction 
at finding my family settled in seclusion, instead of 
amid the tumult and dissipation of Naples ; and 
I soon felt at home, and capable of enjoying those 
sisterly attentions on the part of Florentia, and 
that spontaneous interest on the part of my 
brother, which nothing but close kindred can 
originate. I had been three days an inmate of 
the palace, had visited all Florentia's pensioners 
and proteges in Bajabella, and wandered with 
poor Wrottesley among his favovirite haunts along 
the coast, before I even beheld the venerable 
princess and my sister^s friend Dorothea. At 
length, having left us ample time for our family 
colloquies and revelations, they complimented 
my arrival by a visit of etiquette to Florentia ; 
and never had I found so strong an occasion to 
mark the peculiarities of our national character, 
contrasted with those of continental nations, as 



THE OPERA. 195 

in replying to the harassing interrogations of the 
good old lady. Her inquiries extended to the 
most delicate subjects ; and a thousand questions 
which, while alone with my sister, had trembled 
on my tongue ere I gave them utterance, were 
asked, and answered, and forgotten with easy in- 
difference by her garrulous curiosity. ' Did I 
intend to return to India ? — to settle in Italy ? 
— to renounce my profession or choose another ? 
— was I a good Catholic and a loyal subject ? — 
married or single ? — a father or chUdless ?** It 
was in vain that Florentia attempted to stop the 
current of her old friend's volubility. ' It was 
strange,"* the princess kept repeating, ' that nei- 
ther the Count Abbotscourt nor Wrottesley had 
mentioned to her the existence of a third brother, 
during their first sojourn in Italy ; so much as she 
had talked to them of their country and relatives, 
and so much as they had said in their turn of 
the charms and excellencies of the amiable Fio- 
renza.' And it was actually from my sister's 
answers to her inquisitive guest, that I discovered 
k2 



196 THE OPERA. 

how much treachery had been exercised to seduce 
Wrottesley from his brotherly affection towards 
me ; that our mutual letters had been invariably 
intercepted ; and that his first knowledge of 
my marriage and banishment, as well as of 
her own immurement in a provincial Irish con- 
vent, had been obtained on his return from 
the continent, a few months prior to my father''s 
death. Yet it appeared, that even such dis- 
torted details of these facts as were to be gathered 
from public report, aided by Lord Abbotscourt^s 
invectives, and the accusations of Father John, 
had sufficed to rouse the indignation of my bro- 
ther in my behalf; and I was now able to discover, 
from the reluctant and incoherent answers vouch- 
safed by Miss Maldyn to the princess, that my 
elder brother's marriage had originated in some 
family dispute undertaken in my behalf. 

" ' And your younger broth er''s anxiety to pro- 
nounce his vows at Rome, and his increasing in- 
firmity of health, would not permit you to re- 
main in Ireland, and await the arrival of Signore 



THE OPERA. 197 

Capitano ? What a pity ! — or you might all 
have travelled together. But then I should have 
missed the happiness of having you with me 
during the past winter !' said the venerable gos- 
sip to my sister, adjusting our family affairs, and 
her own pinch of snuff, with the same easy non- 
chalance. ' Ah ! India is a sad place,' she 
resumed ; ' a land of barbarism and atrocities. 
We Italians seldom travel so far ; nay ! are seldom 
to be found out of our own country. But why ? 
Lavished around us, we have the corn, and wine, 
and oil, which others go so far to seek ; while in 
England, I am assured that the commonest pro- 
ductions of the earth can scarcely be forced into 
cultivation ! No wonder you are tempted to 
perform such journies and voyages, to catch a 
glimpse of the sunshine.' 

'' She might have talked for ever, now that she 
had anchored on a topic of general interest, un- 
molested by interruption or molestation from 
Florentia or myself; but Dorothea, mortified by 
her mother's involuntary rudeness, attempted to 



198 THE OPERA. 

turn the conversation by inquiries concerning 
India — a country all but apochryphal to an Ita- 
lian understanding. Her mother, however, soon 
managed to repossess herself of the lost ground ; 
and before I had the honour of re-conducting 
her to her own apartments, and receiving a ge- 
neral invitation for future visits, she had managed 
to acquaint me, that her daughter was betrothed 
to a young baron of the Valvassone family, then 
on his travels with her own young son, Prince 
Bagnagliori ; that had it not been for this en- 
gagement, she could have been well content to 
unite her with my elder brother, ' the reigning "* 
Lord Abbotscourt— with whom they had become 
intimately acquainted during his stay at the 
Court of Naples ; that my sister was an angel, 
and my brother Wrottesley a saint — much more 
of a saint than he had promised to become when 
he originally presented himself in her Neapolitan 
circle ; and too much indeed — since it was by no 
means necessary for a man of his family and for- 
tune to be so strict in his professional observ- 



THE OPERA. 199 

ances, and shut himself up among the Francis- 
cans of the Bajabella Friary, instead of coming 
occasionally to chat with herself and Princess 
Dorothea. Unable to evade her importunities, I 
promised to become his substitute, and accompany 
her daughter and my sister in their walks and 
riding excursions ; but I felt my spirits wholly 
unequal to such a sacrifice, and returned to 
Florentia's saloon wearied and ill at ease ; and 
anxious only to prosecute those inquiries to which 
her friend's rapacious curiosity had directed my 
attention. 

" But on many points of oiu: family affairs, Flo- 
rentia still remained as ignorant as myself. ' We 
parted, my dear Randolph,' said she, in answer 
to my questions, ' with the promise of constant 
intercourse and a speedy re-union. But scarcely 
had you quitted the castle, when my hopes were 
destroyed by my poor father's commands that I 
should hold no further communication with his 
rebellious son ; and on Father John's subsequent 
discovery of my attempt to infringe these harsh 



200 THE OPERA. 

orders, I was conveyed to Kilkenny, and re- 
sided there in total ignorance of all that was 
going on in my family, till a few days previous 
to the death of our unfortunate parent. Never 
shall I forget the state of excitement in which I 
found him on my inauspicious return to the 
castle ! On the arrival of my eldest brother and 
Wrottesley from Italy, it had been his first ob- 
ject to vindicate his conduct towards yourself, 
and engage them in his own intemperate opposi- 
tion to the Templeton family; but in the course 
of Father John''s representations on the subject 
to his favourite and ally, my brother Maldyn, 
some inexplicable circumstance transpired which 
determined both my brothers to visit England— 
whither the Darley family had retired — and seek 
a personal interview with Lord Templeton. The 
result you know ! — and the speedy announcement 
of my brother's union with Lady Katharine was 
the first hint of the motive and destination of 
their journey which reached my father's ears. In 
his frantic resentment he wrote to me as his sole 



THE OPERA. 201 

remaining child, summoning me home to the 
castle. But it was only to witness his frenzy — 
to shudder over his death-bed ; nor did I behold 
my brothers from the period of their departure 
for the continent till the day which re-united us 
for the mournful ceremony of his interment.** 

" ' You must have been painfully startled by 
the alteration in Wrottesley's appearance ?'' said 
I. ' For my own part, I own I can trace no 
analogy between the joyous and confiding friend 
of my boyhood, and the reserved and gloomy re- 
cluse of Bajabella.' 

" ' They bear, indeed, but a slight resem- 
blance !' replied Florentia, with a mournful 
wave of the head ; ' far less than even my im- 
petuous brother Randolph, to the kind, gentle, 
and considerate Captain Maldyn.' 

" ' Your brother Randolph has been trained by 
the harsh discipline of adversity into his present 
tameness ; every plague that Heaven could rain 
upon my head has been successively my portion : 
but Wrottesley has suffered no bereavement, save 
K 3 



202 THE OPERA. 

in the ordinary course of nature. Wrottesley 
has been doomed to no privation, save those self, 
inflicted by the austerity of his religious ob- 
servances. 

<^ ^ You are right !** said my sister, in answer 
to these arguments. ' Yet the reality of his 
sorrow is as undeniable, as it is difficult of justi- 
fication. Every day his health declines, though 
untouched by any definite disease ; every hour 
his mind becomes more abstracted from human 
interests, though unoppressed by any real af- 
fliction. He is infinitely changed since we 
quitted Abbotscourt. At that period, my poor 
brother was subject to attacks of nervous agita- 
tion, and subsequent debility, which often made 
me tremble for his reason ; but since his residence 
in Italy, and more especially since we inhabited 
this secluded place, he has gradually sunk into 
his present condition of calm and habitual me- 
lancholy. Even your arrival has done little for 
him beyond the excitement of the moment.'' 
" ' He embraced his sacred calling at his own 



THE OPERA. 203 

instigation,' I involuntarily observed. ' Can it 
be that he repents those vows which alienate 
liim from the softer ties of human nature — from 
pursuits more congenial with his age?"* 

" * Impossible !' faltered my companion, cross- 
ing herself at the bare sound of this sacrilegious 
suggestion. ' It is only since my father''s death, 
and at the sole prompting of his own inclinations, 
that Wrottesley pronounced his final vows. His 
object in visiting Italy was less the re-estabhsh- 
ment of his enfeebled health, than the accomplish- 
ment of this important duty."* 

^' ' Still I do not understand,' said I 
but my further interrogations were interrupted 
by the entrance of their object ; and although I 
had pre-determined to avow to him my uneasi- 
ness respecting his condition of mind and body, 
I was involuntarily awed into silence by the 
spectacle of his unnatural solemnity. Instead of 
presuming to speak to him of himself or his own 
affairs, the evening passed away in interroga- 
ti ons on his part touching the spiritual and intel- 



204 TilE OPERA. 

lectual enlightenment of the oriental nations I had 
visited ; and he seemed much affected when I 
acknowledged that there were still interior pro- 
vinces of the peninsula to which the light of the 
Gospel had not yet penetrated. ' It would be 
an office worthy an Apostle/ said I, ' to con- 
vey the benefits of redemption to the darkness of 
such a land. ' To live and die in the dis- 
charge of so trying a duty might avail perhaps 
as an aU of expiatioii!^ he replied; and the 
ordinary sternness of his voice was broken by an 
involuntary sigh. 

" Meanwhile our intercourse with the Bagna- 
gliori family partook of the languor of my own 
state of mind. When the confusion occasioned 
by my sudden arrival had in some measure sub- 
sided, Florentia indeed resumed her habits of 
affectionate familiarity with the princess, and 
spent a considerable portion of every morning 
with Dorothea, engaged with music or needle- 
work, or the labours of benevolence ; but it was 
my habit to devote these hours to study, or ra- 



THE OPEKA. 205 

iher to the silent and solitary reflexions "which I 
fancied myself to be evading by literary applica- 
tion ; my books lay neglected before me as a 
mirage of blessed reminiscences rose before my 
eyes ! It was therefore a matter of heartfelt 
rejoicing to the sociable old lady, to hear that the 
presence of Colonel Manningfield was soon to 
enliven our circle; and when, on his actual arrival, 
she found in him a handsome, animated young 
man, speaking several European languages with 
elegance and fluency, and elaborately versed in 
the latest gossip and scandals of Naples, she soon 
learned to regard him as very superior to any of 
the three brothers of her favourite, ^ Renziellina,' 
a nom de caresse^ she had bestowed upon Miss 
Maldyn. Previous to his arrival, I own a hope 
had crossed my mind, that my sister might be 
inclined to join in this preference ; and that Man- 
ningfield — one of the noblest and bravest fellows 
that ever drew breath — might sympathise in my 
own opinion of Florentia's excellence. But I 
would not dwell on the idea, lest by interesting 



206 



THE OPERA. 



myself too warmly in the subject, I might ensure 
its defeat ; I felt myself destined to disappoint- 
ment in every serious expectation of my life. 
This prudential resolve secured me from the 
peevishness of mortification, when I perceived, 
shortly after Colonel M.^s appearance at Baja- 
bella, that it was to Princess Dorothea his atten- 
tions and admiration were directed. I knew and 
warned him of her matrimonial engagement; 
and felt half inclined to apprise the princess, her 
mother, of the perils she suffered Dorothea to en- 
counter, by encouraging her intimacy with a 
man so attractive as Manningfield ; for since she 
was irrevocably destined to become the wife of 
Count Valvassone, it was unjust towards all three 
to court the probabilities of a dangerous attach- 
ment. But in spite of my secret predictions of 
evil, music-parties, boating-parties, and excur- 
sions into the forest, still went on. Manning- 
field seemed to forget India, and renounce his 
professional ambition, while, in the stillness of 
the evening twilight, he sat under the trellices of 



THE OPERA. 207 

lemon, jessamine, and magnolia, overhanging 
the terraces of the palace- gardens, with his eyes 
fixed on the soft and saddened countenance of the 
young princess. I was too proud for my sister 
to venture on those expostulations which I fancied 
might betray the disappointment of my anterior 
views. Applying all my own energies of mind to 
the entertainment of Florentia, I laboured only 
to prevent her from bestowing too much of her 
attention on the supposed admirer of her friend. 

" It had more than once occurred to me, that 
the secret affliction imdermining the heart and 
health of Wrottesley might proceed from a si- 
milar source. Notwithstanding the cold inacces- 
sibility of his demeanour, I had succeeded in 
extracting from him that Maldyn and himself had 
passed the greater portion of their former stay at 
Naples in the society of the Bagnagliori family ; 
the elder prince being then aHve, holding a high 
post of honour at court, and maintaining a noble 
establishment on this important addition to his 
hereditary revenues. But there were two elder 



208 THE OPERA. 

daughters at that period gracing his domestic 
circle, who were more likely than the youthful 
Dorothea to have attracted his attention; one 
of whom was resident at Madrid as the wife of 
Count Pignatelli, ambassador from the Neapo- 
litan court ; while the other, Princess Camilla, 
now wedded to Prince Monterosa, lived in re- 
tirement on her husband's estates near Gaeta. 
Unwilling to distress my sister by exciting her 
suspicions on such a point, I strove to elicit some 
intelligence concerning them, by directing my 
inquiries to Princess Dorothea herself; but my 
utmost efforts could only ascertain, that Countess 
Pignatelli was the most volatile of coquettes, — 
Princess Monterosa, a rigid devotee ; and judging 
from my own feelings, I deemed it impossible that 
either should have attained so profound an in- 
fluence over any human heart as that exercised 
by the object of Wrottesley*'s imputed attach- 
ment. 

" How strange — how passing strange — the re- 
luctance which renders it so difficult to address a 



THE OPERA. 209 

person with whom we live in the confidence of 
individual affection, on any subject involving the 
impulses of human tenderness ! Day after day 
did I converse with Wrottesley IVIaldyn on the 
holiest of mysteries — the most appalling responsi- 
bihties of mortal nature ; but I found it impossible 
to turn towards him with the simple inquiry of 
' My brother, how hast thou sinned ? — My bro- 
ther, whom hast thou loved ?"* I would have 
given worlds for courage to force his confidence, 
that I might obtain the means of pouring com- 
fort into his soul ! It was grievous to me — 
blighted as I was in my own destinies, and shut 
out from the best interests of existence — to be 
denied the consolation of sympathising in his 
distress. 

" But time was passing rapidly away ! The 
purple clover with which the plains were clothed 
on my arrival at Bajabella, had given place to 
the rude surface of their winter fallows : the 
golden sheaves of the maize hung suspended from 
the eaves of many an out-building, while its 



210 THE OPERA. 

Stunted and parched stalks disfigured the adjoin- 
ing fields. The plantations of elms adorning the 
avenues of Bagnagliori were growing dun and au- 
tumnal in their foliage ; and every evening the 
fishing- vessels rode close at anchor in the little 
bay before the approach of twihght, in terror of 
equinoxial storms. The princess was already 
busy with preparations for her departure for 
Naples, to pass the winter season ; and though 
she had failed in shaking our resolution to brave 
the desolation of La Puglia for some months 
longer, I fully prepared myself for Manningfi eld's 
declaration, that he must bid us farewell and 
accompany Dorothea. I was pondering within 
myself over the moment and manner he would 
probably select for the announcement, as he sat 
one afternoon by my side in a fissure of the cliffs 
near Bajabella, which we were all in the habit of 
frequenting, to overlook the wide level of the 
Mediterranean; when seeming to wake from a 
long reverie, he suddenly exclaimed, ' And in 
a few months Valvassone will make his ap- 



THE OPERA. 211 

pearance, and then what will become of 
her?' 

" ' She will unite herself with the man selected 
by her family to receive her hand,** said I, 
coldly. ' We are not now in England, where 
the vague and often guilty impulses of the heart 
are allowed such overweening influence. In this 
country, no contract is valid if unhallowed by the 
sanction of those whom God and man have set in 
authority over us — our parents and our prince. 
Dorothea is too gentle even to dream of rebellion ; 
and he who would disturb the tranquillity of so 
soft a bosom, emulates in my eyes the sin of 
Satan, who first imparted to our first parents in 
their guiltless Eden the lesson of tears.' 

'' ' You are right!' said Manningfield, with 
fervent sincerity : ' it would, indeed, be the ac- 
tion of a demon ; but the wretchedness of Doro- 
thea experiences no aggravation from the sym- 
pathy of the object of her attachment. Surely 
it must be as plain to you as to myself, that 
Wrottesley regards her with indifference, and is 



212 



THE OPERA. 



either unconscious or careless of her prefer- 
ence ?** 

" ' Wrottesley !' I exclaimed. 'And is it 
possible that you, Manningfield, cai;i fix your 
affection on a person convicted of a sacri- 
legious passion, of an attachment to the anointed 
priest of the altar.?' 

" * You are either mad or dreaming, Ran- 
dolph,** he replied, with unfeigned amazement. 
' What are the frailties and errors of poor Do- 
rothea to me, unless as the source of affliction to 
your sister's friend^? While I was yet doubtful 
of Florentia's affection, the young princess 
kindly lent her ear to my doubts and anxieties, 
and hourly confirmed my attachment by details 
of Miss Maldyn's virtues and excellences ; and 
since T was blest with the certainty of her regard, 
I have naturally rewarded Dorothea's previous 
compassion with an unfeigned tribute of pity 
towards the difficulties of her own position. 
As far as my own prejudices are concerned, 
I am not sufficiently bigoted to the exterior 



THE OPERA. 213 

observances of our creed, to regard with abhor- 
rence the marriage of priests. I have resided 
too long in a Protestant country to make it a 
matter of reproach." 

" ' An oath once taken, although on erroneous 
grounds, is sacred for ever !' said I. ' Wrottesley 
is now beyond all power of dispensation from his 
vows — and should be above all indulgence in the 
common weaknesses of human nature."* 

" • We may look in vain for such perfection 
among the children of wrath," said Manningfi eld; 
' but on this occasion let me absolve him. Not 
even Dorothea Bagnagliori suspects him of the 
slightest susceptibility ; nay ! the exalted sanc- 
tity of his character is, in fact, the source of her 
adoration ; she loves him with the veneration of 
a votary, rather than with the weakness of a 
woman ."" 

" ' Heaven be thanked I" I exclaimed. ' There 
will be the less danger — the less sorrow for both ! 
But yourself, Manningfield — how comes it that 
I am only thus accidentally permitted to learn 



214 THE OPERA. 

your own views, your own attachments? Had 
you been more communicative you would have 
spared me many a heart-ache ! It was the wish 
nearest my heart that you shovild conceive an 
affection for my sister.' 

" ' Had you not so many anxious thoughts to 
occupy your attention,' replied my friend, ' I 
should pronounce your blindness inexcusable. 
Our hesitation in applying for your sanction of 
our engagement has arisen solely from the gene- 
rous scruples of your sister, who is equally unwil- 
ling to insist on my abandonment of my profession 
for her sake, and to leave her brothers to the 
mournful isolation of their destiny. Florentia is 
persuaded that if permitted to share the monotony 
of Wrottesley's existence, you, my dear Maldyn, 
will imbibe his self-denying austerity; nor will 
she hear of quitting Europe, while you evince 
your present despondency.' 

'^ « And you are willing to disappoint the views 
of your family, and renounce the military ambi- 
tion with which I have so often charged you, in 



THE OPERA. 



215 



order to gratify her tenderness towards us ? — This 
is indeed loving as I could wish Florentia Mal- 
dyn to be loved ! But it must not be ! If my 
brother persists in his detennination of monastic 
seclusion, and recovers sufficiently to justify our 
removal, I shall willingly return with you to 
Bengal. Heaven knows I have little to detain 
me in my native country ; and India or Apulia — 
what matters it where I waste away the remnant 
of my days ? — With you, and Florentia, and your 
children, I shall experience a nearer approach to 
happiness than I could find elsewhere. 

" I accordingly undertook to ascertain the 
views of Wrottesley, and convey to him the in- 
telligence of Florentia's projected marriage with 
my friend ; and although Princess Bagnagliori's 
intended departure for Naples rendered the cau- 
tion in some measure superfluous, I determined 
on profiting by the same occasion to warn him 
against the unacknowledged passion of Count 
Valvassone'*s betrothed wife, and sound anew the 
depths of mystery in which his own destinies 



216 



THE OPERA. 



were involved. I formed, in short, a resolution 
to utter those long repressed inquiries — ' My 
brother, whom hast thou loved ? — My brother, 
how hast thou sinned?' " 



THE OrERA. 217 



CHAPTER XI, 



O happy persecution, I embrace thee 
With an unfettered soul ! So sweet a thing 
Is it to sigh upon the rack of pain. 
When each calamity bears groaning witness 
To the pure martyr's faith. 

MiDDLETOX. 



" It was after a night passed in harassing deli- 
berations on the mode of framing these questions 
with the least possible offence to Wrottesley's 
feelings, that I rose one morning, and, on seek- 
ing him in his own apartments, found he had 
already made his way to the Franciscan monas- 
tery Avhere the greater portion of his time was 
passed. On pretext of familiarizing himself with 
the religious exercises of the community, he had 

VOL. I. L 



218 THE OPERA. 

obtained a cell from the favour of tlie superior ; 
a venerable man, to whom the peculiar sanctity 
and humility of the young acolyte rendered him 
an object of the highest interest. 

" To this hallowed retirement I determined to 
follow him ; and as I was slowly descending the 
terraces, leading by a succession of marble steps 
from the platform of the palace to the town be- 
low, pausing occasionally to admire the gorgeous 
brilliancy of the pomegranate blossoms, or the 
shapely outline of the bright green box trees 
which graced the marble vases ornamenting the 
balustrade, I perceived the advancing figure of 
Dorothea, ascending in the same direction lean- 
ing on the arm of her habitual attendant, an aged 
nurse who had watched over the infancy of all 
her family. The head of the young princess 
was enveloped in her black faldetta ; but she 
frequently paused in her ascent, as if panting for 
breath, and drew back the folds of sable silk from 
her face, as if to refresh herself by the cool morn- 
ing air which beat in gusts along the level 



THE OPERA. 219 

terraces. On a nearer approach, I noticed that 
her hands were frequently and involuntarily- 
clasped together; and as she advanced still closer, 
I could hear the voice of her companion address- 
ing her in tremulous tones of counsel and comfort. 
But when she actually passed the spot where T 
stood, and hurriedly exchanged with me the com- 
pliments of the day, a rapid glance beneath her 
hood enabled me to discover that her cheeks were 
dim with even more than their wonted paleness, 
and her eyes discoloured by weeping. — How was 
this ? — Were Manningfield's speculations erro- 
neous ? — Was the object of her visit to Bajabella, 
like my own, a private interview with Wrottesley ? 
Was his retirement chosen as a cloak to this un- 
hallowed purpose .'* 

" Less tenderly disposed towards my brother's 
peculiarities than I had been in the commence- 
ment of my walk, I presented myself at the portal 
of the monastery ; and, on the plea of urgent 
family business, requested access to Mr. Maldyn. 
I was accordingly conducted to the door of his 
l2 



220 THE OPERA. 

cell by a lay-monk of the order ; and admittance 
having been demanded in the name of his reve- 
rence the superior, I suddenly found myself in 
the presence of the startled Wrottesley. — Alas ! 
what a spectacle greeted me on my entrance ! — the 
form of my brother, lying extended on the floor in 
utter exhaustion, his bare shoulders lacerated and 
bleeding, — the discipline still grasped in his hand. 
' Leave us !' I exclaimed to my conductor ; and 
raising him in my arms, placed him on the wooden 
chair constituting the sole furniture of his cheer- 
less apartment. I could perceive that his lips 
were wounded by the gnashing of his teeth in the 
extremity of bodily anguish ! 

" ' My dearest Wrottesley ! ^ cried I, irritated 
rather than touched by this excess of self-abase- 
ment and superstitious piety, *can you not be 
contented with bearing your faculties like a man, 
instead of indulging the spiritual pride which in- 
duces you to these extravagances of zeal ? What 
have you done — what crime committed — that you 
deem the measure of punishment appointed by 



THE OPERA. 221 

the Almighty insufficient for your penance, and 
court these loathsome — these superfluous tor- 
tures ?' 

" ' He who wrestled with his agony in the gar- 
den of Gethsemane — ^ my brother began. 

" ' Blasphemer !' I exclaimed, interrupting him 
with involuntary indignation. ' Do you pre- 
sume to emulate the patience and fortitude of 
your Kedeemer ? ** 

«« « Pardon me, brother ! pardon me,' was his 
meek reply. ' That you thus exaggerate my 
fault and misconceive my motive is a blessing ; 
or that, or any other form of contumely or injury, 
do I welcome with joy. Yea ! trample upon me, 
my brother, and diminish my responsibility of 
sin and sufFering.** 

a i Wrottesley ! ' said I, ' you terrify my very 
soul by this vehemence. Heaven grant that it 
be the fruit of a mistaken zeal, rather than of 
the promptings of an evil conscience ! I would 
willingly believe that this prostration of spirit 
arises from the infirmity of health which is a 



222 THE OPERA. 

source of so much anxiety to us all ; for well I 
know that the grasp of death upon the heart is 
capable of turning its best resolves to feebleness 
and mistrust. But shake off this morbid frame of 
mind; — rouse yourself, my dear Wrottesley, up, 
and be a man ! You have duties to perform to 
your faith, your country, your family, yourself, 
such as may better work out your task of mortal 
bondage than acts of proud and solitary pe- 
nance!' 

'« With an air of mortification, but not of resent- 
ment, he now resumed his customary array, while 
I unfolded to him the projects of happiness en- 
tertained by Florentia and my friend, my anxiety 
to return with them to the east, and a chimerical 
notion that had glanced into my mind of inducing 
him to prosecute in the same direction the duties 
of his sacred calling. It was true that such a 
resolution would place him beyond reach of those 
ecclesiastical dignities which afforded my father's 
original inducement in its selection ; but the feud 
existing between the head of the house of Maldyn 



THE OPERA. 223 

and its younger branches had already deprived 
him of the support of family interest in their ac- 
quirement ; and moreover, Wrottesley had dis- 
avowed, on many occasions, a view towards any 
honours at the disposal of the church of Rome. 

'' * To India ?' he exclaimed, on my hazarding 
the first hint of such a scheme, ' willingly — 
gladly ! — Oh ! that such a pilgrimage had been 
my fortune, instead of the destiny which con- 
ducted us to this luckless place ; one thorn had 
at least been spared from my crown of martyr- 
dom;' and he wrung his hands in irrepressible 
anguish. 

" ' Nay, then,* said I, ' it is as I feared, and 
Dorothea — "" 

" ' Is to me but as a suffering daughter of the 
faith ! ' faltered Wrottesley Maldyn. ' Pray 
for her, brother; give her your prayers and 
your pity, as I shall ; for never till this day did I 
dream that our sojourn at Bajabella had been a 
source of — ' He paused, and averted his face ; 
and at the same moment, remembering that the 



224 THE OPERA. 

brother who conducted me to his presence had 
stated him to be substituted for the day in the 
duties of one of the elder brethren then labouring 
under severe sickness, and that my brother had 
only quitted the confessional a short time pre- 
vious to my visit, I had little doubt that in its 
sacred office Wrottesley had first obtained an 
insight into the lamentable weakness cherished in 
his favour by Princess Dorothea. 

" But I knew that the seal of such a communi- 
cation was sacred ; and, without dwelling further 
on the subject, slightly observed, that for all our 
sakes it would be advisable to hasten our de- 
parture. 

" *So soon ! so suddenly !' was his involuntary 
exclamation. ' I, too, who thought to lay 
down the weariness of life in this most favoured 
province of our holy church. But what matters 
on which section of the earth we inhale the 
breath of Heaven, and fulfil its behests .?' 

^' ' We need remain in England,' said I, ^ only 



THE OPERA. 225 

till the return of spring ensures the sailing of 
the eastern fleet ; and then — "* 

'' ' England !^ said my brother, arresting the 
hasty steps with which he had been traversing 
the cell, and having paused beside me, fixing his 
large dark eyes intently on my face. * England ! 
I had not thought of that. Cannot the voyage 
be otherwise achieved .?"* 

" And he listened with eager interest while I 
described to him the limited nature of the com- 
munication between Europe and Calcutta. At 
length it occurred to me that a passage might be 
procured for our family in a French merchant 
vessel fi'om Havre ; unless it became necessary 
for the adjustment of Manningfield's private 
affairs and the presentation of his bride to his 
family (one of considerable antiquity and respect- 
ability in the county of Derby) to visit London. 

" ' London ! ' again reiterated my brother. 

' Impossible ! If such be the course of our career, 

suffer me to remain in Italy. — London ! — not all 

the wealth of the land to which we are bound, not 

l3 



226 THE OPERA. 

all the attractions of this^ should induce me to set 
foot anew in that accursed city. Do not ask it, 
Randolph ; do not ask it.' 

'' Surprised by the intensity of his emotion, I 
proposed that, without interfering with Manning- 
field's arrangements, we two should make our 
voyage together, and rejoin our friends in 
Bengal. 

" ' They will be too happy,' said I, ' to need 
our society for some time to come.' 

" ' True,' said he, ' for some time they may 
indeed be happy ! —the stroke may be suspended 
over their heads ; the bitter cup may even be 
long in the decoction of its poisonous ingredients. 
But it will fall at length ; — the chalice must be 
quaffed at last ; — and will not the dark hour derive 
a deeper gloom from these moments of antecedent 
brightness V 

" ' Such are the vicissitudes of every destiny,' 
said I. 

•«« ' Such is the fixed and inalienable heritage 
of ours,' faltered my brother, again advancing 



THE OPERA. 227 

towards me, and grasping my arm. ' So long as 
a Maldyn is born upon the earth, so long will the 
shadow overhang our race. A destiny is upon 
us. Accursed of Heaven, we are created but for 
the commission of crime, or the endiurance of 
anguish !' 

<c < Wrottesley !' said I ; ' this very de- 
claration is impious, or the result of mad- 
ness.' And firmly believing his reason to be 
disordered, I looked on him with unfeigned 
compassion. 

'' ' I am not mad,"* was his reply. ' I often 
wish it were so ; but I am not mad. No, Ran- 
dolph, no ! — the fables of antiquity were ever 
grounded on real foundations. — The tale of 
Atreus, brother, was no fiction. Therehavebeen, — 
there will ever be, — races of mankind elected by 
the will of the Creator for severest probation ; 
some distinguished by the mightiness of their 
offences ; — some by the magnitude of their atone- 
ment. — Brother, brother ! so long as a Maldyn 
is left upon the earthy the commandments of 



228 THE OPERA. 

God will seem to court his infringement. The 
mark of Cain is upon our brows ! * 

" Even while I entreated — nay ! commanded 
him to repress these presumptuous declarations, 
I own I shuddered beneath the terrible expres- 
sion of anguish disfiguring the countenance of 
my brother. It was such as might have been 
attributed to Laocoon wrestling with the monsters 
appointed for his perdition. Vain had it been to 
reason with his infirmity ; — there was no remedy 
for such a state of mind except in the interposi- 
tion of Heaven. 

" But Wrottesley was not the only member of 
the little circle of Bajabella who regarded the 
projected alliance of Manningfield and my sister 
with regret. The good old princess had con- 
ceived a real affection for her ; and flattered her- 
self that on the marriage of Dorothea, Florentia 
might be induced to accept a permanent home 
under her roof. The unprotected situation of 
my sister, the improbability that she would be 
sought as a wife in a country where, as in that of 



THE OPERA. 229 

Naples, the nobility are restricted in their choice 
by early betrothment, seemed to render such a 
measure desirable to all parties ; and Princess 
Bagnagliori almost recalled her former encomiums 
of the English colonel, when she found that his 
influence was about to deprive her of her in- 
mates, at once and for ever. So strongly de- 
monstrated indeed was her selfish discontent, 
that we judged it expedient to pursue our original 
intention of living out our term at Bajabella, 
instead of returning with the peevish old lady to 
Naples, according to her invitation. It was in 
vain she offered, as an irresistible allurement, the 
brilliant fetes with which she intended to grace 
the return of her son and her daughter's bride- 
groom. Not one of our party experienced the 
slightest inclination to witness the sacrifice of the 
reluctant Dorothea. 

'• At first, it had been my sister's desire that her 
own union might be solemnised by the hands of 
her brother, in the tranquil solitudes of Bajabella. 
But the informalities charged against my unfor- 



230 THE OPERA. 

tunate marriage had rendered me tenacious on 
such points; and I persuaded Manningfield to 
insist that the ceremony should be performed at 
Naples, and witnessed and authenticated by a 
kinsman of his own, attached to the EngHsh mis- 
sion. He even consented to precede us in our 
departure for that city, to complete the prepara- 
tions for the solemnization ; and it was settled 
that Wrottesley and myself should immediately 
afterwards embark for Genoa, while he proceeded 
with his wife, by a land journey, towards Eng- 
land. 

" These intentions, though kept a profound 
secret from the old lady our hostess, probably 
transpired to her daughter through Florentia's 
means ; for although Princess Dorothea avoided 
strictly and on all occasions the mention of 
Wrottesley's name in her familiar intercourse 
with my sister, yet, as the time for a general se- 
paration drew nigh, her distress of mind became 
unconcealable and unconcealed. Florentia and 
herself had lived for more than a year in the un- 



THE OPERA. 231 

restrained confidence of womanly friendship ; and 
the habitual gentleness of Miss Maldyn's cha- 
racter was dignified into something of matronly 
superiority by an advantage of ten years of age 
over the young Neapolitan, which did but aug- 
ment the tender veneration of her regard. But 
Florentia was incapable of sharing, and almost 
of comprehending, the bitter anguish with which 
this unexpected parting was contemplated by her 
friend. Her mild and rational tone of mind 
could not elevate itself to the exalted enthusiasm 
irradiating the soul of the Italian princess. She 
had been accustomed, from childhood, to vexa- 
tions and separation from those she loved; while 
Dorothea had lived till now a life of the most 
monotonous tranquillity. She was about to con- 
fide her destinies to the guardianship of an ho- 
nourable man, the chosen of her heart ; while 
Dorothea was destined to waste the charms of her 
youth, the sweetness of her nature, on a boyish 
libertine, unqualified to appreciate the purity and 
nobleness of such a spirit. 

'« ' And worse than all,' said Manningfield (who, 



232 THE OPEPx-A. 

from his familiar association with Plorentia's 
friend, had better opportunities than myself of 
appreciating her attractions, and noting the con- 
dition of her mind) — ' worse than all, she is 
forced to compress within her aching bosom those 
rebellious feelings, which she knows to be repug- 
nant to every principle and every obligation of 
those around her. I am persuaded Dorothea 
will never marry Valvassone, though evidently 
nerving her courage for some desperate mea- 
sure. But she will never marry him ! — 
never fulfil these odious and unnatural en- 
gagements. The girl's heart is breaking ! — I 
wish we were off, and beyond the reach of parti- 
cipation in the catastrophe. Florentia has not a 
suspicion of the extent of the evil; and I would 
willingly spare her the sorrow of such a dis- 
covery.'' 

" I began to be of my friend's opinion, and to 
hope that nothing might occur to prolong our 
stay at Naples, when I directed my attention to 
the wasted form and marble countenance of 
Dorothea on occasion of cur visit of adieu to 



THE OPEllA. 233 

her mother. Princess Bagnagliori was on the 
point of departure, and amid all the bustle of 
such a moment; the going and coming of at- 
tendants ; the parting charge to those who were 
to remain during the winter months at Bajabella ; 
the struggling, and chiding, and squabbUng which 
Itahan gesticulation renders so vehement, she 
stood motionless, and as if unconscious of the 
tumult around her. Her fine features were fixed, 
her lips compressed as if in restrainment of her 
emotions ; but she did not utter a syllable. 

" ' Farewell ! my dearest of friends,' cried 
her mother to my sister. ' In the torrid 
climate wherein you rashly choose to seek a 
home, you will find no hearts so kindly disposed 
towards you as those you leave in Italy. Will 
she, Dorothea.^ — Speak, and tell these English 
friends of ours that they desert us cruelly, and 
will live to repent their decision. And Renziel- 
lina ! — dearest child, — make haste and grow weary 
of Bajabella; make haste and discover how 
lonely the castle becomes after our departure; 



234 THE OPERA. 

malie haste and visit Naples for the celebration 
of this ill-advised marriage of yours ; or you will 
never see my daughter again. Will she, Dorothea.? 
Speak, and tell your English friends that our dear 
Valvassone will soon arrive, and that you are to 
accompany him to Rome for the carnival.' 

" But instead of replying to her mother, who 
indeed seldom needed a reply, or re-iterating her 
half-angry, half- courteous invitations, Dorothea 
stood motionless and pale as one of the statues 
which ornamented the gallery in which we were 
standing. Manningfield gave his arm to the 
princess to lead her to the carriage, and Florentia 
was compelled to walk by her side, listening to 
her frivolous complaints ; while Wrottesley, who 
would willingly have absented himself from this 
parting scene, having been summoned by order 
of the kind-hearted old lady, ensconced himself 
in the embrasure of the window, and affected to 
be intent on the movements of the suite in the 
court-yard below. He had already breathed a 
few words of formal farewell while touching with 



THE OPERA. 235 

his lips the withered hand of the princess ; and 
nothing now remained but for me to offer my 
escort to the silent Dorothea, which was mecha- 
nically accepted. 

" She had already placed her hand in mine, 
and had even made a few steps towards the door 
to follow her mother ; when, as if by an irresist- 
ible impulse, she turned suddenly towards my 
brother, and in a moment was kneeling at his 
feet. ' Your blessing !' she faltered, in a hoarse 
concentrated voice, clasping her hands upon her 
bosom. ' Your blessing — your pardon ! — for we 
shall meet no more. Pray for me; pray that 
the Mother of God may take pity on my tears, 
and end my probation.** 

'' I know not what was Wrottesley's reply to 
this invocation ; for my eyes and heart were fixed 
upon the soft and melancholy beauty of the 
youthful figure before me, which was such as 
might have personified the Magdalen of a holier 
age and land. And as she knelt in humble pros- 
tration at the feet of the young and noble Wrot- 



236 THE OPERA. 

tesley, I almost forgot that it was sacrilege to 
upbraid the untowardness of fate which had 
placed an eternal barrier between persons so 
fitted for each other. In another minute she 
was gone; in another hour the tumult of the 
crowded court-yard had given place to the mourn- 
ful tinkling of the fountain, whose monotonous 
music usually illustrated its desolation. But the 
spectacle of her despair — her beauty — her touch- 
ing resignation — had impressed itself on my mind 
for ever. 

" ' Yea ! the curse of Cain is on our brows!" 
cried my brother, when I found him some hours 
afterwards, pacing in solitary agitation the marble 
arcade of the quadrangle. ' We suffer, but we do 
not suffer alone ! We gaze on the young and 
beautiful, and they wither — we gaze on the fair 
and innocent, and they become tainted with the 
plague-spot of sin. My brother, my dear brother, 
said I not aright, that a destiny is over all our 
race.?'" 



THE OPERA. 237 



CHAPTER XII. 



Her faults were mine, her virtues were her own. — 
I saw her, and destroyed her. 

TVitc/l.~^Yiih. thy hand ? 
Not with my hand — but heart — which broke 7ier heart : 
It gazed on mine, and wither'd I 

Manfred. 

"Of all the chimeras of mythological fic- 
tion," observed Count Maldyn, on resuming his 
narrative, '' there is perhaps none more gloomy 
than that of which a modification had taken pos- 
session of the mind of Wrottesley. The idea of 
a race of human beings lying irremediably under 
the reprobation of the Deity, is fortunately ne- 
gatived in modern times by every promise of the 
Gospel ; nay ! by the very spirit of the Christian 



238 THE OPERA. 

faith ; and our minds can scarcely frame a con- 
ception so inconsistent with reason and rehgion. 
Yet I could have wished that my brother had 
never given utterance to the delusion by which 
his spirit was oppressed ; for on reviewing at 
his suggestion the destinies of our house, I 
could not but acknowledge them to be tinged 
with an undue share of the darker shades of hu- 
man calamity. 

" Sharing the dishonours heaped upon the 
Catholic population of the kingdom at the pe- 
riod of the accession of the House of Hanover, 
my grand-uncle, the Viscount Maldyn, took re- 
fuge in a cloister from the mortification of his 
worldly pride ; — his brother, my own grand- 
father, perished by his own hand, under circum- 
stances of peculiar horror ; my father, after nou- 
rishing for years an antipathy of the strongest 
nature, had seen it derided and set at nought by 
his own children — by the first-born of his pride, 
and the favourite of his affections — and died in 
the struggle of his wounded feelings : while of 



THE OPERA. 239 

those two rebellious sons, the one was united with 
a woman to whom he was secretly an object of 
abhorrence; — the other, cankered to the very- 
heart's core, was about to betake himself for ever 
to another hemisphere, in order to escape the 
consciousness of isolation haunting him in his 
own ! 

'• Was not this enough to justify the visionary 
denunciation of my brother, and to confirm our 
family as marked out by the wrath of the Di- 
vinity ? Yet, no ! — a darker destiny was yet 
undeveloped. Wrottesley, the sworn of God, — 
the priest of the altar ! our propitiatory media- 
tor with Heaven, — was not only given over to 
the remorse of some undefined and unspeakable 
crime, but had been the innocent means of mtro- 
ducing sin and sorrow into a bosom too fan: and 
too pure to have been created as a temple for 
such infernal deities ! — Dorothea Bagnagliori — 
the gentle Dorothea — who might have been pre- 
dicted at her birth as utterly beyond the reach 
of so disastrous a destiny, had been sought out 



240 THE OrERA. 

in her foreign solitude to participate in the male- 
diction attached to a race apparently incapable 
of collision with her own. Even the wilds of Ire- 
land and the fertile gardens of Italy had been 
brought in contact to attest the fatality of our 
fortunes ! 

" The opinions of my brother, therefore, how- 
ever wild, — however obnoxious to rational argu- 
ment, — were not destitute of a degree of confirma- 
tion from the coincidences of accident ; and I felt 
glad when Manningfield betook himself to Naples 
for the completion of his nuptial preparations, 
lest Wrottesley should disturb him by confidences 
of a similar nature, and perhaps introduce into 
the bridal garland of my sister a sprig of baleful 
and undying wormwood. I rejoiced, too, when 
Manningfield, — writing to us from the city to an- 
nounce the day and the hour on which we should 
do well to time our arrival in order that the 
ceremony might be performed without delay, — 
mentioned that he had been kept aloof by his 
dread of the ill-humour of the venerable princess. 



THE OPER-A. 241 

from all communication with the Bagnagliori 
family ; and had fixed himself wholly in the di- 
plomatic circles during his stay at Naples. Ac- 
cording to his confirmation of our previous plans, 
the marriage was to be solemnized in the church 
of San Gennaro on the morning following our 
arrival, our own family and his English friends 
alone attending the ceremony ; and Manning- 
field had engaged us apartments in an hotel on 
the Chiaja, and a passage for AVrottesley and 
myself in an English schooner bound for Genoa. 
It did not surprise me, Adrian, that the de- 
pression of my brother's spirits increased to a 
painful extent at the moment of quitting Baja- 
bella. His austerities of life, the profound peni- 
tence which imparted to his youthful frame the 
debility of premature decay and stamped his 
boyish brow with the furrows of age, had obtained 
for him in the Franciscan community of the 
place the reputation of a saint, and from 
the venerable superior a degree of fatherly 
tenderness, to which the solemnity of their spi- 

VOL. I. M 



242 THE OPERA. 

ritual intercommunication imparted an intensity 
beyond the common nature of filial and paternal 
love. 

" It grieves you to part from these good 
men," said I, in a tone of sympathy, as I accom- 
panied him home to the palace on the evening 
preceding our journey. 

"It grieves me more," was his stem reply, 
" to find that I have still some human predi- 
lections unsubdued within my heart. To a bosom 
scathed like mine by the angry bolt of Heaven, 
time and place should be indifferent ; nor can I 
account it otherwise than a token of sinful 
weakness, that Bajabella and its green woods — 
its glassy seas — its groves of myrtle and orange, 
cling to my imagination like a spell of beauty ; 
and that the weight now heavy on my mind ap- 
prizes me how often I shall sorrow after the 
soothing voice of yonder good old man, in the 
dreariness of my distant pilgrimage ! " 

" Even Florentia, although standing on the 
threshold of a new life of happiness and love, was 



THE OPERA. 243 

moved to tears on quitting the beautiful region 
where its dawn had first irradiated her destiny ; 
and the rude, but grateful people, who assembled 
to pour their parting benedictions on the benefi- 
cent EugUsh stranger, the adopted friend of their 
Uege lady. We left La Puglia with regret ; and 
arrived at Naples, harassed by all the annoyances 
of traversing a half-civilized country in an incle- 
ment season. 

But the joy with which we were welcomed by 
my friend, and the eagerness with which he ac- 
knowledged how much was revealed to him of the 
strength of his affection for his dearest Florence, 
during the week he had been deprived of the 
sound of her voice, and the sight of her sweet and 
feminine beauty, roused me to more cheerful 
thoughts. It was indeed gladdening to perceive 
that one at least of our miserable race was likely 
to reverse the fiat of its destinies ; and that, in 
renouncing the name of Maldyn, my sister would 
attain prospects of domestic happiness, such as 
the confidence of mutual affection can alone 
M 2 



244 THE OPERA. 

bestow. Even Wrottesley laid aside his ordinary- 
reserve lest he should sadden the last evening 
our sister was to be wholly our own ; and though 
Florentia took occasion to whisper to me that 
she should seek an interview with her lovely friend 
Princess Dorothea immediately after our em- 
barkation ; and though the mention of that 
name sufficed to cast a temporary shadow over 
our hearts, the hours passed away in cheering an- 
ticipations of our re-union in that gorgeous king- 
dom of the east, which, were it not a land of 
exile, would exhibit unnumbered attractions to 
the wanderers of northern climates. 

Never did I see my sister assume a smile of 
such sweet, and holy, and innocent loveliness, as 
when, arrayed for the bridal ceremony, she 
greeted us on the morrow. My brother, mis- 
giving his own self-possession at so interesting a 
moment, had persuaded her to accept some other 
ministry at the altar, and proposed to act as 
simple witness on the occasion ; while to myself 
it was appointed to bestow her hand upon my 

5, ^ lJ 



THE OPERA. 245 

friend. But, aware of the gloomy delusion 
which had taken possession of Wrottesley's brain, 
it struck me that he was unwilling to tmge with 
the influence of his own evil fortunes, the union 
which afforded some promise of exemption to the 
daughter of our house. 

It was one of those soft autumnal mornings 
which seem to breathe over the earth a farewell 
from the happier seasons of the year, — smiling 
upon its surface with the melancholy tenderness 
of departing beauty. My sister's attendants had 
procured, in honour of the occasion, a profusion 
of orange-blossoms and other flowers rare at 
that advanced season ; and as we traversed an 
extensive corridor thus bestrewn, on our way to 
the equipage waiting to convey us to San Gen- 
naro, the sunshine falling in sudden gleams upon 
Florentia"'s snowy draperies, as she passed the suc- 
cessive windows, — giving way as suddenly to the 
denseness of November gloom pervading the inter- 
vals, — afforded a preternatural exemplification of 
the varying destmies of her life. At one mo- 



246 THE OPEKA. 

ment, she appeared an angel irradiated by a 
halo of glory ; the next, she seemed to shrink, be- 
neath the foldings of her veil, into obscurity and 
sadness ; while Wrottesley, slowly following, 
showed in his sable garments and gloomy coun- 
tenance like the evil genius of her fate ! — It 
was in vain I strove to shake off this idle fancy ; 
I could not, at that moment, regard my brother 
in the light of an ordinary human being ! 

It was not yet noonday, when, at the appointed 
hour, we reached the portal of San Gennaro; 
and on springing from the step of the carriage, 
I perceived an unusual stir and tumult, as if 
some important ceremony had been recently 
celebrated ; but in a city of processions, such as 
Naples, nothing could less deserve surprise 
or comment. The multitude of filthy beggars 
and infirm or mutilated persons, ever found 
lounging on the steps of sacred edifices, seemed 
occupied by some especial object of discussion ; 
but without troubling myself to listen to their 
ejaculations, I assisted Manningfield in the task 



THE OPERA. 247 

of conducting Florentia into the church, by 
drawing aside the heavy draperies suspended over 
the swing-door of entrance. 

In a moment we saw that the various altars of 
the temple were illuminated and decorated, and 
the groined aisles still filled with the incense of 
some important rite. The archbishop, in his 
robes of state, followed by a numerous assem- 
blage of priests, was retiring into the sacristy 
as we advanced ; and I observed the chancel 
to be decorated with an array of gorgeous 
hangings, and draperies of silver and white. But 
it was for no bridal commemoration that these 
sumptuous preparations had been achieved; — 
emblems of mortality, and all the insignia of the 
grave, were displayed around. — The last echoes 
of a funeral anthem still reverberated from the 
choir. 

" You should have forewarned us of this," 
cried Manningfield to the sacristan who pointed 
out to us the chapel of Santa Maria delle Grazie, 
set apart for the celebration of the sacrament of 



248 THE OPERA. 

marriage ; where our diplomatic countrymen and 
an English brother of the Dominican order were 
in waiting to receive us. 

" Her Excellency died but yesterday," was his 
reply, " and the body will remain here till to- 
morrow, when the grand ceremony of interment 
takes place. In this church where most of the 
high ceremonies connected with the court and 
nobility are solemnized, we have seldom a day 
without similar occurrences." 

At this moment we entered the aisle in which 
the catafalque was deposited; when two of the 
reverend canons approached us with the custom- 
ary request that we would sprinkle holy water on 
the dead. Involuntarily my sister recoiled from 
such a ceremony at such a moment, and clinging 
to Colonel Manningfield's arm, made way for 
Wrottesley and myself to advance and fulfil that 
sacred duty. But what was my amazement and 
horror when I perceived my brother, instead of 
governing his movements with the discretion due 
to the august temple of God, rush wildly and 



THE OPERA. 249 

irreverently along the aisle,— put aside the priests 
who were kneeling beside the body, — and after 
casting a hurried glance upon the bier, stagger 
towards the nearest column for support. All his 
presentiments were justified by that momentary 
view ! It was, indeed, Dorothea, whose sweet face 
lay there discoloured by the livid hues of death! 
Attired, according to the custom of the country, 
in her brightest array, with a wreath of green 
myrtle encircling her head, she seemed as if en- 
tranced in sleep ; — but a sleep whose dreams were 
cheerless and painful. Instead of the placid smile 
which had adorned the wasted countenance of my 
own beloved Cecil when invested in the solemn 
garments of the grave — a smile which seemed des- 
tined to perpetuate in the depths of the sepulchre 
that happy'consciousness of my presence which had 
cheered her dying moments, — the brows of the 
young and beautiful Dorothea were contracted as 
by her parting struggle ; and the jewels ornament- 
ing her robes seemed placed there as if in mockery 
of the cold damp face on which they shed their 
M 3 



250 THE OPERA. 

glaring reflections. Dorothea had evidently died 
in anguish ; nor had the bright soul which thus 
bequeathed the sad impression of its sorrow been 
able to preserve the fair frame it had so long in- 
spired from the degradations of mortal nature I 

But it was not the bier of the youthful victim — 
it was not the compression of her pale lips, nor the 
glassy glimmering of her half-closed eyes, which 
at that moment paralyzed my heart. My wretched 
brother having thrown himself writhing on the 
marble pavement of the church, now gave vent to 
the agony of his soul in shrieks whose piercing 
tones might have moved every heart to commi- 
seration, had they not been instigated by the 
pangs of such unhallowed distress. He called 
upon Dorothea, as upon a soul in torture, to for- 
give him that he had been the blind instrument 
of her lawless love — the unconscious cause of her 
untimely death. He cried aloud to Heaven to 
withdraw its chastening hand — to mitigate its 
retribution upon his crimes — to spare the devoted 
victims of our house, — in terms so hideous, and 



THE OPEKA. 251 

apparently so frantic, that it was well fos ur his 
awful apostrophe to the Almighty was framed in 
a language unfamiliar to the wondering witnesses 
of the scene. Our Italian servants, who had 
followed to be spectators of the marriage rites, 
now rushed forward to my assistance, while I 
attempted to raise him in my arms, and convey 
him to the carriage. The completion of the ce- 
remony of the day was wholly out of the question. 
Florentia, half fainting, had already been re- 
moved from the scene by the horror-struck Man- 
ningfield ; and many of the superstitious idlers 
who are to be found at all hours in continental 
churches, appalled each other with exclamations 
that the English stranger was possessed by the 
devil. In the age of miracles, such a denuncia- 
tion might mdeed have borne some semblance of 
truth. The unhappy Wrottesley was rolling to 
andfro on the ground ; — ^liis eyes closed ; — his lips 
covered with foam ; — his body distorted by spas- 
modic contractions ; — and offering a horrid con- 
trast to the gentle form stretched upon the ad- 
joining bier — all coldness, and stillness, and rest. 



252 THE OPERA. 

Yet profound, my dear Adrian, as was my 
emotion at this afflicting scene, while I assisted 
in his removal from the vulgar inquisition of the 
crowd and the murmurs of inquiry which were 
now beginning to arise respecting the origin of 
this strange exhibition, I had a far more trying 
ordeal in reserve. I had to endure, in the 
presence of Manningfield, the maniacal execra- 
tions poured aloud by my brother on his own 
head, and on that of some mysterious partner in 
crime. He spoke of our family as a predestined 
race ; — he spoke of himself as shut out from the 
mercy of Heaven. In his paroxisms he cried 
aloud for the forgiveness of his brother Ran- 
dolph, — that at the instigation of a human fiend 
he had abetted in the concealment of his child — 
the vilification of his marriage ! 

" Iknew it,"' he cried, as he lay bound on his 
frenzied couch. " I discovered it ; — I sought out 
the priest they had bribed to silence, the witnesses 
they had suborned, the nurse who bore away 
the boy, the menials who watched over his in- 



THE OPERA. 253 

fancy. And did I uphold my brother's cause, or 
stand forth in behalf of the wretched wife whom 
they had terrified from the fulfilment of her 
duties, — estranged from her wedded husband, — 
and condemned to seclusion and madness ? — Did 
I brave the haughty Templetons in the pride of 
their triumph, and smite them to the dust by the 
infamy of public exposure? — No, no, no ! — I crept 
to the ear of Katharine, — the woman I loved, — 
of my brother's affianced wife, of that incarnation 
of evil; — I crept to her ear, and whispered my 
hideous tale, and threatened, and closed my 
heart against her entreaties ; and dearly did she 
buy the preservation of her secret. — Like me, 
she forfeited all — her mortal peace, her immortal 
soul ! — Katharine Barley's burning eyeballs 
glared hatred upon me as I swore to conceal the 
boy's survival from the knowledge of its father ; 
but they glared not as mine do now ; nor did 
her brain rage in the bewilderment of remorse as 
mine will for ever and ever ! She loathed me — 
my brother's bride loathed me, even as I loved 



254 THE OPERA. 

her, with an intensity beyond the instigation of 
any mortal passion. We were victims, — victims 
to the fatality spread aroimd the house of 
Maldyn, — victims to the ascendancy of the 
powers of evil — victims — victims — as I am — as 
she was who is lying among reptiles in the vaults 
of San Gennaro ! " 

Such, my son, were the horrible revelations 
by which I purchased my first consciousness of 
your existence ; and even at that frightful mo- 
ment, even amid the terrors that ensued — the 
prolonged agonies — the tremendous death-bed of 
my erring but repentant brother, the feeling upper- 
most in my heart was exultation in the certainty 
of possessing a living pledge of Cecil's affection, — a 
breathing thing that bore affinity with my injured 
wife ! — In the course of those weeks of humilia- 
tion and dismay that Wrottesley lingered on the 
verge of the grave, intervals of self-possession en- 
abled me to extort from him an acknowledgment 
of the means by which he had first possessed 
himself of evidence of the authenticity of my 



THE OPEEA. 255 

marriage, and the preservation of my child ; and 
with the assistance of Manningfield, the neces- 
sary depositions were taken without extending 
the dishonour of the family. But ardently as I 
desired to obtain the co-operation of the dying 
man in legitimatizing my unknown son, I own it 

was a relief to my feelings when the physicians 
summoned to his aid pronounced that the powers 
of life were giving way, and that the frail 
body of the sufferer could not long survive 
this total disorganization of mind. I felt that 
my brother was no longer capable of earthly hap- 
piness,— of earthly pardon; although that pene- 
trating eye which had marked his penitence and 
noted his expiation might vouchsafe to him the 
still mightier mercies of redemption — the peace 
which passeth all understanding. As I closed his 
dying eyes, and saw his head laid in the grave, 
I felt that gracious was the will of Heaven which 
decreed his release. Of what he had been to me, 
I thought no more. I forgave his treachery to 
the brother who had loved him so much and 



256 THE OPERA. 

been the hand in hand companion of his youth ; 
for I remembered with awe and trembling, that 
his sins towards himself and his Creator were now 
weighed in the balance, and judged on the judg- 
ment-seat of the Most High ! " 



THE OPERA. 257 



CHAPTER XIII. 



Mir. You have often 
Begun to tell me what I am : but stopped 
And left me to a bootless inquisition. 
Concluding, "Stay! not yet!" 

Pros. The hour's now come ! 
Tlie very minute bids thee ope thine ear ; 
Obey and be attentive. Dost remember 
A time before we came unto this cell ? 

THE TEMPEST. 



And thus had one of the fairest pages of our 
family archives become blotted with shame, and 
the bridal day of my sister obscured by the 
darkest of storms. From the moment of Manning- 
field's avowal of affection for Florentia, I had 
made it my study to intercept all private com- 



258 THE OPERA. 

munication between himself and Wrottesley, lest 
the gloomy chimeras of my brother should in- 
sensibly produce an unfavourable influence on 
the mind of one about to become a member of 
our family. But there was no possibility of con- 
cealing the recent catastrophe, nor the enormities 
it had tended to bring to hght. Manningfield 
would not hear of leaving me to become the 
solitary guardian of my brother's pillow ; and not 
one word had escaped him of all the horrible 
revelations of the delinquent's delirious ravings. 

But it was not from him proceeded the de- 
termination which bhghted for ever my hopes of 
finding a brother in my friend. His anxiety to 
remove his beloved Florentia to a happier home 
and brighter destiny was only augmented by 
the information he had recently acquired ; and it 
was solely my sister's courage and firmness of 
purpose which now decreed their separation. 
Though endowed by nature with a disposition as 
cheerful as it was gentle, her ^spirit had been 
gradually depressed by a series of domestic sor- 



THE OPEEA. 259 

rows and personal mortifications ; till grown 
fatally sensitive to the instability of worldly joy, 
she was now intent only on preparations for her 
own great trial. I had succeeded, it is true, in 
withholding from her participation the darker 
afflictions connected with my brother's destiny ; 
but previous to my arrival he had not failed to 
unfold to his sympathizing companion those 
peculiar notions touching the house of Maldyn, 
which had recently received such horrible authen- 
tication. Whether in the course of Wrottesley's 
illness she perceived, or fancied she perceived, in- 
voluntary symptoms of uneasiness and reluctance 
on the part of her affianced lover, it is unpossible 
to determine ; but on the evening succeeding our 
brother's release, Florentia secretly quitted her 
home, nor did I see her again till she had placed 
an eternal barrier between herself and Manning- 
field by assuming the garb of a Carmelite. From 
behind the chiUing grate of a cloister, she breathed 
her last farewell to me, previous to my departure 
for England in search of my child ; nor could I 



260 



THE OPERA. 



wonder that she had taught herself to regard as 
unsanctioned of Heaven, a marriage interrupted 
by so dreadful a catastrophe. 

" I love him too well, far — ^far too well," fal- 
tered Florentia, when I reproached her with the 
wretchedness she was heaping on my friend, " to 
involve him in the fatalities of our house. Watch 
over him, dearest Randolph — comfort him, soothe 
him ; and may the devotion of my life to peni- 
tence and prayer suffice to propitiate the future 
vengeance of Heaven. May that jealous God, 
who visits the sins of the fathers upon their 
children, be moved to absolve the crimes of the 
undenounced offender of our race ; and in your 
person, my dear brother, and that of your child, 
may the sentence be accomplished."" 

I had little difficulty in persuading my un- 
fortunate friend to quit a city connected with such 
varied scenes of affliction, and incessantly afford- 
ing a renewal of his regrets. But such was the 
despondency of his mind, that I dared not in- 
dulge in his presence those joyous anticipations 



THE OPERA. 261 

which had arisen like a day-spring amid the 
darkness of the recent tempest. While heavy 
sighs were still bursting from the depths of his 
heart, how could I insult him with an avowal of 
the dehcious pulsation that throbbed in mine 
whenever I recalled to memory the fair and gentle 
child I had seen clasped to the bosom of the 
detestable Lady Abbotscourt, and strove to trace 
in its remembered features some token of Cecil's 
loveliness — of CeciPs love. Already I seemed 
to feel the touch of its little hand, — the warmth of 
its breath, — the endearing glance of its smile, — 
its soft caresses of childish tenderness ; — already I 
seemed to listen to the name of ' father,' lisped 
in the enrapturing accents of infantine love. 
For four long years had 1 been defrauded of this 
treasury of happiness, and shut out from the 
holiest sympathies of human nature ! Could such 
an injury be forgiven ? 

Never shall I forget the excitement which 
fevered my frame during the interval between 
my brother's death and my arrival at Dover ! 



262 THE OPEEA. 

My existence was an alternation of rapture and 
agony ; at one moment exulting in the anticipa- 
tion of clasping my son within my arms, — and the 
next, recalling to mind the often-repeated dis- 
appointments which had prepared their penalties 
for my too sanguine heart. If my restlessness 
was for a moment tranquillized by sleep, some 
hideous dream would startle me into new terrors ; 
some terrible picture of the casualties of human 
life — of human childhood — would glare before 
my eyes in visionary mockery; — till time and 
space seemed leagued against me to prolong 
these tormenting uncertainties. Contrarieties of 
every description beset our journey ; and on my 
actual arrival in England, my mind was so over- 
wrought by its previous excess of anxiety, that 
I kneeled down and kisse(!^the land in an agony 
of delirious joy ! 

On approaching the metropolis, a new sense 
of happiness seemed dawning within me ; and it 
was with difficulty I calmed down my impatience 
to the demeanour of a rational being, when I dis- 



THE OPERA. 263 

covered that my brother and his family were on 
a tour, and that their protege^ little Adrian, who 
passed for the son of one of Lord Templeton's 
tenants, had been placed at some obscure school. 
It was fortunate for me that Manningfield was 
at hand, to direct and assist me in the negotia- 
tions which now became indispensable to obtain 
a clue to your retreat. 

Willing to spare the mind of my brother, as 
well as the honour of our house, the disclosure 
of many circumstances which Wrottesley's in- 
firmity of reason had brought to light, my first 
step was to address a letter to Lady Abbotscourt, 
setting forth my proofs of her guilt, and demand- 
ing the immediate restitution of my son. But 
Katharine was now grown bold in sin, and on this 
occasion demonstrate^ that 

A shameless woman is tlie woisc of men ; 

by replying to my claims with a declaration that 
they were grounded only on the ravings of a dying 
lunatic. 



264 THE OPERA. 

It was solely by a legal procedure, therefore, 
that I was enabled to repossess myself of the off- 
spring of my beloved Cecil ; and this termination 
of the business was every way unfortunate. Lord 
Temple ton, who had been kept in partial igno- 
rance of the detestable plots of his wife and 
daughter, became acquainted with the existence 
of his grandson only to recognise in him an illegi- 
timate outcast of his race, and expired ere I had 
means to prove that the malicious intrigues of 
Lady Abbotscourt had originated the doubts 
thrown upon the validity of our marriage. The 
certificate in Cecil's possession had probably been 
destroyed during her illness ; and the officiating 
priest, origin ally bribed to silence, was now no more. 
Even Father John, his companion in the religious 
fraternity to which he belonged, by whose inter- 
position this singular tissue of enormities first 
became known to my miserable brother, had ceased 
to exist ; and I found that the noble and promis- 
ing boy I was at length permitted to strain in 
fatherly fondness to my bosom, was excluded by 



THE OPERA. 265 

the malice of his nearest relatives from all here- 
ditary claims on the families of Darley or 
Maldyn. 

" And yet," cried Adrian, incapable of re- 
straining any longer the anxious perturbation of 
his feelings — " and yet, my dearest father, you ad- 
dressed me yesterday as heir to the title of Ab- 
botscourt ? " 

" Be patient,'' replied the count, smiling at his 
vehemence ; and it was the first smile which had 
brightened his careworn countenance in the course 
of his narration. " Believe me it required all your 
father's patience to endure the persecutions of 
which I found you the object. My funds ex- 
hausted by the expensive legal process to which 
I had been compelled to have recourse, — my health 
broken by the series of agonizing trials to which 
I had been exposed, — my pride wounded by the 
insulting triumph of the infamous Katharine, I 
had little loft but my honour and my sword to 
ensure a maintenance for my injured child. But 
even these were of some account in the disordered 

VOL. I. N 



266 THE OPEEA. 

state of European politics. I had brethren in 
arms, of my own persuasion, serving with distinc- 
tion in the armies of the emperor. I furnished 
myself with the necessary recommendations, en- 
tered the Austrian cavalry, served in it with 
favour and distinction, and retired to the seclusion 
of Elzstein only when my infirmities necessitated 
my seclusion from active service. During the 
troubles of the French invasion my son was shel- 
tered at Elzenkrentz, under the tutorage of the 
worthy Remigius ; and the friendship which 
ensued between us determined me to become the 
proprietor of this humble retreat ; where I trusted 
to end my days unmolested by the cares of the 
world, and soothed in my decline by the succours 
of the church. Had I pursued my mihtary career 
in its original destination, I might indeed have 
attained similar distinctions, and achieved a more 
ample provision for my son. But India, my dear 
Adrian, is fatal to the frame of youth ; and to 
expose my only child to the perils of such a cli- 
mate, or to endure a second separation from my re- 



THE OPERA. 267 

covered treasure, was not to be thought of : I had 
therefore suffered Manningfield to depart alone." 

*' And was Lord Abbotscourt satisfied to leave 
his only brother to the obscurity of such a fate ?" 

" Alas ! my dear Adrian, I have every rea- 
son to believe that, to the last, the ruling passion 
of my brother's existence was hatred to me and 
mine. I had forestalled him in the favour of 
his father, the regard of his family, the affections 
of his wife; and not even the sacrifices and 
penalties to which he had seen me condemned 
were sufficient for the mitigation of his fury. 
Perhaps there might be traced, in the intemper- 
ance of his feelings, some symptoms of aberration 
of intellect ; for only a few years after my final 
abandonment of my native country, he withdrew 
himself wholly from society, and from his family. 
While Lady Abbotscourt pursued, amid the 
dissipations of London, that heartless career 
which was best fitted for the indulgence of her 
evil passions, her lord was a solitary inhabitant of 
the obscure castle, to the desolation of which his 
N 2 



268 THE OPERA. 

own eflPorts had so materially contributed. Re- 
jecting the society of his only daughter, who, 
whatever might be her mother's faults, was 
guiltless of offence towards him, he lived a recluse, 
and died — a maniac ! '''' 

'' And this daughter — this cousin — does she 
yet live ?" said Adrian. " Or am I now sole re- 
presentative of the ill-fated house of Maldyn?" 

" It is scarcely three years,'' replied the 
count, " since I received a letter from Mr. But- 
ler, the confidential agent of my brother, ac- 
quainting me that in consequence of his mental 
infirmity commissioners had been appointed by 
the Irish Chancery, for the regulation of his 
affairs. That my absence from the kingdom 
had prevented the insertion of my name in the 
commission ; but that, as heir apparent to the 
title and estates, my presence was earnestly de- 
sired on the spot. He added, in the name of 
Lady Abbotscourt, certain mysterious allusions 
to her desire of extinguishing the feuds of the 
family by an alliance between her daughter, sole 



THE OPERA. 269 

heiress to the immense opulence of the Barleys, 
and my son, Adrian Maldyn ; and the expres- 
sions of almost maternal tenderness towards your- 
self in which this proposal was couched, were in- 
termingled with hints of the possibility of estab- 
lishing your rights and legitimacy."' 

" An alliance between my mother's son, and 
the daughter of Lady Abbotscourt !" cried Adrian. 
"How, my dear father — how could you find 
terms sufficiently contemptuous to mark your re- 
fusal r 

'' Rendered wary by former experience," re- 
plied the count, " my reply was any thing but ad- 
verse or scornful. I entreated further explana- 
tions, — alleged the state of my health as the 
cause of my disinclination to visit England, — and 
requested from Mr. Butler some insight into the 
character and disposition of my niece. Lady 
Abbotscourt, I knew, was sufficiently acquainted 
with mine, to be assured that the mere temptation 
of thirty thousand per annum would be insuffi- 
cient to decide me on accepting her for a daugh- 



270 THE OPEEA. 

ter-in-law ; and the result proved that I had not 
reckoned with an erroneous calculation. Satis- 
fied, by the earnestness of my inquiries respecting 
her daughter, that I was eager to enrich the 
future coronet of Abbotscourt, by securing the 
heiress for mv son, Katharine now ventured to 
negotiate in her own name. The reply was in- 
dited by her own hateful hand; and expressed 
in strong terms her joy and gratitude that the 
animosities of our earlier years were likely to be 
appeased, and that an union between the sur- 
viving representatives of the family would extin- 
guish all remembrance of past misfortunes. Her 
daughter, whom she represented as a model of 
every grace and every excellence, had exhibited 
from her birth, she said, a pecuUar family re- 
semblance, which would probably tend to endear 
her as much to myself, as in her early childhood 
it had done to Lord Templeton, who had be- 
queathed her the reversion of his splendid fortime 
and princely estates. 

" It was always my hope and project," wrote 



THE OPERA. 271 

the crafty Lady Abbotscourt, " in that detention 
of your son, which you so ungenerously resented, 
to educate my nephew in a manner deserving the 
name he doubly inherits, with the view of uniting 
him to the last of the Darleys. Confirmed in 
this intention by the enthusiastic tenderness I 
soon conceived for the child, I found it difficult 
to relinquish him to your hands ; and not even 
my own lovely girl has ever obtained so strong a 
hold upon my affections, as the Adrian Maldyn 
whom I had already taught myself to regard as 
my own." 

To these flattering declarations, she incauti- 
ously added a declaration that her sister's marriage 
certificate was unquestionably in existence ; and 
in the next letter I had the art to extort from her 
in the process of negotiation, she actually com- 
mitted herself by so detailed a confession of 
facts, that I had no longer any hesitation in 
throwing off the mask and placing her letters in 
the hands of the commissioners appointed to the 
management of the Maldyn estates. The vali- 



272 THE OPERA. 

dity of my marriage was instantly investigated 
and confirmed ; for my threat of exposure proved 
a sufficient inducement to Katharine to give up 
the original documents she had so long se- 
creted." 

" And her daughter," inquired Adrian, with 
an air of affected unconcern, " did she not resent 
this tacit rejection .?" 

" Of the feelings or opinions of either," re- 
plied the count, " I inquired no further. To 
me both were worse than indifferent; but I doubt 
not that the charms imputed to Miss Maldyn, 
combined with the attractions of her enormous 
wealth, have long since secured her a suitable 
alliance. She must be three years younger than 
yourself, and consequently in her twenty-first 
year. I trust that the melancholy warning of 
her father's mental affliction may have operated 
favourably on her mind. Heaven knows, the off- 
spring and pupil of Katharine Darley must have 
had need of such a lesson !" 

" But since my nuclei's demise has deter- 



THE OPERA. 273 

mined you to renew your intercourse with your 
native country," said Adrian, after a meditative 
pause, '^surely, my dear father, you will be 
persuaded to accompany me to England ? I 
can no longer wonder at the aversion which 
estranged you from your native country, while 
poverty and the imputed illegitimacy of your 
child tended to degrade you from your rightful 
position ; but now — ^now that your claims and 
mine are established — now that all the joys of 
gratified pride and gratifying opulence are at 
your command — why should you restrict your 
existence to this obscure and cheerless retreat ; — 
why condemn yourself to the desolate monotony 
of an Austrian village?" 

" I will not chill your enthusiasm by an old 
adage, and tell you that ' custom is second na- 
ture ;** or attempt to explain to a person in full en- 
joyment of the buoyant impulses of youth and 
health, how limited are the pleasures, how indo- 
lent the habits of the sick and infirm. I will 

n3 



274 THE OPERA. 

rather, my dear son, leave you to suppose," said 
the count, smiling at his eagerness, " that I am 
willing to put you to the proof by the united 
temptations of liberty, wealth, and personal dis- 
tinction." 

'' I trust I shall not dishonour myself in the 
ordeal,*" cried Adrian, blushing deeply as he spoke. 
" But I own it would be gratifying to ^me to 
receive the benefit of my father's experience in 
my first intercourse with England and English- 
men." 

"And Englishwomen /" added the count ; 
" for I trust to receive a daughter-in-law from 
your hands of your own faith and country. "V es ! 
my dear son ; you must marry and settle at Ab- 
botscourt. Invite me to England or Ireland by 
new ties and renovated connexions, and I shall 
less intensely dread the recollections of early ties 
and youthful associations which would at present 
greet me at every step. Invite me to the cheer- 
ful circle of a domestic fireside, and I promise 



THE OrERA 275 

to renounce Elzstein, and quarter myself with 
old Armbrust for the remainder of my days, in a 
wing of Abbotscourt Castle." 



276 THE OPEEA. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



I am resolved I will not stop hisjourney, 

Nor practise any violent means to stay 

The unbridled course of youth in him — for that 

Restrained becomes impatient. 

He that's compelled to goodness may be good, I 

But for that fit alone ; while others, drawn 

By softness and example, get a habit. 

Ben Jonson. 



It was only a few days after this touching 
but gratifying explanation, that Adrian Maldyn 
took his departure from the desolate manor-house, 
of which he allowed himself to speak in such dis- 
paraging terms ; and sooth to say, his exit was 
noted in the village with almost the same exulta- 
tion that had celebrated his entrance. 



THE OPERA. 277 

Count Maldyn— or let us defy the power of 
habit, and call him at once by his own name and 
title, Lord Abbotscoiurt — ^had acquired, in the 
course of his long seclusion, notions and peculia- 
rities which might be termed eccentric, even had 
they not been occasionally tinged by that flighti- 
ness of mind characteristic of the organization of 
the Maldyn family. It was his pleasure to 
alter nothing of his previous course of Hfe, in 
honour of his change of fortunes. " I have 
been happy and contented during the last eight 
years,"' said he to his son, " with the attendance 
of Hiob Armbrust, and three or four boorish 
house-knaves, and pottering old women; and 
why increase my establishment.'' — They serve 
me for love no less than lucre; and I should 
only breed strife and contention among them 
by the introduction of a gang of idle me- 
nials, such as your Ebene, and the laced varlet 
whom you call yoiu: courier. Even were I at 
your suggestion to pass the winter at Vienna, 
who sbfluld I find among my old comrades so 



278 THE OPERA. 

patient towards my long stories as the reverend 
superior of St. Florian's — so dexterous in the 
management of my gout as the worthy Brother 
Remigius ? — No ! no ! Adrian ; I am grown nar- 
rative and infirm in my mental and bodily capaci- 
ties ; and here, in my old home, I am sure of indul- 
gence. Farewell, boy ! farewell ! — be merry — 
be wise ; and if you are willing to gratify the 
whims of your father, devote a vacant half-hour 
of every day to the transcription of its events. In 
sailing on the summer-sea of youth, we know not 
on what barren strand we may be wrecked here- 
after ; and believe me there comes a time when 
the review al of past events forms one of our truest 
gratifications. Had I exerted myself to chro- 
nicle the passing events of my earlier life, the 
record would have served to cheer many a tedi- 
ous day of subsequent solitude and sickness." 

To so slight a request Mr. Maldyn had nothing 
to offer but cheerful acquiescence, while the 
boundless liberality practised towards him by his 
father in every arrangement for his journey and 



THE OPERA. 279 

residence in England demanded his utmost gra- 
titude. 

'* Judging from the correspondence of Mr. 
Meriton, the legal agent to whom I am indebted 
for those negotiations with Lady Abbotscourt 
which terminated in the establishment of your 
rights, I have httle doubt you will find in him a 
judicious adviser and gentlemanly man. In both 
capacities I have already bespoken his friendship 
for my son," continued Lord Abbotscourt ; " and 
as he is installed in Butler's appointment for the 
universal regulation of my affairs, you will have 
no difficulty in obtaining from him any further 
inteUigence you may require. From my old and 
excellent friend, Sir Herbert Manningfield, you 
will derive excellent coimsel on matters more closely 
connected with your intercourse with society. 
Even changed as you are from the wild boy of 
fourteen who accompanied him in his ramble 
through Styria and Camiola, immediately after 
the peace, I have little fear but that he will recog- 



280 THE OPERA. 

nise the nephew of that beloved Florentia who sur- 
vived but so short a time their disastrous separa- 
tion. Little, indeed, did I dream when Manning- 
field scouted my retreat on the Traun, that we 
should both live to acquire possessions of so much 
more dignified a character; he^ the modern ele- 
gance of Manningfield Park, — and myself the 
ponderous antiquity of our baronial castle." 

" Still less did I imagine," observed Adrian, 
with a smile, " that the general, whose quaint 
habits and Orientalisms were the sport of my 
boyish satire, had been the hero of a romantic 
incident. I trust his ancient friendship for my 
father has long induced him to forget in me the 
youthful petulance he was wont to reprehend." 

" If half the merits he ascribes to Lady Har- 
riet Manningfield — " 

'^ How ! — is Sir Herbert really married .^" cried 
Adrian. " I remember you wrote to me at Got- 
tingen of some such scheme." 

*' Married — and to a young and charming 



THE OPERA. 281 

woman,''' replied his father. " From their intro- 
ductions you will probably derive a favourable 
access to London society." 

" I should rather imagine that the rank and 
fortune 1 derive from yourself, my dear father, 
will afford a surer passport." 

"My dear Adrian," replied Lord Abbotscourt, 
gravely, " draw no deductions of England and its 
prejudices from the contracted sphere of a petty 
German court. Your native country is mighty 
in every thing, even in its faults ; and at present 
you can form little conception of the arbitrary 
nature and prodigious extent of the conventional 
formalities prevalent in the metropolis you are 
about to visit. In modern London — (if I am to 
believe Sir Herbert's representations) — in modern 
London, as in the Paris of the last century, an 
error of taste ranks in the scale of delinquency 
far blacker than a breach of morality. To be 
ridiculous, is to be infamous ; Fashion has as- 
sumed the perpetual dictation of society." 

" General Manningfield is so much of a hu- 



282 



THE OPERA. 



morist, that we must allow for some exaggeration 
in the picture." 

" For much, — or I should scarcely venture to 
recommend a visit to the heartless and fastidious 
cu-cles depicted in his sketches. Still, let me 
forewarn you to beware of attracting too much at- 
tention to yourself on your entrance into society. 
Our family has outlived the notice of the public ; 
the name of Maldyn, for so many years unpro- 
nounced among our countrymen, is almost for- 
gotten ; and in the formation of new friendships 
and connexions, I advise you to abstain from any 
ostensible pretension to the opulence and honours 
with which it is connected. Do not render your- 
self a mark for the intrigues of the designing of 
either sex." 

Such was the parting advice of the doating 
parent; and if Adrian already in some degree 
premeditated its infringement, something must be 
pardoned to the buoyant spirits of twenty-three, 
excited to their highest pitch by the first prospect 
of independence. During the few remaining days 



THE OPERA. 283 

of his sojourn at Elzbach, he had some difl&culty 
in restraining his impatience under the endurance 
of the St. Florianic homilies, the importunate re- 
prehensions of old Armbrust, and the vehement 
apostrophes of Michelehen, and divers other 
ancient matrons of the village. It was astonish- 
ing the quantity of mischief, both moral and 
active, which Monsieur Ebene the French valet, 
and Ludwig the Hanoverian courier, had managed 
to perpetrate during the ten days of idleness in- 
flicted upon their hvely capacities at Elzbach. 
If half the reports officially rendered to their 
young master were correct, neither the vil- 
lage, the monastery, nor the castle — neither 
church nor state — had been exempted from their 
waggery and knavery ; and a general exclamation 
of joy and triumph actually greeted the departing 
wheels of their patron's son. Not Adrian himself 
was more delighted to get rid of the tedious, 
prosing, matter-of-fact worthies of the Gold 
Forelle, than were the Elzbacheners themselves 
to be secured from the domestic incursions of 
Ludwig and his dandified comate. 



284 THE OPERA. 

Yet the reflections of Mr. Maldyn, as he ra- 
pidly skimmed the level plains of Bavaria on his 
way towards Strasburg, were tinctured with re- 
grets wholly independent of his parting with his 
home, or the melancholy narrative recently un- 
folded to his knowledge. He could not forget 
that while his father had thus gratuitously laid 
bare for his edification every secret, every sorrow 
of his past life, he had retained within his own 
bosom confessions of folly and disobedience such 
as it was his duty to tender in return. While 
journeying from Hanover homewards, Adrian had 
firmly made up his mind to acknowledge and 
claim his father"'s indulgence for transgressions 
hitherto unsuspected at Elzbach ; and now that 
the moment for familiar intercourse was over, he 
bitterly reproached himself for having day after 
day neglected the suggestions of his own frank 
and honourable nature. He felt how much easier 
would have been the personal confession of his 
youthful excesses, than the task of committing 
them to an indelible impression. He felt the 



THE OPEEA. 285 

awkwarcloess of writing " My dear father, I have 
deceived you. While you supposed me busy 
in the pursuit of my studies at Gottingen last 
winter, I was passing the carnival at Paris with 
my friend Gustavus Adelberg in the midst of 
dissipation and riot. I have formed friendships 
and connexions of which you dream not. I have 
mingled familiarly among those Enghsh fashion- 
ables you describe in such severe terms. Already 
I am loved and hated — already I have been ca- 
ressed, cajoled, defrauded, — by those against whose 
iniquities you forewarn me. Instead of requiring 
the favour of Sir Herbert and Lady Harriet Man- 
ningfield to ensure my admittance into the great 
world of London, my own sanction may not be 
useless to themselves. And although it was osten- 
sibly Adrian " Baron von Elzstein " who accom- 
panied Gustavus von Adelberg in this unau- 
thorized expedition, I have little doubt of finding 
Adrian Maldyn recognized with pleasure by many 
of those fair countrywomen who vouchsafed their 
smiles to the German truant. Such, my dear 



286 THE OPEEA. 

father, such were the indiscretions which pccupied 
the leisure of your absent son; and such the 
modes of excess to which I have recently applied 
the first-fruits of your liberality ! " 

Even now he resolved to defer his letter of 
contrition till his arrival in London ; flattering 
himself that he might be enabled to enliven its 
vexatious details with intelligence of a more 
cheering order. 

In the mean time, it was a circumstance by no 
means unacceptable to Mr. Maldyn that his 
route to England necessitated a short pause amid 
the scenes of his stolen pleasures. He had pro- 
mised his father that a week should form the 
utmost limit of his stay in Paris; but Lord 
Abbotscourt, in suggesting a period too short for 
the formation of dangerous attachments, had very 
little suspicion that he was authorising a visit 
intended only for their renewal ; that his uni- 
versity novice had figured as the young and 
handsome Baron Elzstein, at half the bals coS' 
tumts of the preceding carnival ; that he was 



THE OPERA. 287 

the idol of the foyar at the Gymnase, and the 
victim of the cercle at the salon ; that not Mon- 
sieur Ebene himself was more warmly welcomed 
at the Hotel de Wagram^ than the young 
stranger who had occupied an humble quatrieme 
in the month of March, and who now returned 
en grand Seigneur y in the month of December, 
to take possession of its brilliant suite au pre- 
mier ttage. 

Anxious as was Mr. Maldyn to set foot upon 
his native country, and acquaint himself with 
those interests and localities and customs which 
had been so often the theme of his conversations 
with his father, there was something in the exhi- 
larating aspect of Paris which insensibly mode- 
rated his impatience. He knew that London, 
whether in its general or individual character, 
had nothing to offer comparable with the grace- 
ful sociability of the select circles of the Chaussee 
D'*Antin, or the piquant variety of the public 
amusements of the French capital ; and it was 
not till he had ascertained at the hotel of the 



288 THE OPERA. 

British embassy, that his friends, Lady Neville 
and Mrs. Perceval, had quitted Paris to pass the 
winter in Italy, and that Sir Henry Bagot, the 
young attache whose intimacy with the son of 
Baron Adelberg had been his means of general 
introduction during their former visit, was now 
in England on leave of absence, — that he could 
reconcile himself to the thought of so speedy a 
departure from the scene of all his pleasures. 
He had already despatched from Munich an in- 
vitation to his friend Gustavus, to meet him in 
England, and accept in London some slight 
token of his gratitude for the hospitality and 
friendship lavished upon him during the five 
years of his residence in Hanover ; and as soon 
as Ludwig could be persuaded to admit that 
the Offenbach calash had undergone sufficient 
reparation to encounter the perils of the ^^at'e of 
Picardy, and the macadamization of Kent, they 
quitted the joyous, stirring, sunshiny, obsequious, 
laughing, dancing, singing city of vaudevilles, — 
slept their way from the porte St. Denis to 



THE OPERA. 289 

Dessins Hotel, and from the Ship Inn to 
Westminster Bridge. 

Few individuals have ever sat down to their 
introductory cutlet in the appartement des 
pnnces of M^^'^^^^'s hotel so indifferent to the 
merits of the chef and the state of their own 
appetite, or so keenly alive to the novelties of the 
scene, as Lord Abbotscourf s son. Every ob- 
ject, every sound, the very air he breathed, was 
a source of interest and curiosity to his mind. 
Every trifle connected with his native country 
had been at one time or other an object of in- 
quiry to him ; and though he was scrupulously 
careful to assume the air of languid listless- 
ness he had been taught to admire in Count 
Anastasio Pignatelli, Sir Henry Bagot, and 
others of the elect of English ton, his eyes 
and ears and heart were open to a thousand new 
impressions and anticipations. The pungency 
of the sooty winter atmosphere, — the growl of 
" Second edition of the evening Courier,''^ shouted 
and echoed from Bond-street to Grosvenor- 

VOL. I. o 



290 THE OPERA. 

square ; the rumble of the occasional carriages, 
and the jingling of the frequent hackney-coaches 
over the hoUow pavement — even the ordinary- 
furniture of the chamber in the clumsiness of 
its English solidity — struck him with all the 
force of novelty. Never had an iski or an ouski 
a Venetian magnifico or a Persian satrap, per- 
ambulated that chamber of heterogeneous inmates, 
with a more eager inquisition into its peculiari- 
ties, or a more earnest desire for the dawning of 
day, to extend his observations to the nationali- 
ties and Nash-onalities of modern London. 



THE OPERA. 291 



CHAPTER XV. 



J'ecrirai avec sincerite, mais suivant mon humeur et ma fan- 
taisie. Quelquefois m'abandonnant a ma paresse, a moa 
insouciance, et courant ensuite apres ties souvenirs presque 
effaces ; d'autrefois plus emu, recherchant arec soin tous mes 
sentimens, les ecrivant chaque jour, et osant meme derancer 
I'arenir. — De Souza. 



DIARY OF THE HON. ADRIAN MALDYN. 

' ', '* Hotel f Brook-street, 

December 23, 182-. — Arrived in London; — 
the heart's core of the civilized earth ! — Wearied 
to death by the contrariety of postilions and post- 
boys, — commissionnaires and custom-house ofl5- 
cers, and all the Wrights and wrongs of my 
Dover journey, — but stimulated to new life by 
o 2 



292 THE OPERA. 

wonder and curiosity. To-morrow I shall com- 
mence my chronicle j and never was night so 
importunate as that which still divides me from 
a morrow so full of excitement. Why did the 
destinies decree my arrival here at this season 
of short days and tedious nights ? 

January 4. — My father is right! — There 
cannot be a stronger check upon the conduct 
than the custom of diarizing our follies and 
fancies. The man who commits his opinions to 
paper warm from the mint of the brain (or of 
the heart, so long as impulse and not judgment 
rules the hour) is startled on finding their incon- 
sistencies forced on his notice, and learns to 
mistrust himself on future occasions. It has 
been said that no two persons differ so widely 
from each other, as the same individual from 
himself at successive periods of life. Even my 
short experience confirms this notion; and I am 
resolved to ascertain its truth by perfect candour 
in my self-communing. In spite of all that has 
been predicted to me of the influence of the 



THE OPERA. 293 

great world, at least let me be honest with my- 
selfy and reserve my lies for my friends. 

Oh, this London! — I had intended to sit 
down pen in hand the very day succeeding my 
arrival, to record my impressions of England, — 
if England that portion of the kingdom can be 
called, which is daily and nightly traversed by 
restless peregrinators between Britain and the 
wide continent. Impressions! — what did I 
feel ? — what did I think ? — I know not ! — Every 
hour from that to this has imprinted some 
new and striking image on my mind ; yet I 
have never found a moment to give them per- 
manent existence. In Paris, indeed, every 
minute is occupied, and pressingly occupied; 
but there is something so easy, so accommodat- 
ing, so glissant in all its engagements, whether 
voluntary or peremptory, that no bustle ensues. 
Life is made a sport instead of a toil even in its 
severer duties ; and the ball is kept up without 
effort or w^eariness. In London there is more 



294 THE OPERA. 

pleasure ; the sources of amusement are wider 
and more various; but one works harder in 
finding them. For my own part, I prefer the 
garden rose to those which must be laboriously 
forced into existence. 

We used to say at Gottingen that every 
Englishman is born with a mania for legislation. 
Let him have but a single idea in his head, and 
it is sure to be connected in some way or other 
with " the British constitution.'' The hereditary 
worshippers of liberty are in point of fact so 
enamoured of despotism, that not content with 
the laws of God and man framed for their sub- 
jugation, they have constituted half a dozen 
minor codes of the most fanciful and arbitrary 
nature ; and as if these enactments of the 
common council of society were insufficient to 
render him uncomfortable, each individual 
institutes for himself an extraordinary sta- 
tute of limitations. In Paris, people usually 
conform to the little prejudices and customs of 



THE OPERA. 395 

the coterie to which they belong ; and in deter- 
mining a point too trivial to be submitted to the 
mighty test of " right or wrong ? " refer it to 
the preference of those with whom they Uve in 
habits of intimacy. But this never appears the 
case in my own country. An EngUshman ob- 
serves on every petty occasion, " I make it a 
rule," — "it is my invariable custom," — " nothing 
should induce me to, &c." He lives up to a 
theory in the choice of his great coat ; and acts 
upon fixed principles in the colour of his coach 
horses ; — regulates his servants' hall on the sys- 
tem of Say — and will not pass a bill without 
three readings, and a family committee. Even 
his egotism assumes a parliamentary tone. 

January 5. — Providence be thanked, Bagot 
has this moment arrived from his uncle's seat 
in Hertfordshire ; I shall no longer be con- 
demned to ride, drive, and walk, in solitary 
snlkiness along the tedious avenues of brick, 
whose aristocratic dulness incessantly reminds 
one of the pride with which the most com- 



296 THE OPERA. 

mercial nation in the world repudiates all asso- 
ciation with the outward and visible signs of 
trade. A shop introduced into a street en- 
sures its desecration ; and the value of houses 
is trebly increased where " no thoroughfare/' 
can be set forth in recommendation. 

It would be impossible to produce any thing 
more satisfactorily expletive of the increase of 
coroners' inquests during the winter months in 
London, than the gloomy aspect of one of the 
streets devoted to " genteel residences," — losing 
its northward prospect among the fogs of the 
New E,oad, its southern amid the smother of May 
Fair; with rows of narrow blinking windows, 
obscured by filthy muslin curtains and still 
dingier draperies of heavy damask, or closed in 
announcement of the predilection of their owner 
for the biting breezes of his country-seat ; the 
walls smeared and darkened by soot, — the offices 
plunged dungeon-like into the depths of the 
earth, in fetid contact with the common and un- 
common sewers. Such is the house which John 



THE OPERA. 297 

Bull boasts as his castle; such the caverns 
which these railers at negro slavery apportion 
to their luckless domestics. " C'est pire que les 
anthropophages ! " exclaimed Ebene this morn- 
ing, when he described to me the damp and 
dreary subterraneous chamber devoted to the 
use of my servants. " Pour etre mangSy pourvu 
que la sauce fut bonne, je sauroism^y soumettre; 
mats me f aire enterrer vif! — Je n^y tiens pas ! '' 
As to Ludwig, he has been luxuriating in a 
porter-butt ever since his arrival ; beer and to- 
bacco afford a universal panacea for German 
miseries. 

January 5. — How provoking ! — Bagot is again 
off for the country. — He assures me that Christ- 
mas is the season of the year allotted by fashion 
for the indulgence of rural predilections ; and 
that nothing but huge sea-coal fires and a deep 
snow reconcile the members of the beau-monde 
to the sight of their woods and lawns. Hosts of 
idlers assemble in these country mansions, osten- 
sibly for the purpose of hunting and shooting ; 
o 3 



298 THE OPERA. 

but in reality for the same motives which unite 
them in town — ^to flirt with other men's wives, 
and other men's daughters, — devour other men*s 
venison, — and criticise other men's wine; the 
said fathers and husbands being buried, in the 
interim, full fathom five in philosophy : — reading 
or manufacturing political pamphlets, which have 
been re-manufactured, re-read, and re-committed 
to oblivion at least two thousand times since 
the epoch of the Rump Parliament, — being sus- 
ceptible of adaptation to each trimestral crisis, 
periodically agonizing the British empire. It 
appears that there is always a distillery or a 
habeas corpus bill — a corn law, or a canon law, 
necessary to endanger the constitution ; in the 
discussion of which powdered heads are shaken, 
buttons held, and hustings mobbed with as 
much earnestness, as if the great march of man- 
kind could be retarded by their influence, more 
than by the obstruction of an atom of sand. 

Bagot, it seems, is both by station and acci- 
dent of high account in these Christmas coteries. 



I 



THE OPERA. 299 

Young, handsome, rich, intelligent, and his own 
master, he is super-endowed with the attraction 
of being fresh from Paris, with the last nothings 
of the best society sparkling on his lips; 
and the most expert hand at a proverb or a 
charade, who ever improvisated the finesse of 
Scribe. Moreover, he dances the mazurka like 
Tagiioni en pantalon; and is withal the best 
humoured companion and most animated guest 
ever vouchsafed to a country-house. 

What will become of me till his return ? — He 
offered to take me with him to Lord Romford's, 
and promised me the smiles of her ladyship's 
two daughters, as an incitement to the journey; 
but it would not suit my present views to be 
smuggled into society in that sort of free and 
easy style. Till last night, I was only known to 
Sir Henry Bagot as the Baron von Elzstein, a 
friend of his friend, young Adelberg; and I 
should not even desire him to take my actual 
station upon trust and present me to others, till 
my new honours have received ample authenti- 



300 THE OPERA. 

cation. He tells me that Lady Neville and 
Cecilia will not return to Endand before 
Easter; but by that time I trust I shall find 
myself properly estabUshed in this fastidious 
metropolis. Mrs. Perceval, courted and rtpandue 
as she is, must not see me lounging away my 
days in a dull hotel, or driven to a still duller 
theatre for my evening's amusement. 

" Aha ! Adrian, my friend ! — a little touch of 
the pride of the house of Maldyn ? '' As if it 
were possible for Elzbach and Gottingen to 
afford me credentials to the elect of London 
society! But then Cecilia knows nothing of 
my connexion with these places. In Paris it 
was my fortune to meet her where Baron 
Elzstein was warmly welcomed as the friend 
of Count Pignatelli, and the companion of Sir 
Henry Bagot; nor has she a conception that 
there exists a class, — a presentable class of men 
and women, — beyond the pale of that exclusive 
circle in which she has lived, and moved, and 
had her being. Dearest CeciHa! the fanciful 



THE OPERA. 301 

but ndhe coquette that other women are from 
affectation, she is by nature, — by ineffaceable 
and changeless nature ; steady only in caprice, 
and consistent only in inconsistency. Yet how 
channing amid all her faults ! Last night, in 
speaking of her, Bagot compared her to a comet: 
whose brilliant irregularities are scrutable only 
by the eye of wisdom, and a matter of vulgar 
terror to the crowd. Yet not to the vul<rar 
alone : I am convinced that even my father 
would listen with alarm to Cecilia's sallies. 
Were not those lips so beautiful in the archness 
of their expression, — but I will not permit 
myself to rhapsodize in this matter-of-fact 
journal ! 

It appears that Pignatelli accompanied them 
to Naples. Surely Lady Neville cannot be so 
blind as to remain in ignorance of his attach- 
ment ; and if so, what are they all about ? Well, 
well ! — 'tis no affair of mine ; twelve weeks — 
thirteen weeks — (let me see, when does Easter 
fall this year ?) — will make me fully acquainted 



302 THE OPERA. 

with the affair. Till then, I will think and dream 
of Cecilia — as little as I can help ! 

January 6. — Do I dine at home to-day ? in- 
quires the supercilious waiter; and though it 
is clearly for mine host's advantage that I should 
drop into his apartments friendless as if from 
the skies or Baffin's Bay, I see they are begin- 
ning to think it odd I have so few visitors and 
pay so few visits. In spite of my father's warn- 
ing, I fancy I must throw away some hundreds 
to show them I am not an adventurer ; I de- 
tected one of the fellows in a very close 
scrutiny of the bank-note for which I requested 
change this morning. 

Twelve o'clock. Again returned from that 
huge wilderness called a patent theatre; and 
again I say, why was I destined to visit London 
when all London is out of town ; when skaiting 
on the Serpentine is the order of the day, and 
pantomimes the order of the night? It is the 
custom here to dine at seven, and to go to the play 
at half-past six ; an economy of time and place 



THE OPERA. 303 

hardly compassable by mortal ingenuity. I 
arrived at Covent Garden at eight, and not 
having dreamed of securing a private box, found 
some difficulty in getting a seat on a back row ; 
where on a hard and narrow bench, a fat wheezing 
old gentleman to my right, and a tall ungainly 
young one, buttoned to the chin, on the left, 
promised Uttle for my local advantages. The 
asthmatical heavings of the one formed a bad 
addition to a detestable orchestra, without 
being sufficiently powerful to drown the discord- 
ances of the worst corps d'opera that ever 
blundered through the enchantments of Figaro. 
We had a Barber who did not sing, a Countess 
who could not, a Susanna who should not, 
and a little sulky Page who would not ; a bass 
who growled like a polar bear, and a tenor 
that squeaked like a broken-winded bag-pipe. 
Their effiDrts were prodigiously applauded by 
the galleries, who probably exercised their 
hands in this manner to promote circulation, 
for the house was filled with a chilly orange- 



304 THE OPERA. 

coloured fog, obscuring even the glare of the 
gas-lights, and throwing the opposite boxes 
into a total eclipse. I hazarded a single remark 
to the well-buttoned young gentleman; who 
instantly drew in the skirts of his coat and the 
corners of his mouth, elevated his eyebrows 
and froze me by a monosyllable. And after 
witnessing with admiration the prodigious extent 
of histrionic fortitude in the quantity of thumps 
and bumps endured to the tune of an Irish jig 
during five acts of a pantomime, I returned home 
with a headache, to ponder over the degradation of 
the drama in the country of Shakspeare ; and to 
drown my irritation of mind and body in a warm 
bath and a draught of Seltzer water. So much 
for a patent theatre ! " They manage these things 
better in France !" Ay I and in Germany. People 
there are less self-engrossed and more disposed 
to the sympathies of dramatic excitement. 
They button themselves less sturdily within 
their broadcloth, both literally and figuratively^ 
January 8. — More frost, — more fog, — more 



THE OPERA. 305 

cold, — more coughs, — more dreariness, — more 
desolation ! And yet how little has the climate 
we damn so unceremoniously for all these delin- 
quencies to do with the business ! At Vienna, 
the air from the Gallicean mountains and the 
Danube is fifty-degrees keener ; and during a 
whole winter, there are not twenty days in 
which the spire of St. Stephen's is not enveloped 
in mist. Yet how cheerful the city ! — how gay 
the sledge parties, the balls, and all the 
varying dissipations of the carnival ! — Notwith- 
standing the influence of the season, society 
forms a still intenser focus, and gathers itself 
into a cordial mass, defying the rigour of the 
atmosphere, and the still harsher inclemency of 
human asperity. If union be the basis of 
strength, it is also the origin of warmth ; the 
very name of a solitary winter makes one*s 
teeth chatter ! 

Meriton, the family agent, seems a good sort 
of vulgar man, neither so intelligent nor so high- 
minded as I have the prejudice to expect in 



306 THE OPERA. 

every one connected with my father. It appears 
that he derives a large income from what is 
called " a good parliamentary business," and is a 
capital hand at jobbing with corporations, and 
cheapening boroughs. By this means he occa- 
sionally occupies a seat in the house as a man 
of straw, till a customer presents himself Not- 
withstanding these senatorial honours, he ap- 
pears to affix much importance to his connexion 
with our family ; and is most fussily gracious 
to myself. Yesterday I accompanied him to 
call on my father's banker ; a man of family, 
fortune, and fashion. 

The bankers of this country, by the way, be- 
long to a higher sphere of society than those 
of the continent; a circumstance which natu- 
rally renders them far less serviceable to tra- 
vellers. Here, it would be considered officious 
to interfere with a stranger's modes of amuse- 
ment ; and admissions to casinos and galleries, 
or introductions to public or private institu- 
tions, are as little likely to be offered to a 



THE OPERA. 307 

foreigner, as they are to be withheld from 
an EngUshman of respectability in any con- 
tinental city. Yet in London they become 
doubly necessary ; for the clubs which engulph 
the idlers about town are of course accessible 
only after long probation ; and society — so 
called — is surrounded by barriers permeable 
only by the aid of certain talismans, rare and 
valuable as the spells which cleave asunder the 
magic caverns of Caucasus. 

But to return to the banker, and his friend 
the agent, — which I am in no hurry to do. Mr. 
Meriton has favoured me with an enormous 
card of invitation for a dinner at his house in 
Hanover Square, this day three weeks ! And 
the brute is perfectly aware I have not half a 
dozen acquaintances in the metropolis, and am 
passing every evening alone in an hotel ! — ^Three 
weeks hence! — By that time parliament will have 
met, the town will be full, a revolution may 
possibly have occurred, and certainly a thaw ; 
and I shall be independent of his superfluous 



308 THE OPERA, 

hospitality. This is what is called " giving a 
dinner;" why could not he ask me to eat a 
cutlet with him without ceremony to-day ? — He 
inquired, with a formal smile, what I thought of 
London ; aware all the while that I know 
nothing of it beyond the desolate vacuity of its 
long, straight, monotonous, unpicturesque streets; 
dumpish and heavy and smoke-weazened as a 
middle-aged Dutchman ! 

The lighter business of life is carried on here 
with the regularity of a counting-house. People 
would not for the world be amused except at 
given hours and appointed seasons; nor can 
they be persuaded that a pleasure is lawfully 
their own, unless duly entered into the day- 
book and ledger. Dancing becomes a sin every 
Wednesday night, unless at one particular 
house, in one particular street, — a certain club 
called Almack's; and although Pasta may be 
heard three times a week during the season, it 
is only pardonable to listen to her on a Tuesday 
or a Saturday night. A life thus burthened 
with the weight of prejudices and formalities, 



THE OPERA. 309 

becomes as heavy in its course as a broad- 
wheeled waggon. Oh ! for the light calash of 
Paris, — or the rapid britschka of Vienna ! 

January 10. — Letters from my father ; — well, 
thank Heaven, and cheerful ! He assures me 
that the Manningfields are enchanted with the 
prospect of my visit; and advises me to go 
down at once to Derbyshire, and remain there 
till the meeting of parliament and the conse- 
quent re-animation of London. But no ! — I 
have not yet made myself acquainted with a 
thousandth part of the wonders of this mighty 
metropolis ; and though the sight of its busy 
multitudes renders me peevishly sensitive to my 
own isolation, I have no inclination to under- 
value its prodigies, animate and inanimate. Like 
some prodigious sea-monster, whose bulk ren- 
ders its motion imperceptible, its very stillness 
is awful ! — I am anxious, too, to get over my 
traveller's curiosity, and acquaint myself with 
every thing deserving investigation previous to 
Lady Neville's return to England. I remember 



310 THE OPERA. 

Cecilia once assured me that among the Eng- 
lish nothing is considered more raw and ridicu- 
lous in good society than a thirst for informa- 
tion; that a man of the world would disown 
with indignation having visited any pubHc 
monument of his own country, though punc- 
tihous in paying his respects to every cork 
model, or troop of dancing dogs, imported from 
the Continent. I will therefore stay here, and 
acquire, previous to her return, a familiarity with 
all that it is necesary to know, and all that it 
is necessary to leave unknown. 

How can it be that this dingy city produces 
such a host of poets and romancers ? — For my 
own part, I own it has exercised a most fortu- 
nate influence over my mind, by numbing into 
torpor the excitement arising from my father's 
extraordinary revelations. Had I remained in 
Germany, I might have found it difficult to 
throw off* the ghastly terrors with which our 
family misfortunes had possessed me; but I am 
now only surprised how such impassioned im- 



THE OPERA. 311 

pulses could have arisen in a country of rail- 
roads, steam-engines, muffins, and brown stout. 
Never was there a land so unpropitious to the 
development of sentiment ; and, as to the loftier 
emotions of the soul, I conceive them to be 
wholly incompatible with the customs of the 
nation. 

Think of a family pursued by the wrath of 
Nemesis, in a kingdom scoured by the wheels of 
omnibuses and two-horse stages, buggies, and 
tax-carts ! I blush to own that for a moment 
I was so staggered by my father's narrative, as 
to have lauded my stars I had made Cecilia's 
acquaintance, as Adrian von Elzstein, and 
not under the fatal name of Maldyn; but a 
fortnight passed in this anti-romantic region of 
traffic and barter, hackney-coaches and patent 
medicine-shops, has effectually cured me. The 
Destinies, who weave their thread of life with a 
patent Oxford-street spinning-wheel, are in my 
estimation as unpoetical as any old dames who 
pick lint in a parish poor-house. 



3T2 THE OPERA. 

January 12.*— At length my dear Gustavus 
has made his appearance ; and this great wilder- 
ness of desolate splendour, this mass of breath- 
ing existence, will henceforward assume a new 
character in my eyes. How delightful to be 
enabled to welcome, with hand and heart, the 
friend whose hospitality rendered Hanover my 
home ; and whose partiahty sufficed to acquire 
me so many friends during that memorable 
month at Paris. In the house of Adelberg's 
father I have lived as a son; and Gustavus 
shall be as a brother in mine. 

One of the most charming points in his cha- 
racter, is the perfect singleness of heart with 
which he either accepts or confers a favour. 
The alternative is pretty nearly indistinct to his 
perceptions ; he is aware of a feeling of general 
satisfaction, and is indifferent 'whether it pro- 
ceed from generosity or gratitude, from the 
pleasure of giving or receiving. In the midst 
of his declarations of joy at this sudden change 
in my worldly prospects, he observed, " And it 



THE OPERA. 313 

must delight so you to be enabled to prove your 
friendship to Pignatelli, Bagot, knd the rest of 
us ! " I doubt whether there exists an English- 
man who would not have been afraid of incurr- 
ing the deductions which might be drawn from 
such an observation; but Adelberg is as in- 
capable of apprehending, as of cherishing 
an illiberal inference; the cultivation of his 
mind, which is of no common order, has done 
nothing towards fencing his honest heart against 
the rubs and knaveries of mankind. I often 
fancy that my father in his youth, must have 
resembled Gustavus Adelberg. 

It is impossible to imagine two persons 
more different than my friends Gustavus and 
Pignatelli. The old prince has so long main- 
tained his post at the British court, and Anas- 
tasio was so young at their arrival here, that 
his Enorlish education has done as much towards 
tempering his hot Calabrian blood, as my resi- 
dence in Germany towards the condensation of 
my natural phlegm ; if / am to be admitted as 

VOL. I. P 



314 THE OPERA. 

only half an Englishman, I am satisfied Pig- 
natelli is less than a quarter of an Italian. His 
naturally fervid temper and acute understand- 
ing have subsided into a humorous tone in 
London — a satirical vein in Paris ; w^hile his 
causticity is still tempered by the gracious 
urbanity of his Neapolitan courtliness. I wish 
he were here again ; or rather I wish he had 
never revisited his native country. Pignatelli 
is the very last companion I could desire for 
Cecilia. All her faults are his own ; and he has 
the art of rendering them so attractive, that 
with his example and popularity before her 
eyes, I have little hope of a change in her 
modes of thinking and feeling. Perhaps I 
should say of talking ; for who can guess what 
a woman really thinks or feels ? 

How strange that here, even here in my 
native country, Adelberg should have better 
means of forwarding my views in society than 
lie at my own disposal ! The position of Baron 
Adelberg at the Hanoverian court has enabled 



THE OPERA. 315 

him to provide his son with introductions such 
as will immediately place him in the vortex; 
and the personal endowments of Gustavus are 
of a nature to do them ample justice. But, 
how German to the heart's core ! No sooner 
had he installed himself in his new apartments, 
than he commenced his inquiries touching the 
operas, orchestras, concerts, composers, leaders, 
fiddlers, and pianists, who were likely to render 
life endurable during his sojourn in London. 
Adelberg has scarcely an idea of measuring his 
time except by crotchets and quavers ; or of the 
value of notes, except those of the chromatic 
scale. He began questioning me concerniiig 
the " great leader ;'^ and when I replied in the 
belief that the premier was the object of his 
curiosity, I discovered him to allude to John 
Cramer; the " great English composer/' whom 
I naturally concluded to be Sir Walter, turned 
out to be Henry Bishop ; — and Spagnoletti and 
Mori appear as much objects of interest and 
curiosity to him, as Croker or Lord Holland to 



316 THE OPERA. 

myself. Scandalized to find that this mighty 
metropolis boasts at present no national opera, 
he has piersuaded me to engage a box for the 
season at the King's Theatre ; a spot which is 
hallowed ground in my estimation, from the cir- 
cumstance that within its walls twenty years 
ago occurred my first interview with my father ! 
In another week it will open ; and we have the 
promise of a sufficient variety of musical won* 
ders to afford the strongest stimulus to Adel- 
berg's curiosity. 

Among others whom Adelberg's diplomatic 
introductions have already brought here in re- 
turn, is Lord Brabazon, the Nestor of the ante- 
diluvian world of dandies; a man who has 
wasted his life, dissipated his fortune, and 
lavished his feelings, in as laborious a search 
after frivolity as ever bewildered the mind of 
the merest ass translated from Eton to Oxford, 
from Oxford to St. James's-street. He has 
bestowed as much time on the instruction of 
his tailor as might have rendered him an able 



THE OPERA. 317 

statesman ; and as much money on the building 
of carriages as would have constructed a man- 
sion on his Enolish estates, or a villao-e on his 
Irish ones. But his experience of the world— 
the great world which is in fact the least of all 
possible worlds, — has not been thrown away. 
Brabazon is par excellence the micrometer of 
fashionable life ; the great philosopher of petty 
science. While other learned men have been 
rewarded by the discovery of a new gas, or the 
decipherment of the Rosetta stone, he has gra- 
tified himself by the invention of a new linch- 
pin, and the substitution of some inexplicable 
chemical compound for starch. 

Hany Crawford, his double, is a fellow of 
another caliber. Finding himself born to the 
sorry inheritance of a younger brother, he re- 
nounced on his first entrance into life, all the 
powers and capabilities of a noun-substantive ; 
and descended into an adjectitious condition for 
the remainder of his days. Not Charles the 
emperor, in his abdication of sovereignty, per- 



318 THE OPERA. 

formed a more heroic act of self-spoliation than 
Harry Crawford in the resignation of his freewill 
and nominative powers. He gave up the command 
of his five senses, — and no longer sees, hears, 
or tastes except at the instigation of his patron 
for the time being ; — he has no memory unless it 
be refreshed by his suggestions ; — no anticipa- 
tions, unless the future be distinctly propounded 
by his discernment. He is in fact a mere second- 
ary animal actuated by the soul of his lordship 
of Brabazon ; whom he renders as much a qua- 
druped, as if he walked on four noble legs ; and 
endows with a bifold sense of all that is to be 
seen or heard in the world. 

So much for Lord Brabazon and his shadow ; 
than whom two pleasanter companions, or more 
accomphshed in the arts of London-life, exist not 
throughout its ninety-three clubs, or nine hun- 
dred and ninety-three coteries. They are just 
returned from a visit to the Romford s ; and relate 
wonders of Bagot's success in society, and of the 
attractions of Lady Romford's circle. It seems 



THE OPERA. 319 

that her ladyship has been its solitary centre for 
the last thirty years, and is far from willing to re- 
sign the post to the beautiful Lady Charlevilles, 
her daughters; and Bagot, who has been till 
now a votary of this setting sun of a day that 
is past, is just beginning to fancy the rosy dawn 
may not be wholly unworthy his notice. Lady 
Clara Charleville it seems is the object which 
detains him at Romford Park. 

Next week, however, parliament will meet; 
and as Adelberg invariably adds, — next week the 
Opera will open ; — and thenceforward something 
will be going on in London. The great sea- 
monster will begin to lash its tail, and we shall 
all share its reanimation." 



END OF VOL. I. 



C. Whiting, Beaufort House, Strand. 



n 







