                HOWARD CASTLE




                   A ROMANCE.

















Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London.
              HOWARD CASTLE;

                   OR A

                ROMANCE

            FROM THE MOUNTAINS.

             IN FIVE VOLUMES.

            BY A NORTH BRITON.

         What in vain life an idle flight of days,
         A still-delusive reund of sickly juys,
         A seene of little cares and trifling passions,
         If not ennobled by some deedsol virtue.       
                                          THOMSON.

                   VOL. III.
   
                    LONDON:

          Printed at the Minerva Press for
A.K. NEWMAN AND CO LEADENHALL-STREET.

                    1817.               HOWARD CASTLE.


                 
                  CHAPTER I.

  THE important day of the ball arrived--
a day which occupied the attention of the
beau monde in a wonderful manner: those
who were not to be present were anxious
to hear the result, as if was expected to be
the most splendid assemblage of beauty
and fashion. Seats in the music-gallery
were occupied by contemporaries with
many who were tripping it on the light
fantastic toe: many bets were laid who
would bear off the prize; of course, different
gentlemen had different tastes, and various
opinions were sported, and asserted with
much warmth. Clementina's terror wore
off as she became more acquainted amongst

 VOL.III.
2              HOWARD CASTLE.

the gay of both sexes, she had met with
lady Caroline Seymour very frequently,
and each time their admiration for each
other increased; she had spent an evening
at lord Carberry's, and was pleased exceed-
ingly with the family.

   Lady Almeria did not arrest her atten-
tion; the total insipidity of her conversa-
tion and her ideas made her forget she was
present; her extreme beauty was the
apology for her thinking of nothing else;
she made not the least doubt but she
would be encircled with the magic zone:
the supposition gave her no uneasiness;
she thought, if she was to decide, a pleas-
ing countenance would influence her, and
she should not hesitate in fixing on lady
Caroline.

   Mrs. Conway had the valuable orna-
ments laid in her dressing-room; when
Clementina retired to the very important
task of her toilet, her friend followed her,
with the precious gems; she spread them
before her, and told her they were to be
worn by her. She looked with the utmost
surprise at Mrs. Conway--"I will not ap-
pear in plumes, borrowed even from you;      HOWARD CASTLE.       3

those jewels are beautiful, but you must
excuse my positively refusing to wear
them."

"Do not be too determined," was her
answer; "they are not my property; mine
are reserved for the wife of my Howard; if
you will deck yourself in them, I will joy-
fully bring them; but remember upon
what terms I produce them: those orna-
ments are the gift of your father; he sent
them to my care to present to you; never
can you have a better opportunity than
you have to-night, to be as splendid as pos-
ible; and these diamonds, which are re-
markably fine, will insure your cutting a
brilliant figure."

"I receive them," said Clementina, "as
the gift of my dear father, with pride, with
pleasure, and I feel gratified that I shall
be decked this evening in his valuable
gift.  I presume they were the property of my mother?"

"The greatest part were," said Mrs.
Conway; "lady Clementina would be
charmed, could she see how well she is re-
presented by her daughter."4       HOWARD CASTLE.

  She left her; and Clementina, with her
heart beaming with gratitude and love to-
wards her parent, again examined he pre-
sent, and wondered where she could put
the variety of sparkling things. When
she was complete, she entered the draw-
ing-room, where Mrs. Conway and a small
party of select friends were at cards. The
splendour of her appearance, and the beau-
ty of her face and form, struck them as the
most perfect model they had ever seen.

  General Gosford, who had been formerly
intimate with her father, and who was one
of his daughter's warmest admirers, laid
down his cards, and eyed her with the most
minute attention--"I pronouncce," cried
he, "that Miss Bonverie is the goddess of
the night."

  "She would, I dare say," replied an old
Mr. Camden, who was as much prepos-
sessed in favour of lady Almeria Villyers,
"if you were to determine."

  "From this house I shall not move,"
said general Gosford, "until this celestial
being returns; so I give you all due no-
tice. When I have seen her with her new
badge of honour, I will go home satisfied,and have a sound sleep; uncertainty always
disturbed my repose".

   Mrs. Conway approved of the idea; and
Clementina, with one of her most benevo-
lent smiles, thanked her kind friend for his
good wishes.

   The carriage was anneunced. General
Gosford, taking off his spectacles, offered
his arm, saying -" For want of a younger
been, will you allow off; and i trust i shall
receive you safe on your return; and may
you be as happy as i wish you to be, both
this night, and every night of your life!"
He pressed her hand as he parted with it.
 
   Clementina felt perfectly confident she
should not bear a more gratifying speech
at the ball; she was conviced the one she
had just heard was sincere. To her great
satisfaction, she found lady Carberry and
a very large party had just arrived; she
was kindly greeted by lady Caroline, who
felt no sting of envy in seeing that her
dress was more splendid than any of the
party's, or that she had never seen her
half so beautiful.

   When lady Carberry entered the ball-


6           HOWARD CASTLE.

room, all eyes were rivetted upon them.
Sir Theodosins felt the sweets of his situa-
tion, with the object of general admiration
learning upon his arm; he proudly led her
to a seat, and exultingly replied to many
inquiries, that Mrs Rouverie was his part-
ner. At last the P-was announced;
he entered with his usual grace, and ad-
vanced with his characteristic afrability;
round his right arm was twisted the gir-
dle, which sparkled with imunmerable
gems. He addressed lady Carberry, and
all her party, except Clementina, whose
he had never before seen; he signified his
wish to know all who were with her lady-
ship; she immediately presented Miss Bou-
verie, with whom he condeseended to con-
verse for a few minutes; he then passed
on, saying something civil and pleasing to
every one. When he understood sir Theo-
dosius was Clementina's partner, he ex-
pressed his admiration by saving, she was
a divinity dropped from the clouds.
   "She may be a mortal, in dancing,"
cried lord Villyers, who was an admirer
of lady Caroline Seymour, and was bro-
ther to lady Almeria. He feared the
 
            HOWARD CASTLE.      7

stranger his mother patronized would
eclipse those he was most interested in.
"Miss Bouverie has certainly been at an
uncommon good rouge-shop, as there never
was seen so brilliant a colour."

"She certainly is a brilliant star," re-
plied the P____; "but, as your lordship
justly observes, her beauty may fade when
she moves; although her form is so pecu-
liarly elegant, that I should almost deem
it impossible that she does not excel in 
dancing."

Lord Villyers was vexed at the evident
admireation the P____ had expressed. Two
cotillions were to begin the ball; one was
formed from lady Carberry's party, and 
consisted of lady Almeria, lady Caroline,
the honourable Miss Stanfor (who, Cle-
mentina thought, almost equalled lady Al-
meria in beauty), and she made the fourth.
The cotillion chosen was what she had 
danced with lord Montague at Carnsworth 
Castle; the tune brought a train of ideas
across her mind, yet she danced with her
accustomed elegance and vivacity; every
step of the figure brought her cousin be-
fore her; it was itrieate, but she was per-8    HOWARD CASTLE.

fect mistress of it, and had nearly finished,
when a dizziness and faintness seized her;
she was turning lord Villyers round, when
she had nearly sunk at his feet; he raised
her, till sir Theodosius, alarmed beyond
measure, flew to her assistance, and sup-
ported her to a seat.   The music was
stopped; lady Carberry proposed retiring
to another room, where there was more
air.

Clementina, shocked at being the cause
of so much confusion, begged leave to sit
where she was; sir Theodosius prevailed
upon her to drink a little wine which he
brought, and which perfectly restored her
to health.  The tender assiduity of her
partner would not permit her to join the
dancers; he was convinced it was the fre-
quent turning in the cotillion, which had
made her ill- "You will perhaps think it a
strange speech, when I say, now that I see
you perfectly well, I cannot mourn over
your illness."

  "It is not at all necessary that you
should," was her answer; "I am now in
perfect health."

  "I am resolved to surprise you," re-                 HOWARD CASTLE.            9

turned he; "I am pleased that you nearly
sunk at lord Villyers' feet, with a counte-
nance pale as death; I believe he thought
you were expiring in his arms, as he seemed
alarmed beyond measure."

   "And why were you pleased that he
should be frightened?" asked Clementina.

   "Because," replied sir Theodosius, "he
accused you of using art; and as I firmly
believe there is not a particle of it, either
internally or externally, in you whole
composition, I rejoiced in your giving such
a convincing proof that your complexion
was the work of nature, which has been
so bountiful to you with all her charms."

   "I do not know what nature has done
for me," replied she, laughing; "but I am
sure sir Theodosius Sidney would restore
my colour, had it completely fled. What
had lord Villyers to do with my appear-
ance?"

   "Every lady in the room," said he,
"who dances with a subscriber, must go
through the ordeal of criticism. Miss Bou-
verie need not fear the strictest investiga-
tion, as all other sink in the comparison."
                 B 3
10            HOWARD CASTLE.

A country-dance being formed, Clemen-
tina rose from her seat, saying, she hoped
she should not again cut so conspicuous a
figure, as she was perfectly able to join the
set.

  Lady Carberry, who had paid her every
attention, entreated that if she again felt
ill, she would not persevere too long, as
she had done in the cotillion.

  Clementina's health, and her animation,
were quickly restored; and lord Villyers
was sensible the brilliant colour, which was
again reinstated in her cheeks, was not
purchased in Bond-street; he very unwill-
ingly allowed that her beauty surpassed
lady Caroline Seymour's, and that Miss
Bouveric would be the favourite fair.

  The evening concluded with dancing
Scotch reels, one of which consisted of lady
Almeria, Clementina, lord Cranborn, and
sir Theodosius; the P- walked about
the room, eyeing the various lovely females,
who were moving in the most exact time,
and in the most graceful attitudes, to a
lively Scotch tune; he was observed to
linger near the spot where Clementina
danced with superior elegance; her per-     HOWARD CASTLE.     11

feet ease and cheerful countenance be-
spoke a bosom quite at peace, and as if no
anxiety of any kind disturbed her. Lady
Almeria's ideas were employed, as most
of her contemporaries were, in forming a
speech proper to make upon receiving the
girdle, which every one hoped would be
her lot to wear.

  Clementina made no preparation, as in
such an assemblage (in spite of sir Theodo-
sius's flattering assurances) she could not
expect the prize. The music stopped by
the P_____'s order, and he unclasped the
zone from his arm. Lady Almeria stood,
in evident expectation; the P_____ passed
her, and pursued the retreating Miss Bou-
verie; she observed that she was in the way,
and impeded access to lady Caroline Sey-
mour, who, she concluded, was the object
in question. How was she astonished and
confused, when his r_____ h_____ exclaimed
_____ "Why will Venus fly in this cruel man-
near? this zone belongs to you, Miss Bou-
verie, who are the goddess every heart must
yield to." He, at the same time, with the
elegance and grace which ever accompany
his actions, fastened the gorgeous girdle12        HOWARD CASTLE.

round her waist; her colour varied so fre-
quently, that all believed she would sink
under the confusion of the moment; of
course, every eye was upon her, as she was
the object of general envy.

 At last she articulated-" Is it possible
your r--h-- can mean this ornament 
for me, and the honour of such a flattering
speech?"

 " I have fixed the girdle," replied the
P--," and with it my admiration, upon
one who seems worthy, in every way,
of both; the zone you will certainly wear
-all I have to ask is, you will not forget
the person who has had the pleasure of
putting it on."

 He handed her to a seat, and quitted
her, as he saw and admired the modest dif-
fidence which suffused her cheeks, and
agitated her whole frame.

 Sir Theodosius exulted in his triumph,
and handed her to her carriage, followed
by the eyes of the whole company. It
was generally allowed by the male sex that
the decision was just; and by the ladies,
that it was extremely unjust, as most of
them were wounded in the most vulner-                HOWARD CASTLE.          13

able part of the female composition; their
vanity was injured, and their pride mor-
tally hurt--by whom? an insignificant
Miss, whom nobody knew!

  Lady Caroline Seymour was an excep-
tion; her bosom was tranquil, as from the
first moment Clementina appeared, she was
convinced of the termination; and she was
so much charmed with her very pleasing
manners, that she could not join in the
general disapprobation which she heard
expressed, and no where in more violent
language than from lady Almeria Villyers.
Her superiority being disputed, or rather
decidedly negatived, was not to be borne;
it was all her ladyship possessed to support
her; take the palm of beauty from her,
and you took her all--every sense concen-
trated to that point of attraction; if it was
superseded, the rest would die away, and
lady Almeria would become a non-entity:
the only hope was, that the young lady
would retire to her native plains, and leave
the path of dissipation and fashion to those
who were formed and educated for no other
pursuits.14   HOWARD CASTLE.

Clementina had time to recover the ex-
treme confusion and agitation which she
had been thrown into, before she arrived
at Mrs. Conway's, where she expected to
find the party waiting her return; she un-
clasped the zone, and pinned it under her
dress.

  As she entered the drawing-room, ge-
neral Gosford exclaimed--" Here comes
Venus! the bet is mine, Mr. Camden; I
see it sparking at this distance."

  She advanced to the table where Mrs.
Conway was placed, and apologized for
being so late.

  "By Heavens!" exclaimed the general,
" she has got it. Mr. Camden, the
hundred pounds is yours; I could have laid
a thousand on her head."

  "And I would have laid as much on lady
Almeria," was his answer.

  A general inquiry of how she had been
amused, made her reply, indifferently--she
had been extremely ill, and had cut a very
awkward figure.

  Mrs. Conway, with much anxiety, in-
quired what had been amiss? and general
            HOWARD CASTLE.                15

Gosford declared she had not given him 
fair play. She told thm she had nearly
fainted in the arms of lord Villyers.

"Then," said general Gosford, " you 
lost your colour, but could not lose your
beauty; what have you been about? did
lady Almeria exult when she received the
prize?"

"She was not the favoured person,"re-
plied Clementina, smiling, "and there
was no exultation expressed by the person
who had it given."

" A drawn bet, upon my word, Cam-
den!" cried the general. " Mr. Camden.
what say you now?"

Clementina produced the girdle and put
it on. The ecstasy of her old admirer ex_
ceeded her expectations; he rose, and in-
sisted upon saluting her, saying, he be-
lievd it might not be consistent with the
dignity of a goddess, but she must stoop,
in the present instance, to please a mortal. 
"Give me your hand, Camden."

" And a hundred pounds into the bar-
gain," said the other. 

"It cetainly is my due,"said he, "but 
I have so much pleasure in my favourite's16            HOWARD CASTLE.

gaining the prize, that I require no hun-
dred pounds of yours, my friend."

  They proposed separating for the re-
mainder of the morning. General Gos-
ford withstood many hints, before he could
be prevailed on to quit Clementina, with
whom he was quite fascinated; being the
daughter of his old friend, was not the
only charm; he was a great admirer of fe-
male beauty, and the good-humoured at-
tention she had from the first of their ac-
quaintance shewn him, had quite gained
his heart, which would have been de-
pressed beyond measure, had any other fe-
male eclipsed her.

  In spite of the lateness of the hour, Mrs.
Conway would not retire without hearing
many particulars which interested her ex-
ecedingly; she was pleased to hear that
lady Carberry had paid her friend every
attention, and that lady Caroline Seymour
had shewn her usual good humour.

  Next morning sirTheodosiuscalledbefore
Clementina had quitted her apartment.
Mrs. Conway was pleased at having an op-
portunity of conversing a little with him,
before her friend appeared; she head what
           HOWARD CASTLE.          17

she expected to hear—Miss Bouverie
praised to the skies. Sir Theodosius could
not find words to express the admiration
she justly inspired; her beauty, which the
cestus proved was superior to all around
her, was her least attraction; she was the
magnet which arrested every heart and
every eye.

  " She is." replied Mrs. Conway, " the
most bewitching creature in the world—
formed to please in every way,"

  " And formed," added he, with quick-
ness, " to give the most exquisite pain ;
how much is the marquis of Clemaire to
be pitied, who has been unsuccessful!"

  " Certainly," replied Mrs. Conway, "she
is an object of' such value, that many will
contend for the prize. Lord Clemaire's
failure may probably deter others from
attempting to interest her; self-conceit is
inherent in our natures."

  " It is woven in our very existence," said
sir Theodosius, with energy; " where there
is the most distant possibility of such a re-
ward, who would not ran the risk of dis-
appointment?"
 
  Mrs. Conway feared that sir Theodosius18		HOWARD CASTLE.

would be a very arduous competitor for
Miss Bouverie's hand; she knew he was a 
favourite of hers-why might he not suc-
ceed? his appearance and manners were
superior to most people's; the place he
held in society entitled him to look high,
both as to birth and fortune; she knew
not why he should be deemed presamp-
tuous if he asked Miss Bouverie; yet she
should be impressed with the idea that he
was so, and should be mortified to the
heart if he succeeded; if she was disen-
gaged, she had other views for her.

	Mrs. Convey was rather pleased when
the subject of their conversation entered,
as she had no wish to be confidant to sir
Theodosius's hopes and fears; he flew to 
Clementina, and taking her extended hand,
tenderly hoped she had recovered the fa-
tigue of the preceding evening?

	"Perfectly so,"was her answer; "i did
not exert myself sufficiently to render
fatigue excusable; the lateness of the hour
we separated at, as I had the anecdotes of
the ball to give after I got home, must be
my apology for being extremely lazy."
         HOWARD CASTLE.     19

   Mrs. Conway inquired if sir Theodosius
had breakfasted?

   "No," was his answer; "he had been
so anxious to inquire after his fair partner,
he had intruded at so early an hour that
he had never thought of eating; if they
would suffer him to partake, he should be
very much obliged to them:" he was in ex-
cellent spirits, and made their meal particu-
larly agreeable.

   Mrs. Conway thought she never saw
Clementina so lively, or look more ani-
mated and pleased. Sir Theodosius exert-
ed all his powers to amuse, and succeeded,
she feared, too well. Clementina proposed
calling upon lady Carberry, which Mrs.
Conway readily acceded to. Sir Theodo-
sius could not prevail upon himself to
leave such agreeable society; and not un-
til the carriage was at the door, did he re-
collect an engagement of consequence:
the siren sung and played, and all was for-
got by him, but that he was in her com-
pany.

   When the coach was announced, he de-
parted, after handing them to it; they
drove immediately to lord Carberry's, and
20             HOWARD CASTLE.

were admitted. Lady Carberry expressed
the greatest pleasure at seeing Miss Bou-
verie perfectly well—" Lady Caroline,"
said she, " only a few minutes before you
entered, proposed that we should inquire
personally after you."

  Clementina thanked her for her kind
intention, at the same time saying, that
her anxiety to express to lady Carberry
the obligation she felt for her polite atten-
tion, had made her petition Mrs. Conway
to go out an hour earlier than common.

  Lady Almeria, who was reclining on a
couch, languidly asked her if she was not
almost killed by the exertions of the pre-
ceding evening? and lady Caroline wished
Clementina joy, upon the splendid orna-
ment which had been presented to her in
so eleganta manner—" The P---- was uni-
versally admired, but I believe you were so
embarrassed, that you did not know what
passed."

  " I was indeed," replied she, " as I had
not the least idea he meant to honour me
by his notice; I dare say I made a very
foolish appearance and awkward speech
to his r--- h----."
             HOWARD CASTLE.                21

  "He seemed very well satisfied with what passed," replied lady Caroline, "but you whispered your answer so low, that no one could hear you."
  "There is a most splendid account already published of the ball," said lady Carberry; "my lord sent it from the library for the young ladies amusement; is it in the room, or has lord Villyers taken it with him?"
  "I believe he put it into his pocket," said lady Caroline; "he seemed not in good humour with the editor, and would hardly suffer me to read it."
  Clementina wished the subject changed, and so did lady Almeria, who asked her if she meant to attend the theatre?
  "I have not heard any plan laid for this evening's amusement," was he answer; "but I hope we shall not, as I shall enjoy a little quiet exceedingly."
  "You surely do not think appearing in public two nights running is such great gaiety as would fatigue you?" said lady Caroline.
  "I do indeed," replied Clementina.
  "Oh," cried lady Almeria, "it is the
22     HOWARD CASTLE.

greatest bore in the world; we go from one place to another, perhaps three or four in an evening; always the same faces, the same round of dull amusement-it is too fatiguing for animal spirits to support-I am quite worn-oat; to-night we are going to Drury-Lane, and half-a-dozen parties."

  "You had better accompany us," said lady caroline; "there is to be a favourite singer, and a favourite play; you cannot refuse such temptations."

  "Do go," said lady Carberry, turning to Mrs.Conway;"there is plenty of room in my box for both you and Miss Bouverie."

  "I have just heard her declare the fatigue would be too much for her," answered her friend, "otherwise I would have accepted of your invitation with much pleasure."

  "You must break yourself in," said lady caroline, "my dear Miss Bouverie, as our gaiety will increase; there are not half so many balls as there will be in a short time, and you cannot plead want of strength, and you must not, want of inclination; come, do not seem so shockingly           HOWARD CASTLE.       23

sober; if you get home immediately from
the play, surely you will have rest enough;
you must not let your beautiful girdle
sparkle in your drawer; no, positively,
you shall go this evening, and again asto-
nish with your transcendent charms the
weak minds of the multitude: come, lady
Almeria, try your powers of persuasion."

  "Here comes the cry creature," an-
swered lady Almeria, "Who can persuade
Miss Bouverie."

  Clementina turned round, and to her
surprise saw sir Theodosius.

  "I am glad you are come," said lady
Caroline, "as we are trying to make this
lady go to the theatre this evening; if we
have your assistance, I think we shall
suceed."

  "You require none," cried she, with
quickness; I will accompany Mrs.Con-
way, and join this party with much plea-
sure."

  "Miss Bouverie is afraid of giving me
too great a feel of consequence," said sir
Theodosius; " had she consented to my
entreaties, I should have felt proud indeed;
as it is, I am certainly much pleased--I


24        HOWARD CASTLE.

shall enjoy, at least, seeing her, if I should
not have an opportunity of conversing with
her."

"How comes it," said Mrs. Conway,
"that your engagement is so soon over?"

"It was business which required my
attendance; and when pleasure comes in
the way, I generally cut the former off
with as short a time as I possibly can. I
wished to make personal inquiries after
this family; I hope the party did not suf-
fer from the fatigue of last night."

Lady Almeria vowed that she was quite
worn out, and lady Caroline declared she
could have danced all night ; they return-
ed home most provokingly early, as she
saw no necessity for dancing to be given
up when the P— retired."

"All was at an end," said sir Theodo-
sius; "when the selection was made, no
one thought of continuing the festive
scene."

Mrs. Conway almost immediately wish-
ed them good morning, and quitted the
room. Sir Theodosius looked disappoint-
ed at their so soon taking leave, as he was
forced to remain behind, which was not 
              HOWARD CASTLE.       25

his intention when he joined the party.
Mrs. Conway suspected his plan was to
loiter away his morning with them, from
his so speedily pursuing them to lord Car-
berry's.  She had no wish to be so attend-
ed, as her fears increased each time she
saw Miss Bouverie and sir Theodosius to-
gether, her manner was so perfectly dif-
ferent to him, from what she had observed
it was to the marquis of Clemaire, and to
other gentlemen whose attentions she dis-
liked; her declaration, in regard to sir
Theodosius, she suspected would not now
be repeated, in the strong language which
she had formerly used, when conversing
with her on the subject.

   Mrs. Conway was alarmed, and sincerely
lamented her sone had not kept to his plan
of spending the winter in London.  The
idea of her being engaged to lord Mon-
tague became every day fainter, till at last
it never occurred to her mind; she saw
no more letters delivered to her of a suspi-
cious nature; a regular correspondence,
she knew, was kept up between lady Ele-
nora and her, but she believed that with

   VOL III.26  HAWARD CASTLE.

her brother was dropped. After spending
the morning, as most mornings are spent
in London, Mrs. Conway and her friend
returned home.

   After dinner was removed, and the ser-
vants retired, Clementina, in rather an
abrupt manner, said-" I wonder lord
Howard did not marry lady Caroline Sey-
mour."

  "I was surprised," replied Mrs. Con-
way, who was roused from a train of re-
flections by her remark, "that he did not
make an offer of himself to her; he cer-
tainly admired her beauty, and her good
humour; but he has so may requistes, I
fear he will never find but one female who
could, in any way, come up to his idea of
perfection."

  "And is that female out his power?"
asked she.

  Mrs.Conway knew enough of Miss Bou-
verie's character to prevent her suspecting,
if possible, she meant herself; she was per-
fectly convinced, if she had a suspicion of
plans being laid to bring them together,
she hardly would give him an opportu-
nity of conversing with her, and she was           HOWARD CASTLE.              27

confident her son had the very same sen-
timents; she was perfectly determined not
to interfere in any way, but to introduce
them to each other, if possible, free from
engagements, and let them discover the
various qualifications each possessed, with-
out their being pointed out. She was
quite convinced match-making was the
very worst business in the world, and what
she was in no way calculated for; she saw,
invariably, the most scheming mothers ge-
nerally failed, and often marred the for-
tunes of their family. To Clementina's
question she replied-" He has not made
the attempt, therefore he cannot know if
she is beyond his reach. I wish, from the
bottom of my heart, that I saw him hap-
pily married; he is formed by Nature for
domestic comfort, and I trust she will
provide him with a suitable companion;
then, my dear Clementina, I should be one
of the happiest women in the world."
   "I do think," replied she, "lady Caro-
line Seymour would make a charming
wife-so cheerful and willing to be
amused."
28               Howard Castle.
      
      "But has she the powers of amusing? 
    Lord Howard must have a very good un-
    derstanding and well cultivated."
      "I am not a competent judge."was
    Clementina's answer; "she bears her part 
    in common conversation; farther I do not 
    pretend to know- I have often heard that
    learned men did not admire learned wives."
       "A sensible man," said Mrs. Conway, 
    "could not converse, or make a companion    
     of a woman, who was not, in some degree,
    endowed by nature, and cultivated by art;
    and unless a woman can be a rational friend 
    to her husband, there can be no happiness.
    A pretty face will fade, a fine form lose its
    beauty, but a well-stored mind must re-
    main, and improve by conversing with a 
    sensible man. Mercenary marriages I dis-
    approve of, as the lady is the least essen-
    tial part of the bargain; she is a good spe-
    culation, her fortune will enable the gen-
    tleman to livemore to his mind, and per-
    haps her thousands may afford him to 
    keep a mistress; love matches, in general,
    are bad."
        Clementina laughed-" I never heard                          HOWARD CASTLE.     29

so bitter an enemy as you are to the mar-
ried state."

  "There cannot be a more zealous friend
than I am," was her answer; "but foolish
love-matches, and parsimonious matches, I
condemn for instance, I would have you
to be thoroughly acquainted with the man
you marry; study his temper and disposi-
tion, before you admire his face or figure;
let his character be weighed, know if his
pursuits are rational, if his heart is gene-
rous and humane, and if he is a domestic,
sociable companion, not madly fond of a
gay life, or a retired life, or given up to
the sports of the field, or love of his bot-
tle; not one of those characters would I
have your husband to be."

  "In short," said Clementina, "you
would have me die an old maid."

  "No," said Mrs. Conway; "you are 
formed to make any man happy, but I 
do not think every man is formed to make
you so."

  "What sort of a being must I have, as
I suppose I may pick and choose? shall I
be guided by you, and consult you before
I made my selection?"
30         HOWARD CASTLE.

  " I wish you would," answered her
friend, with quickness, " and I will pro-
mise to lead you, according to the best of
my judgment, to happiness; only give me
your word that you will ask my opinion,
before you even determine in your own
mind."

  " Do you really think what you ask is
possible ?" said Clementina, smiling. " I
would not have my friend make an un-
reasonable request for the world, or one I
could not grant; it may not be in my
power to apprise you of my fancies; but I
will, before I determine upon indulging
them."

  Mrs. Conway did not choose to push
the subject farther; she had made nothing
out in regard to sir Theodosius, who cer-
tainly was madly fond of a gay life; plea-
sure had been invariably his chief pursuit,
and Mrs. Conway made no doubt of his
intending to please himself in marrying
Miss Bouverie, whose manner was per-
fectly free from flirtation with any of her
admirers (and she had several on the list
of fashion). She always seemed amused
with sir Theodosius, and pleased with his             HOWARD CASTLE.           31

conversation, but she never betrayed, at
any moment, the least symptom of affec-
tion--no embarrassment or agitation at his
approach; it might be her natural man-
ner--her friend had not seen enough of her
to judge; but hope would whisper that
she was destined to be her daughter, and
that when lord Howard and she met, there
would be a change in Clementina's beha-
viour; she had hitherto combined much
ease and cheerfulness (which she believed
never would forsake her), but to the beaux
she had seen flutter round her, there was a
dignified composure, which invariably kept
all pretenders at a distance; even sir
Theodosius was often checked in his hopes,
when most elated with the idea of success,
by a coolness of manner peculiar to herself.
She deemed it ridiculous to be always fan-
cying she was encircled by lovers, and that
every man who danced with her, or was at
all civil to her, meant to offer himself as a
candidate for her hand. She had no idea
that sir Theodosius had any serious inten-
tion of wishing for more than flirtation,
pour passer le tems; she was not a flirt
by nature; her answers often disappointed32              HOWARD CASTLE.

him, when he had flattered himself he had
made some progress in her regard: her
heart, he feared, was almost impregnable,
but no labour should be spared to gain 
such a prize.


                 CHAPTER II.
                
At Drury-Lane, lady Carberry's box over-
flowed with fashionable men, who , an
Clementina, but in a second, it was filled
by Mr. Strafford, who was intimately ac-
quaited with the party, and who had
thought it an age since he had seen Miss
Bouverir; he had attended different places of the public resort, but never could see the 
fair form which had arrested his attention;
since the evenin he had passed so plea-
santly in her company at Mrs. Conway's,
her image had haunted his imagination.

  Clementina looed in vain for sir 
Theodosius; no where could she see him,


  


   
  




                  HOWARD CASTLE.     33

and never did she lament his absence more
than when she was teazed by Mr.Straf-
ford, whose conversation tired her beyond
measure; he was so profuse of his fine
speeches, and assurances of his drowned
his domestic measiness in a copious liba-
tion to Bacchus, as she could not suppose
he was in his sober sense: she was mis-
taken in the idea of his being intoxicated
by wine; meeting with a person who had
in so great a degree occupied his thoughts,
charmed him; and his having free scope
to converse with her, delighted him; he
was a professed admirer of every handsome
woman he saw; he had married lady Isa-
bella entirely from the beauty of her ap-
pearance; she was an Irish earl's daugh-
ter, with a very small fortune, who had
been brought to England for the purpose
of gaining an establishment in life.

   Mr. Strafford was soon, dying at her
feet, and thoughts himself one of the hap-
piest of the human race, when she accept-
ed of his hand; his very large fortune,and
the high place he held in the fashionable
34 HOWARD CASTLE.

eireles, made her friends rejoice in the
lucky hit which she had made. Lady
Isabella was very young, and her husband
only one year her senior; she had been
brought up in the country by an indulgent
mother, whose every faculty was engrossed
by a numerous progeny, the care of whom
had fallen to the lot of lady Isabella, as
lady M'Quoir was generally occupied with
an infant.

Mr. Strafford soon found his lovely wife
was the most feeling and gentle creature 
alive; his whole study, the first twelve
months they were married, was to sooth
her sensibility, and lavish upon her all the
endearing epithets he could meet with in
the English language; he had pride in
taking her to public places, and shewing
to the world what a pretty wife he pos-
sessed; when the gay months were over
in London, the fashionable watering-places
were visited by the elegant couple, whose
carriages and attendants eclipsed al others.
Mr. Strafford believed he was completely
happy; all eyes were upon them, and he
was confident he was an object of envy to
many of his dashing companions.           HOWARD CASTLE.       35

   Lady Isabella became a mother, and her
husband was delighted, until he found he
was a secondary object to the little master,
from whom his fond mamma could not be
for a moment separated; if he proposed
driving in the Park, a seat in the carriage
was to be reserved for the child. The first
day Mr. Strafford expostulated, but to no
purpose; her mother never left her
youngest infant-it must be one of the
party, otherwise she should be miserable.
Her husband bowed, and gave up his
place to the nurse, and lady Isabella was
perfectly satisfied: her ideas became as
much engrossed as her time; she could
talk or think of nothing, but what were
the best specifics for the complaints of chil-
dren; and whether it was better to aid
nature, in regard to the cutting of teeth,
or not, that was a grand point to solve;
and all the experienced mothers who knew
whether their children had got their teeth,
and all the medical men who professed to
understand the diseases of infancy, were
consulted. All parties were given up, as
a nurse ought to retire early to bed--her
mother always did so at Cronmore Castle;36 HOWARD CASTLE.

of course, spending an evening from home
was out of the question.

Mr. Strafford found his house became
extremely disagreeable; he was tired of
the child, over whom he had no control,
and who had completely supplanted him
in his wife's affections. He discovered that
he was on the eve of becoming a eipher in
his own house; to avoid discord, he was
seldom to be found with his family; clubs,
public places, and parties, proved much
more agreeable than he supposed they
would, and in a short time he was quite
reconciled to his new mode of life. Their
family increased rapidly, and with it lady
Isabella's cares; her person, which had
been his pride, became neglected; a sloven
disgusted him; their house, which had been
furnished with all the cost and pains possi-
ble, was soon a scene of confusion. The
dear little things must have air and exer-
cise, and the drawing-rooms were the pro-
per places for them to play in.

He saw the costly sofas tumbled and
torn, elegant screens broken, oranmental
china thrown down, and at last a large
mirror broken by master Strafford's ball.            HOWARD CASTLE.       37

If he found fault, lady Isabella was in
tears; her eldest child inherited his mo-
ther's sensibility; he began sob; and the
discordant notes of the others, who always
joined their brother, drove Mr. Strafford
out of the house; he found all peace was
at an end, and strove, as much as he could, 
to forget he was married; he flirted with
every pretty woman, and as he was very
good-looking, very gay and lively, he met 
with amusement.

   Clementina alone curbed his free man-
ner; she was astonished to hear him de-
scribe feelings which belonged to lady Isa-
bella, and which she could not understand
being addressed to any other woman; she
shrunk from him with horror, as she could
not help thinking his strange manner could
only be occasioned by inebriety; yet he
looked sober; his expressions of admiration
were what disturbed her, and she felt un-
comfortable whilst he was her companion.

   At last the welcome sound of sir Theo-
dosius's voice struck her ear; she looked
round, and saw him exerting himself to
get near her; the look of pleasure which
she gave him would have repaid him,38               HOWARD CASTLE.

even had he been forced to keep at a dis-
tance from her; but she was resolved to
changed her seat, as she thought it would 
be more easily effected than to get quit of
Mr.Strafford, whose attentions to her be-
came every moment more disagreeable.

   Clementina was ignorant of the ways of
fashionable life, and that both married and 
unmarried women were accustomed to
hear a torrent of such kind of nonsense
poured into their ears; no matter from
whom,flattery was sweet, whether the
beau was a benedict or not.

  Mrs.Conway ,who was always more in-
terested in Miss Bouverie's countenance
and manner than any thing which was 
passing on the stage, was seated imme-
diately behind her, and quickly observed 
that she was not comfortable with her
companion; the watchful eye of her friend
saw the pleasure which illumined her fea-
tures when sir Theodosius entered the box.
A sensation of regret filled her breast; it
was a flattering symptom to sir Theodo-
sius, and almost a deathblow to her fa-
vourite scheme. When her thoughts were
so occupied, Clemenrina, in the gentlest

         HOWARD CASTLE.            39

whisper, imparted the wish she had to
change seals with her, as she was most un-
pleasantly situated.

  Mrs. Conway smiled—" Do you not ap-
prove of your beau ?"

  " I certainly do not," was hor answer,
at the same time rising and making way
for her friend, who goou-humouredly said,
she wished to have a better view of the
stage.

  Sir Theodosius contrived to benefit by
the movement, and putting himself in as
small a compass as he could, slipped into
a most enviable situation, between lady
Caroline Seymour and Miss Uouverie.
Lord Villyers was placed on the other side
of lady Caroline; so sir Thcodosius enjoyed
an uninterrupted tête-à-téte.

  Mr. Strafford betrayed both surprise and
mortification by the sudden change; he
soon apparently recovered his chagrin,
and conversed with Mrs. Conway, when
the play did not occupy their attention;
he concluded sir Theodosius was a favour-
ed lover, and envied him the bewitching
smiles which were now playing on Miss
Bouverie's features; the contrast was very40           HOWARD CASTLE.

evident to him, and to her friend; they
both firmly believed the die was cast,
which threw a gloom over Mrs. Conway's 
spirits; she did not think sir Theodosius
was worthy of such a prize as she was al-
most convinced would fall to his lot; her
fears magnified every trifling expression
of Clementina's to sir Theodosius as most
flattering, and every look was fraught with
kindness: her temper was not by nature
either suspicious or jealous; her mind had
dwelt so long, and with such peculiar
delight, on the possibility of seeing her son
united to the only woman she thought at
all likely to gain his heart, that she felt
uncomfortable when she saw the marked
attention and evident partiality of sir
Theodosius: if she became lady Sydney,
all her hopes would be blasted, both for
Clementina and for her Howard, as they
appeared formed by nature for each other;
her gentle temper and excellent under-
standing, she was convinced, would render
him completely happy; but still she re-
solved in no way to interfere, either by ad-
vice or by startegem.

   When they returned home, Clemetina              HOWARD CASTLE                 41

expressed the surprise she had felt at the extraordinary freedom of Mr. Strafford's manner - "Had sir Theodosius Sydney," exclaimed she, "behaved in the same high-flown style, and used the same expressions of ridiculous admiration, I should hae treated him in the way I did Mr. Strafford, as I should have thought him horridly disagreeable; but from a married man it was quite unbearable; I had no patience to listen to him, and I cannot express how thankful I was to you for so readily relieving me from my unpleasant companing."

     "And for giving you an opportunity of conversing with a most agreeable one," said Mrs. Conway, smiling.

     "Sir Theodosius," replied Clementina, "certainly possesses the art of pleasing; his conversation is quite the thing to amuse me, without having profound learning or brilliant wit; his extreme cheerfulness and good humour make him always willing to entertain, and be entertained, without racking his brain for fine speeches; he treats me as a rational being, and as such I prefer his society to any I have met with
42        HOWARD CASTLE.

in the gay throng. Mr. Strafford has dis-
gusted me to such a degree, that he made
an incomparable foil to sir Theodosius, who
never shone so much as to-night, and never
rose so high before in my estimation."

    " He will he an object of general envy,"
said Mrs. Conway, gravely.

    " I shall accuse you," said Clementina,
" of following Mr. Strafford's example;
beware of fine speeches—I am sick of them;
poor lady Isabella had them lavished upon
her before their marriage, but now they
are poured into every ear who will listen
to him, and his wife neglected."

    " It is her own fault," said Mrs. Con-
way; " never was there a better husband
than he made, until he was supplanted in
his wife's affections by his children; he
found he was a secondary object, where he
ought to have been the first; 1 know his
home is uncomfortable, and that he is
drove into company. If a woman will
run headlong into misery with her eyes
open, she must not repine at meeting with
it. Poor Mr. Strafford cannot lavish his
fondness on his wife, and he unfortunately
fixed upon an improper object; many              HOWARD CASTLE.          43

would have suffered him to talk nonsense,
and thought no more of it."

   "Do I hear Mrs. Conway," exclaimed
Clementina, "sport such sentiments, that
if a man is not happy with his wife, that
he is to make love to any other woman
with impunity ? you may as well attempt
to defend the frail ladies, who give food to
the lawyers; all, of course, will plead being
unhappy with their husbands, as an ex-
tenuation for their guilt, but are they ever received again into society ? It certainly is very strange that men are to have the liberty 
of insulting the ears of any woman they 
choose to fix upon, and we are to be ex-
posed to the scorn of the world, and made
outcasts for listening to them; they are
again admitted into fashionable circles, and
into the company of modest women;
whilst those who have been their dupes
are banished in disgrace, and never can re-
cover the place they once held in the esti-
mation of the world."

    "You have run away with the subject,"
said Mrs. Conway, " before you under-
stood my meaning; if you thought I was
speaking in defence of either married men 44 HOWARDS CASTLE.

or women's flirting, it is what I daily see,
but no custom can reconcile me to it; and 
I perfectly agree with you, that neither
the misled, nor the misleader, should be re-
ceived. If they were for ever banished to
a remote region, secluded from all social
intercourse, it would do more in checking
vice than paying damages: it marks a 
dashing character, having paid a large sum
for his amours; and instead of being 
shunned by our sex, it seems a passport
into every company, and is a badge of ho-
nour, instead of a disgrace Believe me,
had I thought poor Mr. Strafford could 
have even exceeded commonplace com-
pliments, I should not only have been of-
fended, but have shewn it. I have always
felt the greatest pity for him, as I know 
nature gave him a good, kind heart which
has been thrown away; his mother was an
intimate friend of mine, which interested
me more particularly in the fate of her
son. Sometimes I think I will assert my
friendship, and lecture lady Isabella on
trifling with the feelings of her husband; 
I fear he will find ways of amusing him-
self, independent of domestic happiness,        HOWARD CASTLE.          45

and which she may not now be able to
draw him from, without a wonderful exer-
tion, and I fear that is beyond her capa-
city."

Mrs. Conway retired to her pillow per-
fectly determined to call on lady Isabella
Strafford the following day, and point out 
to her the danger which threatened her;
she put her resolution in practice, and left 
Clementina at home to write letters. Mrs.
Conway was always admitted at Mr. Straf-
ford's, but had, according to custom, to sit
some time alone, when she was at liberty
to contemplate the ravages which had been
committed on the elegant furniture; the
broken mirror, and forlorn appearance
every thing had, struck her exceedingly,
and made her more determined to speak
her sentiments in the most undisguised
manner possible; almost as soon as she
had formed the resolution, lady Isabella
entered the room; her pallid countenance,
on which marks of tears were evident, and
her dejected manner, would have moved
any common heart to pity, but Mrs. Con-
way's was callous; the greater appearance
of misery, the more she was provoked at
             HOWARD CASTLE.

her want of energy and exertion. No wonder Mr. Strafford  was tired of his home, and of his wife, who exhibited every mark of careless indifference in her dress, and in her languid address. No subject ever appeared to interest her, but when her nursery concerns were on the carpet.

   Mrs. Conway listened to the catalogue of distresses which had happened within the last few days; they were many and various, and tears accompanied the recital -" I have come," said Mrs. Conway, "to spend and hour with your ladyship, if you are perfectly at liberty, as I wish exceedingly to have a little conversation with you."

   Lady Isabella bowed; she was sensible of the kindness, and felt grateful to her for the interest she took in he concerns.

   "Will you pardon me." was her replay, " if I express my sentiments with the freedom friendship alone is entitled to use? Our acquaintance has not been of very long standing, and you have had too many family engagements to meet often; my intimacy with Mr.Strafford and his mother will perhaps my pardon with you.
          HOWARDS CASTLE.          47

Mrs. Strafford's death was a very dread-
ful loss to her son, and to his wife; you
are both very young, and I believe very
amiable, but there are some little circum-
stances which are absolutely necessary to
be attended to."

  Lady Isabella looked surprised, but not
offended: she did not interrupt Mrs. Con-
way, who continued-" It is a strange
thing to say, and what cannot often be 
complained of in your walk of life, that
you are too tender a mother."

  Lady Isabella smiled-" I am relieved,"
said she, with more animation in her voice
than usual," to hear that is the subject of
your complaint; I downrightly was alarmed
with the solemn opening of this lecture, 
and am relieved that my love for my little
cherubs is all my crime."

  "It Certainly is," replied Mrs. Conway;
"the extreme affection for your children
may lead you into great misery."

  "Misery," repeated lady Isabella, "to 
attend to my darlings, and see that they
are taken proper care of! how can that 
entail misery upon their fond mother?"

  "By engrossing to much of her atten-48               HOWARD CASTLE. 

tion; you have given up the world - your friends - I fear I may add, your husband's comfort, for the sake of your offspring."

     Lady Isabella coloured; Mrs. Conway was pleased that she saw tokens of sensibility, whether of anger, surprise, or contrition - "Will you permit me, in the true style of a self-appointed judge, to put a few questions to you?"

     "Certainly," was her reply. 

     "Do you value the love of your husband?"

     "Beyond every thing," she answered. 

     "Then," said Mrs. Strafford, I know, fondly loved you when he married you, and continued to lavish his fondest affections upon you, until the birth of your eldest son."

     "He is surely not jealous of his own child?" said lady Isabella, with animation. 

     "I rather think he has occasion," was her answer; "did Mr. Strafford not find a material alteration in your manner to him?"

     "Very probably he did," replied she; "a poor little helpless thing, who ought to

           HOWARD CASTLE.          49

have been as dear to him as to me, required
all my attention."

  " Pardon me, lady Isabella, your infant
had no feelings to study; give it meat and
sleep, all its senses were gratified, and a
careful nurse was sufficient; but your hus-
band was notquite so easily lulled into in-
sensibility; his companion, in whom he
had such pleasure, forsook him; he became
a secondary object in your attention, and
that is what few husbands can support;
and he soon found his home, which had
formerly been so happy, become other-
wise; your mind was occupied; your time,
which used to be dedicated to him, was
otherwise employed; you would no longer
accompany him to parties, or into public;
he could no longer enjoy the society of his
companions at his own house; what is the
result, lady Isabella, but that he now is
seldom or ever within these doors. Pardon
my freedom—I run the risk of offending
you; but if I can, before it is too late, wain
you of the danger which threatens you, I
am very well rewarded for the unpleasant
task I have taken upon myself."

  VOL. III.               D50                HOWARD CASTLE.

    Lady Isabella sat like a statue; at last
she exclaimed- "Your words have struck
like daggers on my heart, and given me
such a strange sensation as I have not the
means to express; you have taken a ban-
dage from my eyes, which had completely
entranced my senses.  Oh! do more, dear-
est of friends, than expose my strange in-
fatuation! teach me to regain what I have
lost, and I shall be as pliant to your advice
as I have been foolish in my conduct; my
heart has been deeply wounded by the
change in Mr. Strafford's manner to me,
which has more strongly rivetted me to
the children; and never until you have
kindly explained it to me, could I con-
ceive why he treated me with neglect.
Indeed we now seldom meet, and if by
chance he sees me, he never either asks
after my own health, or the children's;
total indifference seems to have taken pos-
session of him, and I do firmly believe it
has been brought on by my own folly."

Mrs. Conway was delighted to hear such
expressions; she flattered herself lady Isa-
bella possessed more sense and feeling thanshe had given her credit for, and that all might yet end happily. 

"Tell me," continued she, "kindest of women," and she pressed her hand with all the warmth of affection, "what I must do to regain that heart, which I fear, I have thrown away, and which has cost me so many tears, and so many wretched hours, without one supposing I was to blame; pride kept me silent, noh to Strafford and to the world, and I believe I should have died sooner than made a complaint; I will make any sacrifice, or any exertion you may point out, which you think will be likely to restore me to the treasure I once possessed." 

"When Mr. Strafford was your lover," said Mrs. Conway, "did you not study to please him in every way possible?

"I did," said lady Isabella.
"Then play the same part again; take the same pains to gain his attention now, as you did formerly; and when you have enticed him back to his home, do everything to render it agreeable; invite those you know he likes, visit where he visits,52       HOWARD CASTLE.

have musical parties, and exert your own
talents, which he has often told me were
great. In short, do what you would have
done before you bore his name, and strive
with every little art to awaken his affec-
tion; give up the duties of the nursery to
the proper person, and do not dwell on the
merits or demerits of the children; let him
discover their qualifications, and in due
time he will notice them, if they are not
forced upon him."

   "How can I meet with him?" said lady
Isabella; "I do not know any of his en-
gagements."

   "To-morrow night," said Mrs. Conway,
"I am to have a concert, where Mr. Straf-
ford is to be, and where I shall be most
happy to see lady Isabella, and to hear you
sing and play."

   "Oh !" exclaimed she, "I shall be in
such an agitation, I shall hardly know what
I am about; if I should expose myself be-
fore him, I should perhaps defeat all I wish
to do."

   "If you feel unequal to the exertion,"
said Mrs. Conway, "you must not attempt
it; but I hope you will be able for it; and  HOWARD CASTLE.    53

I further desire that you will come in all
the splendour possible-dressed with the same care as you would have done to in-
sure his admiration."

  "And if I could insure it," said lady
Isabella, "there would not be so happy a
being in the room."

  "And shew your happiness in your
countenance; meet him with smiles and
animation, and do not appear frightened
and embarrassed."

  "It must all depend on the feelings of
the moment," was her answer.  "(am so
relieved by this kind interference of yours,
that I have not felt so cheerful, or so light-
hearted, for many months; you have open-
ed a prospect to my view, which, if it ter-
minates as I wish it, I shall for ever bless
you as the happy instrument of restoring
me to felicity.  I have now an occupation
for my mind, very different from the
gloomy subject which it has lately dwelt
upon; hope will cheer and animate me."

  "I would not only," said Mrs. Conway,
"attend with particular care to my per-
son, but to all concerns of the house.
Mr. Strafford is extremely nice and neat,54      HOWARD CASTLE.

elegant in his taste, and exact both as to
his table and every thing belonging to
him; make all your study, and surprise
him as much by the order and regularity
of his domestic concerns, as in your own
manner and appearance."

  Lady Isabella again poured out her most
grateful thanks, and Mrs. Conway left her
delighted with the success she had met
with. The musical party, the following
evening, was to be a trial to Clementina,
as well as lady Isabella; the duchess of
Beaudelaire and lady August Sydney were
to be there; of course, she had no part to
act, but she should be mortified if her old
companion took no notice of her, and if her
grace shewed any of her dignified pride
towards her; she was to exhibit both in
singing and playing; if her nerves met with
a shock, perhaps she might fail in both,
and expose herself to the ridicule of the
duchess, and of the whole company.

  Clementina was not one of the trembling
fair ones who are ready to die at very
trifling circumstance; she never affected
what she did not feel, as there was not a
spark of conceit in her whole composition;               HOWARD CASTLE.          55

and she hoped her own spirit, of which she
had a proper share, would sustain her on
the approaching meeting. She had finish-
ed a packet of letters, when her friend re-
turned; one was addressed to lord Mon-
tague, and happened to be laid on her
writing-box, when Mrs. Conway tapped at
her dressing-room door.

   Clementina, concluding it was her maid,
readily desired her to come in; she was
in the act of sealing a letter, when Mrs.
Conway advanced to the table; the direc-
tion struck her instantly, and a degree of
confusion in Clementina's manner was very
apparent. The coment her hands were
at liberty, she put the letter into her
writing-box, and closing it, said--"I will
accompany you to the drawing room."

   "I am afraid I have disturbed you," said
her friend.

  "You have not indeed," was her reply;
"I had finished writing, and was sealing
my epistles."

  "You have not sealed the whole; why
should I interrupt you?"

  Clementina persevered, and locked up
the letter, at the same time asking56          HOWARD CASTLE.

what success she had had with lady Isabella 
Strafford?

  Mrs. Conway did not reply until they
reached the drawing room; she was for a 
few minutes completely discomposed by
what she had seen, and the idea that her
friend should have a concealment from her
vexed her: her good humour however re-
turned, upon reflecting that there was no
perfection in human nature; this fault, she
firmly believed, was the only one which 
Clementina possessed; and if she chose to
have a secret, she certainly had no title to
be offended, or to pry into what evidently
was not intended for her scrutiny.  She 
recovered her composure, which mortifica-
tion had in some degree put to flight, and 
she narrated the success she had met with, 
and the hopes she entertained of seeing
Mr. Strafford and lady Isabella again a
happy couple.

  Clementina was surprised with the cha-
racter which the latter displayed, as 
she had, without the least hesitation, con-
cluded she had no character at all.
    HOWARD CASTLE.    57

CHAPTER III.

THE concert, which was to be in the prin-
cipal drawing-room, was to consist of many 
professional amateurs, on various istru-
ments; the vocal part was to be performed
entirely by Mrs.Conway's friends. Cle-
mentina was to take a considerable share, 
and she had determined to begin her pub-
lic exhibition with her favourite Italian
song, Which she had sung at Carnsworth 
Castle; she felt apprehensive that her cou-
rage might fail her, was she to attemptany 
thing new; and nothing could be more 
beautiful than what she had fixed upon.

  The hour arrived, when the street was
filled with carriages, and the company
poured into the elegant suite of apartments, 
which were thrown open for their recep-
tion. Lady Isabella Strafford was the first
who made her appearance; Clementina
was surprised when she heard her name
58		HOWARD CASTLE.

announced, and saw a most elegant and
beautiful woman enter-not dressed exact-
ly according to the fashion of the day, but
with peculiar taste, and with evident
study; every ornament was disposed of in
the most becoming manner; her figure was
not like other people's; she was evidently
arrayed to attract attention, and not pass
unheeded, nor without admiration. That
the languid, half-dead female, who had pro-
voked her with her insipidity, could have
assumed the elegance and animation of the
person she now saw, was beyond her be-
lief; and not till Mrs. Conway particularly
expressed the pleasure which the change
on lady Isabella gave her, could she credit
her senses.

	Lady Isabella took the offered hand of
her kind friend, saying-"I was deter-
mined to be the first of the party who are
to assemble here this evening; will you
permit me to display my old-fashioned garb
in your splendid rooms?"

	Mrs. Conway smiled-"Your ladyship
looks so well, that I believe firmly, your
dress will become the high fashion."

	"Could I escape," said lady Isabella,HOWARD CASTLE                                    59

"the observation of all, expecting one per-
son, I should be delighted; the exact coun-
terpart of this dress was what I wore the
day I first saw Mr. Stafford; the orna-
ments are the same, and the very bouquet
is exactly imitated; the rosy bloom of
youth, you will see, I have in a slight de-
gree reinstated, as alas! the many painful
hours I have spent, have put my colour to
flight; but the happiness which I fondly
anticipate will soon restore it. You asked
me to sing this evening; I refused, from
the belief that I could not; will you allow
me to change my mind?"

"With joy," said Mrs. Conway.

"I have been practising ever since your
kind visit, a favourite song of Mr. Straf-
ford's-the one I sung the very day I was
habited as I now am, and first saw him; it
is the old Irish ballad of Kate of Kilar-
ney. I have not strength of nerves for a
fine songs, anf where my feelings would
have time to overpower me; but in the
one I have chosen there is little exertion."

Mrs. Conway was charmed with the
plan, and had hardly time to express her60       HOWARD CASTLE.

confidence of success, when. her attention
was called by the entrance of company.

     Lady Isabella was the person who at-
tracted general notice; she had once been
much admired for a very short period, but
had so very suddenly disappeared from the
world, that it had, in a great measure, for-
got there was such a being in existence:
her coming out again, in the exact costume
she had retired in, puzzled the few who
recollected her; it appeared like a dream,
and as if their optics deceived them; the
figure before them certainly was lady Isa-
bella Strafford, and not in the smallest de-
gree changed; rouge had restored her
beauty, and hope sparkled in her eyes; her
old acquaintances recognised her, and in-
troduced her to those who had not for-
merly known her. The expectation of
Mr. Strafford's entrance kept her spirits in
constant agitation; she wished to see the
first effect of surprise, as he had not seen
her for several days; and when they did 
meet, it had become, on his side, accidental
and momentary; he avoided the house at
meals, or at any time when it was likely he         HOWARD CASTLE.      61

should meet with his wife, who, he believed, 
was buried in nursery concerns.

   The duchess of Beauclaire, and lady
Augusta Sydney, were at last announced.
Clementina had watched with anxiety for
their approach, and happened, when her
grace appeared, to be standing near the
door with lady Caroline Seymour, and a
gay party of beaux and belles; sir Theo-
dosius Sydney, her faithful attendant, was
expatiating upon the beauty of a song
which he held in his hand, and which he
was entreating Miss Bouverie would sing
that evening; he saw the deep tinge which
glowed in her cheek, as her eyes were fixed
on the door; his followed, and soon saw the
party enter, which he was convinced had
arrested her attention. She was resolved
to give the duchess a full opportunity to 
speak to her, if it was her inclination; and
to her surprise, she moved to her in the
most gracious manner.

   Lady Augusta did not allow her to con-
tinue mute with astonishment; she grasped
her hand, with all the affection which their
former friendship sanctioned, declaring,
with unfeigned pleasure, the joy she felt at62      HOWARD CASTLE.

being again permitted to renew the inti-
macy which had been the delight of their
early days.

Clementina cordially returned the as-
surance, as she believed lady Augusta had
acted under the strict injunction of her
mother, and that her character was not
capricious. She was soon mistress of the
subject, as lady Augusta had no idea of
concealment; she declared, as soon as an
opportunity offered, that her cruel refusal
of the marquis had been the cause of the
averted looks of the family--"The du-
chess," continued she, "is now convinced
that you were engaged, before my brother
popped the question, which takes her
wrath from you. Poor Clemaire is banished
from London; he cannot stand the bril-
liancy of your charms, but spends his
time in the dull retirement of Catnsworth
Castle and Colnbrook Abbey; it is only
from the dreadful monotony of the former,
that can make the latter bearable; his so-
ciety must be delightful to lady Elenora,
who never has, in my estimation, one real-
ly cheerful day in the whole year; the
house is horridly gloomy, and the old pair              HOWARD CASTLE.                  63

miserable companions; even the marquis, in his desponding mood, must appear charming to her; I should not wonder if they become enamoured of each other.What can they do for amusement, but make love?"

Clementina smiled at the idea, which had only that moment entered lady Augusta's head, and had utterance the instant it was formed.She thought it was the most likely thing really to happen, as she was convinced her cousin had envied her the heart of marquis; if he should transfer his affections to her, she was almost certain he would be well received.

Lady Augusta roused her from a momentary absence of mind, by asking when she as to be married?

"Married!" repeated Clementina, with evident surprise.

"Do u really not know,"said lady Augusta,"that it is uncommon thing for men and women to marry?"

"Too common," replied Clementina;"the event is so very frequent, that it is not duly considered before it is practiced;and as there is no retracting after the cere-

64       HOWARD CASTLE

mony takes place, which perhaps you were
not acquainted with, I mean to be very
cautious in my decision; but as I have no
power to change my situation, your ques-
tion rather suprised me."
   "Hypocrisy does not sit well on you,"
said lady Augusta; "we have been inform-
ed, from undoubted authority, that you are
to be lady Sydney; sir Theodosius is en-
vied by many, and many of our sex envy
you."
  "How unfortunate," replied Clemen-
tina, "that such sensations should exist,
when there is no foundation for them!
Pray relieve those you hear express the
painful feeling, by assuring them, from still
better authority than what you deem un-
doubted, that there is no truth in the re-
port."
  "Time will shew," said lady Augusta,
with an incredulous smile; "sir Theodo-
sius is a general favourite."
  "He is a favourite of mine," said Cle-
mentia, "as an acquaintance, but nothing
further."
  "I will not tell the duchess so," said lady
Augusta; "in the first plae, I believe I             HOWARD CASTLE.        65

should her a story; and if it was really
the truth, all her ire would return at your
refusing to become a member of our fa-
mily; so, upon the whole, I shall leave it
to time to explain, which perhaps may
prove different from what you assert."

   Sir Theodosius at that moment ap-
proached, and offering an arm to each, hur-
ried them towards the orchestra, saying-

   "You must not lose one duleet tone; lady
Almeria Villyers strain, but a scientific one;
Miss Bouverie alone can reach the feelings
with her sweet tones."

   Lady Augusta bent forward, and gave
an arch smile at her friend-"Hers," said
she, "are dangerous notes to listen to;
they charm, entrance, and bewilder the
senses."

   "They ravish and delight," exclaimed
he, with warmth; "surely they cannot
mislead."

   At that moment they were joined by
Mr. Strafford, who had just entered the
room- "How fortunate," said he, as the
approached Clementina, "to have so soon
met with Miss. Bouverie, who I hope, has 
 66                  HOWARD CASTLE.

not yet charmed the company with her voice;I have been detained very unwillingly, as I expected being highly gratified this evening."

"And I hope you will,"replied Clementina.

Mr.Strafford made a bow of thanks for her good wishes----"My gratification will depend all on Miss Bouverie; her unrivalled talents in music must charm every lover of harmony."

A female voice of uncommon sweetnes arrested their attention; it was not lady Almeria's;they pressed forward to have a view of the singer, when an exclamation from Mr.Strafford---"By Heavens! it is lady Isabella Dermont; in that dress, in that attitude, singing that song, I fell in love with her eight years ago.What delusion is this? where was that fair phantom sprung from?"

"Hush!" said Clementina;she tapped Mr.Strafford's hand with her fan, in token of silence.

The pretty ballad was sung with much taste,life and animation;Mr.Strafford alone seemed lost to every thing; his eyes               HOWARD CASTLE.     67           

were fixed on the face of his wife with in-
quiring scrutiny-- "It must be my Isa-
bella," he said, in a low tone of voice; "no
other ever sung Kate of Kilarney so weil;
tell me, Miss Bouverie, what this means?"

  Lady Isabella had finished.

  "I am now at liberty to speak," said
Clementina: "the lady you have just now
heard is from Ireland; has lady Isabella a
sister in London?"

  "Let me only call her by the name of 
Dermont," cried Mr.Stafford; "let me 
forget she has ever borne my name, and I
shall be again the supplicating lover."

  He appeared not to have attended to 
the idea of her being a sister of his wife's;
he was thoroughly convinced of her iden-
tity, but the change on her appearance, and
the animation of her manner, astonished
him; ger restored beauty and elegance
charmed him, and he longed, as much as
he had done eight years before, to be in-
troduced to her.

  Clementina saw the plan of her friend
had taken effect, and she was clearly of
opinion Mr.Stafford retained all the af-
fection lady Isabella could wish for, as the 
68           HOWARD CASTLE.

agitation of his manner plainly evinced
that she was still a most interesting object
to him.

  " This," said he, " is a plan of yours;
and if you can insure me her attention and
affection to be restored, in the same degree
as her beauty is, and that tne same degree
of pains shall be bestowed on that elegant
form as there has been this evening, I shall
with joy recognise you as the restorer of
domestic happiness."

  " I have no merit," said Clementina,
" if there- is any, in lady Isabella's being of
the party; I know Mrs. Conway invited
her to be here; her beauty and l.' r inte-
resting appearance must be admired, and
surely it required no stratagem to make
you sensible of both."

  " Ah!" cried Mr. Strafford, " do not add
to my remorse and confusion, by remind-
ing mc of the neglect I have shewn to lady
Isabella for a considerable length of time;
she forced me to it by neglecting herself,
and converting that lovely form into a
sloven; her mind was engrossed with her
family, and I was neglected."

  " And did you become sulky, because            HOWARD CASTLE.        69

you had not sugar-plums with the little
masters and misses?"

   Clementina uttered these words with
rather a sarcastic smile. Mr. Strafford had
injured himself in her opinion by his fool-
ish behaviour to herself; and she blamed
his conduct to his wife, although Mrs.
Conway entertained different sentiments.
Lady Isabella's error was only an excess of
goodness; had she neglected her children,
and studied only her own amusement, she
should have conceived her to be very
blamable; the morning she had seen her
at her own house, she thought her manner
not agreeable, and she pitied Mr. Strafford;
but when she found he seemed inclined to
amuse himself, and forget his wife, she no
longer thought him an object of commise-
ration.

   The face was kept up for the evening,
and Mr. Strafford acted the part of an as-
siduous admirer of lady isabella Der-
mont's; she showed more animation than
Clementina believed her possessed of, and
plainly proved her powers of flirtation were
not extinct; her spirits were raised by the70       HOWARD CASTLE

attention she received from her husband,
who not for a single moment quitted her.
  When Miss Bouvrie sung, he was
Charmed, and lady Isabella was in ecstasy;
her praises were unbounded: the truth
was. she was pleased with every thing and
every body, and returned to her home hap-
pier than she had been for many year;
she exerted herself to retain what she has
experienced could be thrown away, do-
mestic happiness; their house she made
agreeable both to him and his friends; he
was not obliged to roam in search of
amusement; the air of comfort was re-
stored which had been so totally neglect-
ed; the health of the children improved,
as nature was permitted to have fair play.
Lady Isabella continued an attentive mo-
ther, but never either intruded the children
on Mr. Stafford's notice, or made them
the subject of discussion: as Mrs. Conway
foretold, they became a mutual amusement,
and he discovered qualities which he had
no idea they possessed; nor would he have
ever found them out, had lady Isabella's          HOWARD CASTLE.D.       71

plan been pursued. It gave Mrs.Con-
way's kind heart the utmost satisfaction,
that the timely interference of a friend had
restored happiness to the son of a valued
acquaintance, and to a very amiable, de-
serving woman, which she was convinced
lady Isabella was. The gratitude she ex-
pressed to Mrs. Conway plainly evinced
the restoration of peace; she was sensible
of the error she had fallen into, and that it
was in the power of any wife to alienate
the affections of her husband; and proba-
bly, in many instances, not quite so easy
to regain them, as she had found it with
Mr.Strafford; she still retained youth and
beauty to interest him, and draw hims from
the gay career he had entered into; it was
from necessity, as nature had given him a
good heart, and a good temper, he was
ready to return and enjoy, in a high de-
gree, domestic comfort.
   As lady Caroline Seymour foretold, in-
vitations poured in upon Firs. Conway and
Clementina, who became more reconciled to
a gay life, and even could submit to visit-
ing more than one place of public resort in
a night; her friendship with lady Augusta
72           HOWARD CASTLE.

Sydney was completely re-established, and
she was honoured with much stiff polite-
ness from the duchess, at whose parties
she was again permitted to appear. The
marquis never ventured to make one of
the number; he was become quite an en-
thusiast in field-sports, and could not bear
the confinement of a town: the truth was,
that all sport in the country was over; but
as long as Miss Bouverie was in the gay
circle, he durst not be there; he was con-
vinced lie should betray what he wished to
conceal from the knowledge of the world;
he found Clementina still retained too
great an interest in his heart to venture
into her presence.


               CHAPTER IV.
                ~~~~~~~~

In the midst of innumerable engagements,
and general adulation, Clementina received
a deathblow to her happiness; her mind
was in no way intoxicated with the gaiety
in which she was deeply involved; the            HOWARD CASTLE        73

idea of the approaching summer restoring 
her to her father's society, was attended
with peculiar satisfaction; she anticipated
the greatest pleasure in introducing her
friend,Mrs.Conway, at Roachwood, and
in enjoying the beauties of the country in 
rational pursuites, which, in spite of the attention which she received in the vortex
of fashionable life, she could not feel was
the case; all was hurry and bustle; she
had hardly a moment's leisure to open a
book, or to use her pen; her correspond-
ents were circumscribed; but as she knew
her letters were anxiously expected by her
father, the abbess, and lady Elenora, she
stole many hours from her pillow to nar-
rate the scenes which she had quitted.

    She has finished a long epistle to the 
general, with which she entered the break-
fast-room at the usual hour; she was
alarmed with Mrs.Conway's countenance,
who was perusing a paper with earnest so-
lieitude--" No bad news," said she, as she
advanced to the table where her friend was
seated; " I hope your grave countenance
forebodes no disaster?"
   
   VOL. III              E 74          HOWARD CASTLE.

" I trust not," said Mrs. Conway.
"What then," said she, "makes you
appear agitated? no disagreeable letters
from Franc have reached you?"

Still Mrs. Conway answered in the ne-
gative; she feared too rashly to unfold the
sad tidings which she had received from 
Roachwood, that general Bouverie lay at 
the point of death; that he had seized
withpalsy, which had deprived him of 
speech or motion: the very strong feelings
of her friend made her dread to impart
the intelligence, which she knew would be 
more severe than any thing which could
happen to her, as her affection for her pa-
rents was unbounded; and she was con-
vinced that the painful feeling of self-refle-
tion, for having obeyed his injuctions, in
permitting him to return to the country
alone, would prey upon her and add to her
misery.

 Clementina could not bear the torture of
suspense; she did not for a moment sus-
pect that she was further concerned in the
information, than that it affected Mrs. Con-
way; she again urged her to tell her what 
distressed her so evidently-" It is un-                     Howard Castle              75

kind," continued she, "not to let me par-
ticipate in your sorrows, as well as in your pleasures; believe me sincere, when I de-
clare that they interest me as if they were
my own."

  Mrs. Conway, with tears of gratitude
and sorrow, that she had so deep a wound
to inflict on the affectionate heart of her 
beloved Clementina, still hesitated to 
speak; conviction flashed upon her mind-
"Ah!" exclaimed she, "this horrid ex-
planation involves me in misery; my fa-
ther-"

  She could articulate no more of the sen-
tence; she sunk upon a chair, overpowered
by her distracting thoughts.

  Mrs. Conway was alarmed by her pale
countenance, and was going to ring for as-
sistance.

  "Be not terrified," said Clementina; 
"the dreadful idea nearly overcame my
senses. I am better and can listen, I trust,
with composure to the dreadful contents 
of that paper, which I am now convinced
is from Roachwood. Is it written by my 
beloved parent, or was he incapable of re-

                   E276   HOWARD CASTLE.

calling his daughter to him? Perhaps--"

But the sentence died on her lips; she
looked all the agony which the horrid
thought inspired, that it was perhaps intel-
ligence of his death.

"I will not deceive you, my dear Cle-
mentina," said Mrs. Conway, as soon as she
saw her a little more composed; "your fa-
ther is ill, and I have given orders for
hack-horses to be put to my travelling
chaise; we shall soon be at Roachwood,
where, I trust, you will be relieved of part
of the load which overwhelms you; your
father has had a paralytic stroke, which
has disabled him from writing to you: the
letter is from the housekeeper, merely en-
treating your return. The medical men
had not arrived when Mrs. Moore sent off
the express; but I trust the means used
will be attended with success, and that we
shall find him better; at all events, my
dear friend, be resigned to the will of Pro-
vidence."

She, with paternal affection, pressed
Clementina's hand, who appeared almost
unconscious of what was passing; she was
roused to some little exertion by Mrs.              HOWARD CASTLE.                    77

Conway's ordering Mary to prepare for their departure; and in the course of an hour they were out of the bustle and noise of London.  Nothing could rouse Clementina from the melancholy state into which she had sunk, from the conviction that her hopes of seeing her father alive were almost precluded.  The country looked beautiful as they passed along, it being the first week in April, and at no season is vegetation more interesting, than when the lovely face of nature is recovering from the effects of a pinching winter; but all was lost on Clementina; one object alone engrossed lier thoughts--one object was before her eyes; all her senses scemed to be wrapped up in the sad idea that she was on the point of being bereft of her parent--in the agony of the moment, she believed, of her only friend.

     Mrs. Conway would have started an objection to that melancholy idea, as she felt the love of a parent for her; theirs had been a recent friendship, but on her side she was convinced her affection was as firmly bound to her interesting companion, as if she had known her from earliest
         78          HOWARD CASTLE.

days. She did not intrude her conversa-
tion, but suffered her to indulge her
thoughts unmolested; she believed no-
thing she could say to cheer her would
have the desired effect.

   When they reached the gates at Roach-
wood, her agitation increased, and Mrs.
Conway durst not inquire, as she passed
the porter, after the general's health. Mrs.
Moore's countenance, when they arrived
at the house, convinced her there was no
favourable intelligence to be expected.

   When Clementina got out of the car-
riage, she was incapable of speaking, but
passed on, evidently with the intention of
entering her father's apartment; the ever-
attentive housekeeper, with the most ear-
nest solicitude, prevented her; the shock
of seeing him laid on the bed almost ina-
nimate, she was fully aware, would be too
much for her young lady's nerves to bear;
she at once stopped her, by saying, she
would disturb him, as he had been for some
time perfectly quiet; a little sleep might
have the happiest effect.
   
   Clementina, with unequal steps, entered
the library, where she sunk on a couch,               HOWARD CASTLE.           79

completely overcome by her feelings.  It
was not a moment for Mrs. Conway to
feel that it was her first visit at Roach-
wood; the melancholy situation of the ge-
neral, she found, was past all human relief.
The physician had pronounced his case
hopeless before they arrived; Mrs. Moore
had entreated his remaining in the house
till Miss Bouverie came, as she knew not
that the benevolent Mrs. Conway would
leave the gay scenes of London, to enter
the house of mourning; and she knew the 
tender attachment which there was be-
tween her master and his amiable daugh-
ter too well, not to dread the consequence
of his severe illness; it was fortunate that
there was medical assistance, as Mrs. Con-
way became alarmed; both by Clementi-
na's appearance and manner, she was con-
vinced that she was extremely ill.

  Her old acquaintance, doctor Wallace,
who had pleased her so much at Carns-
worth Castle, entered the library: he was
shocked with her flushed countenance,
her burning hands, and the vacant gaze
she gave him, as he approached her--"I
am sorry to see you so depressed," said he. 80           HOWARD CASTLE.

  She sighed, but did not articulate a 
word.
  " Your father will be distressed if he
hears you are ill."
  The sound of father seemed to animate
her--" May I see him?" said she, at the
same time raising herself from the sofa.
"I will nurse him night and day; pray let
me go to his room."
   " Not at present," said doctor Wallace ; 
" I will tell him you are here, and that I
ordered you to take some repose.  You
know," added he, " that I must be
obeyed."
  " Allow me," cried she, with quickness,
"to see my father for only five minutes,
and I will then do whatever you desire
me."
   He shook his head.
   She turned quickly to Mrs. Conway,
whose tears were flowing--:Oh!" ex-
claimed she, in a voice almost choked with
emotin, " I believe you are deceiving me,
and that my beloved parent is no more.
Oh, my friend, shall I not receive his bless-
ing?"
   Here a burst of grief stopped her; the
          HOWARD CASTLE.         81

agitation she was in alarmed Mrs. Con-
way ; her burning head reclined upon the
shoulder of her friend, whilst hysterical
sobs rent her bosom.

     Doctor Wallace ordered her to be re-
moved to her apartment, and to be imme-
diately put to bed; a composing draught
was administered, but to no purpose; a
violent fever had taken possession of her
delicate frame, and she became insensible
to the irreparable loss she had sustained;
her senses wandered, and she raved con-
tinually cf her father; that she had hurt
him by refusing to many the marquis of
Clemaire; but promising, if he recovered
from his illness, that she would obey him
in every thing, and would not again leave
him.

      Mrs.Conway's situation was dreadful;
her fears for the safety of her beloved Cle-
mentina took from the sorrow which she
should otherwise have felt for general Bou-
verie, who had expired the day after their
arrival; every faculty was engrossed by
the dread of losing her second daughter;
never did a fond parent watch by the bed

                  E 3
28             HOWARD CASTLE.

of a darling child with more anxious soli-
citude than Mrs. Conwav did by Clemen-
tina's; every medicine was administered
by her, with an ardent prayer that it might
be efficacious.

  Lord Radnor and lady Elenora came
immediately, upon receiving a letter from
doctor Wallace, describing the melancholy
events which bad so suddenly taken place.
When they arrived, they found it indeed
a scene of sorrow; Clementina knew not
any one, or what was passing around her.
Lord Radnor attended the remains of his
friend to the grave, and lady Elenora
watched, with the indefatigable Mrs. Con-
way, the emaciated countenance of Cle-
mentina.

Doctor Wallace did not despair of her
recovery; she had youth and a good con-
stitution on her side, and lie hoped she
would live to repay her kind friend for her
unwearied attention and fender solicitude.
His predictions were verified, to the joy of
those about her; she fell into a calm and
deep sleep, which lasted for several hours:
nature, which was completely worn out,
revived in a wonderful manner, and she        HOWARD CASTLE.     83

awoke perfectly sensible; the first objects 
which presented themselves to her view, 
upon opening her eyes, were doctor Wal-
lace and Mrs. Conway; she stretched her 
hand towards her friend, who, in a trans-
port of joy, put up an ejaculation of thanks 
to the Supreme Being, for his goodness in 
restoring her senses.
  She faintly pressed the hand of Mrs. 
Conway, and whispered--"I have been 
long asleep."
  "You have," replied Mrs. Conway.
  "No conversation," said doctor Wal-
lace. He felt her pulse, and was pleased 
with the change, but the feeble effort 
which nature was capable of making con-
vinced him that the restoratives were abso-
lutely necessary, and that with perfect 
quietness and good nursing, she would 
soon be restored to health. He permitted 
lady Elenora to see her, but debarred ex-
ertion of any kind.
  Lady Elenora only waited the crisis of 
her illness, which she now hoped was over, 
as she was obliged to return to Colnbrook, 
lady Badnor being an invalid. The alarm 
which had been felt for the life of Cle-mentina had occupied the attention of all the inhabitants of the house, and of the neighbourhood, who evinced their concern by inquiries; the joy which her recovery spread, completely raised the spirits of those who would have been otherwise depressed.

Clementina was restored to reason and to feeling; her mind was weakened with her body, and she dwelt with heartfelt sorrow on the heavy loss which she had sustained. On her waking from insensibility, she knew not what had happened, yet she was sure there was something which had agitated her in a strange manner. Her first inquiry was if she was in London?

"At Roachwood, my love," said Mrs. Conway: "but you are ordered not to think."

"Is it in doctor Wallace's power to prevent me?" said she, faintly. "I not know all that has happened."

Mary had brought some medicine, and her sable figure attracted the attention of her mistress. Mrs. Conway saw that she was bathed in tears, and rejoiced in her having such relief; not a word was spoken,            HOWARD CASTLE.       85

and Clementina cried herself to sleep like
a child.  In a few days she was consider-
ably better, but was astonished with her
own weakness, as she had no idea that she
had been so long ill.

  Doctor Wallace quitted Roachwood, as
soon as the favourable change had taken
place in his patient.  Lord Radnor and
lady Elenora only waited till she was pro-
nounced perfectly out of danger; so that
Mrs. Conway was left alone with her friend,
whose spirits became daily more depressed,
as her thoughts were capable of retrospec-
tion; she tormented herself with unavail-
ing regret that she had quitted her father,
and that she had thwarted his inclination
in regard to her marriage.

  Mrs. Conway long bore in silence her
self-reflections, as she believed contradic-
tion would only increase her agitation;
at last she said-" I could not have cre-
dited the account; if any person had as-
sured me that they had heard you reflect
for a single moment on your own conduct, I
should have believed it misrepresentation."

  " Why?" said Clementina, who was86 HOWARD CASTLE.

surprised with both Mrs. Conway's words
and manner

"Because," said she, with the quickness, 
"you evidently repent having been obe-
dient to your father's commands; had you 
accepted my invitation repugnant to his
will, you could not repine more than you 
do, at the time you spent with me. My
request was made in form to the general,
who seemed to rejoice in the idea; and I
believe, had you not obeyed him, you
would have vexed him exceedingly. Mrs.
Moore informs me that he has spent his
time most comfortably this winter; his spi-
rits were good, and his health excellent;
he had no sufferings of any kind. Our
Heavenly Father, who is constantly watch-
ing over all his creatures, inflicted no ail-
ment of either body or mind; in an instant 
all sense of feeling, of alarm, of pain, was
taken from him; he was even deprived of
the wish to see you; why will you there-
fore injure your health by fruitless lamen-
tations? you hurt me beyond measure, as
I know a peaceful mind is necessary to-
wards restoring your bodily strength. Re-            HOWARD CASTLE               87

pine not at the inscrutable ways of Providence; you may bring some further trails upon you, without the ameliorating circumstances which have attended this severe affliction.  You have many sincere friends; one I can answer for, who has the affection for you of a parent, if you will permit her to be upon that interesting footing."

     Clementina could not articulate a word; she folded her friend in her arms - she feebly pressed her to her heart, and raised her streaming eyes to heaven, in token of thanks for the inestimable gift. Mrs. Conway returned the embrace with fervour, and mentally put up as sincere a prayer to Heaven as Clementina could do, that she might be in reality a mother to her; she believed that if she was the wife of her son, she could not love her better than she did at that moment, but the more she betrayed her amiable disposition, the more earnestly she wished to be allied to her, in the pleasing manner which faney had painted in the most bewitching colours. 

     The difficulties and danger attending her plan, she was convinced, would be now 88             HOWARD CASTLE.

increased; her great fortune, which was
left entirely in her own power, would be
an inducement to many who knew not her
rare endowments, to seek an alliance with
her.
   Mrs. Conway was highly gratified with
the expressions of grateful affection which
fell from the lips of Clementina; the mo-
ment she could get utterance, she pro-
mised all he friend could wish, and that
she would exert her spirits, and subdue, if
possible, the tormenting and fruitless self-
reflection which had embittered her ideas,
since the mournful event had taken place.
As her body regained its strength, her
mind recovered its wonted placidity; her
face, which her late illness had reduced
from animated health to languer and de-
jection, once more repaid Mrs. Conway
for her anxiety by its bewitching expres-
sion. The pensive air which continued to
pervade both her features and figure, added
to her naturally interesting appearance; and
the extreme delicacy which her recent ill-
ness had left, rendered her more like an
aerial than a human being; the faint tinge
of pink, which still kept possession of her               HOWARD CASTLE         89
checks, was at times nearly put to flight,
at others came with a double glow.

    Mrs. Comwat, who was watchfully alive
to every change on so beloved an object,
saw the varying colour with extreme
alarm. Was she doomed again to watch
the decay of a darling child? Clementina's
fragile form brought her Mary before her
eyes; the hectic bloom, the coral lips, and
the brilliant clearness of her eyes, remind-
ed her of her departed daughter, and filled
her bosom with fears; she could hardly be
convinced that her apprehensions were
groundless, in spite of Clementina's almost
complete restoration to health.

     Frolic, who had been her father's con-
stant attendant, was now become her faith-
ful companion; wherever she moved, he 
followed her, and was a double favourite,
from the account Mrs. Moore often gave
her of the fidelity and affection which he \has shewn to her master; during his ill-
ness he had never moved from the side of
the bed' and when the general dies, his
little faithful friend was with difficulty re-moved to the outside of the door, where he lay refusing all food and caresses from

50               HOWARD CASTLE.

the servants, seemingly mourning the separation from his kind master.

Clementia felt a melancholy pleasure in hearing these simple narrations, which endeared the little animal to her in a wonderful manner; she fancied she could understand his looks,and that they expressed grief for her, as well as for himself, as he would stand gazing in her face with the most wistful expression, as if he mourned her disconsolate situation; still lord Montague's collar was round his neck; as her father had permitted it to remain, she was determined that no alteration should take place.

She received frequent letters from lady Elenora, and a most affectionate one from her aunt, condoling with her on her loss, and entreating that she would once more take up her residence with them; at the same time regretting that her health would not permit her to make the proposal in person; assured her that her society would be a delightful addition to theirs, and that she believed nothing could make lady Elenora so happy, as her making Colnbrook Abbey her home, and becoming again the
         HOWARD CASTLE.          91

companion of her heart. She pointed out;
in glowing colours, her youth, and the
necessity there was for the protection of
her nearest relations, whose gioatcst plea-
sure would be in studying and contribut-
ing to her happiness.

  Clementina felt extremely grateful to
her aunt for her kind consideration, and
she believed it would be prudent in her to
accept the invitation, at least until she
could arrange her plans for her future life,
She loved Mrs. Conway with the most
sincere affection; and could she take up her
abode with her, she would h»ve preferred
it to any other situation in the world; but
her having a son, completely precluded
that plan; she could not live in the house
of lord Howard's mother, where, of course,
he had a home when fie chose to visit
England.

  Her friend was seated by her when she
perused the letter, which agitated her. She
observed Mrs. Conway watched her with
tender solicitude—" What disturbs you?"
said she.

" A kind letter," replied Clementina,
smiling; " my strength will not permit me92            HOWARD CASTLE.

to bear kindness unmoved; what would
become of me, had I ill-nature shewn to
me? I should sink under it."

   "Perhaps not," replied Mrs. Conway;
"your spirit might rise; unreasonable an-
ger might rouse you to retaliation."
 
   "You shall judge," said Clementina,
"of the friendly offer of lady Radnor."

   Mrs. Conway took the paper and perased
it--"A most natural request," and I dare
say it is what would give unspeakable sa-
tisfaction to the whole family, if you were
to become an inhabitant of Colnbrook A b-
bey; you would never quit it--you would
become naturalized to the soil, and would
marry one of the sons."

   "You are mistaken in your supposi
tion," said Clementina, with rather a deep-
er tinge of red in her cheeks than common;
"I should think the protection of my aunt
extremely desirable."

   "I agree with you," said Mrs. Conway,
"and I hope there will nothing happen to
interrupt your friendship with her and
lady Elenora; but have you not accepted
of me as a parent? Did you not promise
          HOWARD CASTLE.         93

to regard me as such, and to be guided by
my advice?"

  " I did promise," said Clementina,, with
much animation; " with heartfelt satisfac-
tion 1 received the offer, and with the ut-
most gratitude and affection I promised to
adhere to your opinions and your advice.
I had no intention of accepting of lady
Radnor's offer without consulting you."

  " When you honoured me," replied
Mrs. Conway, " by becoming my adopted
daughter, I never for a moment supposed
we were to separate; it is one of the happy
privileges of a mother not to be separated
from her daughter."

  " People would say, perhaps," replied
she, smiling, " that I should be naturalized
to the soil, and might hope to marry your
son."

  " Then," replied Mrs. Conway, " you
would, if possible, be more dear to me than
you are at present."

  " I hear what your sentiments are, in re-
gard to my living at Colnbrook," was her
answer; " you suppose, of course, there
would be plots and plans on the part of
the Radnor family; and of course, on my94                 HOWARD CASTLE.

part; and that I should be wofully dis-
appointed if they did not succeed: the
world, if the world should bestow a thought
on so insignificant a being as I am, would
say she has not chosen the house of her
nearest relation as an asylum, but gone to
live with the mother of lord Howard,
whom she has chosen as her mother. What
can his lordship do, but really confirm the
broad hint which has been given him? 
You must excuse me, my valued friend,
from taking up my abode with you; I
cannot brook pity, nor being presented to
any man, either by his relations, or the
world, as his destined wife. When lord
Howard is no longer an object of specula-
tion--in short, when there is a lady How-
ard, I will most happily obey your call,
and you may perhaps find some difficulty
in getting quit of me; in the mean time,
I think I had better accept of my aunt's
invitation, and quietly settle myself at
Colnbrook Abbey; could you remain with
me at Roachwood, I should never wish to
stir beyond its boundaries; but I could not
expect such a sacrifice."

   Clemtina stopped, in expectation of               HOWARD CASTLE.        95

 Mrs.Conway's answer, who at last said-
" I was determined not to interrupt you,
but patiently to listen to an explanation 
which has surprised me exceedingly. Your
scheme (I will not say determination) is
founded, I dare say, upon very prudent
principles; I will not attempt to confute
them, as I do not perfectly comprehend
the subject. Answer me one plain ques-
tion, without either circumlocution or pre-
variation; whether would you give the
preference to spending your time with
your aunt, lady Radnor, or your friend,
Mrs. Conway?"

   " What a strange question for you to
put!" replied she, smiling; "how can I an-
swer it?"

   "The truth," said Mrs. Conway.

   "The truth then is," said she, " what I
before said; if you would remain here, I
should be happier than in any other situa-
tion, which proves your company to be
more agreeable to me than any other per-
son's."

   "Then," said Mrs. Conway, " do not
let us punish each other for no reason in
the world. When my son comes to Eng-96          HOWARD CASTLE.

land, you shall visit lady Radnor, if you think it will prove dangerous either to Howard's peace of mind or your own; when he marries, then I hope you will take up your residence entirely with me; how fervently shall I pray for that even taking place, which will remove all your-what shall I call them?"
"Whims" said Clementina.
"Whims then let them be,"added Mrs. Conway. "and I will treat them as such, and laugh you out of them if I can; in the first place, you shall submit to a plan I have laid, which is for you and me to see a little of the world. Men travel for their improvement; why should not women enjoy the same advantage? I think we are both competent to making remarks which might be edifying and amusing to ourselves, with a companion who is capable of seeing the wonderful works of Nature with eyes of admiration, and who is not fastidious in regard to all the comforts and luxuries in life; who is good-humoured withal, and willing to make the best of every thing. I know nothing which could amuse or delight me more highly than wandering.

             HOWARD CASTLE                   97

Amidst the grand scenery of the Alps, or exploring the beauties of Switzerland together. You are the companion I have waited so long for, and i am resolved not to be thwarted in this delightful plan-a much more rational prospect, indulging me and amusing yourself, than being shut up at Colnbrook Abbey."

Clementina's thoughts were quick as lightning; the first remark she made was-"Do you intend to travel with lord Howard?"

Mrs. Conway smiled.

"If you do," she continued, "you can not want a companion."

"A female companion," replied her friend, "will enliven the party. Howard is an enthusiast in fine scenery-you tell me you are the same-what could be more delightful than for him to point out the various places worthy of your observation?"

"Had you been going alone," answered she, "I would have accompanied you with the utmost pleasure; but my spirits are not equal to a gay party-I could not, even with you, enjoy a tour, accompanied

VOL. III
   98               HOWARD CASTLE.  

      by lord Howard. I feel dull and stupid, 
      and should be a complete clog upon your
      amusements,"

        " Lord Howard," said Mrs. Conway,
      " seems a bugbear to you. It will be
      something new to him to be regarded as
      an object of dislike; but I can relieve your
      fears, as I have not the least expectation,
      of having him as my travelling companion,
      nor do I expect to meet with him in Pa- 
      ris ; he may be on his way to England,
      and we may pass upon the road. He is
      seldom stationary for any length of time;
      and if I give him a hint how much my
      friend is afraid of meeting with him, he
      will not intrude himself, but will carefully
      avoid it."

        After much conversation, it was at last
      agreed that Clementina should accompany
      her, as soon as her stength was competent
      to such an undertaking.

        The prospect of visiting the abbess was
      one of the most agreeable attendants of
      the journey; she likewise hoped to see
      lord Montague in his Switzerland solitude,
      and to be introduced to Louisa. The idea
      of accompanying Mrs. Conway was like-
         HOWARD CASTLE.       99

wise very delightful; but she felt so un-
equal to any exertion of either mind or
body, that she believed it must be many
weeks before she could be tit for such an
excursion.

  Lady Elenora Montague came to en-
force her mother's proposal, which she did
with all the warmth of sisterly affection.
Clementina told her the plan which had
been laid for their summer's amusement.
Lady Elenora expressed no surprise that
Mrs. Conway should wish to monopolize
her company, and even dropped a hint,
that she made no doubt iiti scheme would
answer.

  " It will," replied Clementina, " cer-
tainly answer, as change of air and of scene
will, I hope, both restore my spirits and
my health."

  " And change of society," added lady
Elenora, smiling, " has sometimes a won-
derful effect. Lord Howard will enliven
you, as I understand he is uncommonly
agreeable."

  " It is not probable that we shall meet
with his lordship," was her reply.

                  F 2  100            HOWARD CASTLE.

"Not meet with lord Howard!" re-
peated lady Elenora; "is he not in Paris,
and are you not going there?"

  "He is at present, but probably will
have left it before our arrival."

  Lady Elenora again smiled, and said-
"If you are at liberty when you return
from your tour, we shall hope that you
will realize the scheme, the prospect of
which has given me infinite pleasure; and
that you will spend as much of your time
with us as you can spare from other en-
gagements. I fear Mrs. Conway is a dan-
gerous rival, and that you have lost your
freedom, never to regain it."

  Clementina plainly perceived the suspi-
cions which had taken possession of her
friend-"It is as I suspected," said she, as
soon as lady Elenora drove off. "I am
going in pursuit of lord Howard, and shall
be deemed both disappointed and morti-
fied, if he does not declare himself my
lover; how can I extricate myself from
such an accusation?"

Mrs. Conway had not heard the latter
part of lady Elenora's conversation; but
she observed the mind of her companion           HOWARD CASTLE              101

was particularly occupied after their con-
ference, and concluded something had pass-ed between them, which had, in some de-
gree, discomposed her. She had letters to
write, and retired, as soon as dinner was
ever, to give lord Howard a hint of their
intention. She was resolved not to name
her friend, and to put him at perfect li-
berty as to his motions, as she had no in-
tention of being a clog upon him.

    They had arranged their plans so far,
that it was determined a Swiss valet of the 
general's should accompany them, as he 
had been accustomed to travelling. Mrs.
Conway feared no inconvenience, and wish-
ed her son to follow his own inclination.
Clementina likewise wrote to lord Monta-
gue, as she should hope to meet him and
his Louisa at Geneva, but that her wishes
would be, in a great degree, guided by his
letter; if the prospect of seeing her con-
veyed pleasure to him, she should antici-
pate the utmost happiness.

102           HOWARD CASTLE.


              CHAPTER V.
               ~~~~~~~~

Clementina's health and strength were
so much restored, that she was determined
to take a ramble in the beautiful grounds
at Roachwood. The woods, before she had
quitted it for Bath, had been so damp, that
her ever-watchful and affectionate parent
would not permit her to walk in them.
Mrs. Conway had been as vigilant in her
care of her, and had only allowed her to
take exercise in the carriage and on horse-
back. She saw her busily employed with
her pen; she resolved to explore some
of the sweetly-romantic walks, before she
again quitted the favourite residence of
her revered and lamented father.

  Attended by Frolic, she stole unper-
ceived from the house, in one of the mild-
est evenings in May, and walked slowly
along a sand-walk, which immediately led
her into the wood; it skirted the river,
which murmured responsively to her feel-

          HOWARD CASTLE.             103

ings. Her spirits were perfectly tranquil.
She reflected on the .past with a pleasing,
yet a melancholy sensation; her father's
indulgent kindness—his affectionate for-
bearance, in not forcing her to marry the
marquis of Clemaire—his leaving her the
uncontrolled mistress of his fortune, were
strong marks of his opinion of her pru-
dence—all these ideas combined to make
her lament the friend, the desirable com-
panion, she had lost.

  She was almost afraid of indulging her
feelings before Mrs. Conway, who tried to
banish thought, as much as she possibly
could, from the bosom of her young friend,
as she believed it to be inimical to her
health. She found having free scope to
her feelings was very delightful, and rather
relieved her spirits than depressed them.
She considered her present situation, and
was thankful to her Heavenly Father for
giving her such protection as her beloved
Mrs. Conway offered; yet she feared there
would be a barrier to her happiness there;
she had almost convinced herself that lord
Howard was a volatile, lively, dashing cha-
racter, who would never be easy in one104         HOWARD CASTLE.

place, or ever be satisfied without constant amusement and gaiety-very unfit society for her present depressed state.

Clementina's natural disposition was not formed for dissipation; a little quite rational conversation pleased her more than the hurry and tumult of public diversions. Sir Theodosius Sydney she always had pleasure in conversing with, as he never appeared to be carried off with fashionable amusements; his ideas were lively, without being overpowering; what he said seemed to come from the impulse of the moment-nothing studied either in his manner or conversation; both were easy, unrestrained, and unembarrassed; upon the whole, he certainly was the most agreeable man she had met with in the Beaumont; but she had no expectation that lord Howard would prove half so agreeable.

She was stopped in her reverie by a beautiful opening in the wood, which shewed a fine bend of the river, and the old castle on the opposite bank, whose sombre and mouldering turrets struck her with a kind of melancholy awe. The cha-        HOWARD CASTLE.     105

pel, which was partly hid by some tall cy-
presses and yews, gave her a melancholy
sensation, as it was now the habitation of
both her parents.  The tears stole down 
her cheeks as she contemplated the scene.
There was no one to observe her emotion
-- a solemn stillness in the whole accorded
with her feelings.

  A seat had been places in a beautiful
point of view, which commanded not only
the fine objects in the foreground, but a
distant valley, which was richly wooded, 
and displayed, in various places, the river
which gently murmured past her.  She
placed herself upon the bench, and wished 
she had the means with her of sketching
what was spread before her.  A Gothic win-
dow of the chapel peeped form its dark
covering, and she perceived an arched door, 
which perhaps  had been lately opened to
receive her father's remains.  The tangled
foliage and luxuriant ivy hung in elegant
disorder from the decayed turrets of the
castle, and the bank on which it stood
shewed the ravages time had made --stones
and rubbish lay scattered around in wild confusion.


106            HOWARD CASTLE.

   The evening was beginning to close-
the sun was setting over the distant pro-
spect, which was tinged with its last rays;
the warm purple which was spread over
the whole, and the streaks of gold which
still adorned the sky, attracted her atten-
tion-it was beautiful-"Who," exclaim-
ed she, "would be at this moment im-
mured in the heat and close confinement
of London, where nothing is seen but the
dull routine of human faces-nothing heard
but the rattle of carriages-nothing enjoyed
but a crowded opera, theatre, or ball-room?
Well might Cowper, in his simple but 
elegant language, express-

   ' Is in a garb like this?
   Needs be the tragie far, the smoke of lamps,
   The pent-up breath of an unsavoury through."

Ah, no!" exclaimed Clementina; "I re-
quire them not for my gratification; give
me such tranquil views as this is, and the
sweet melody of that delightful bird, who
would charm me the night long, rather
than the tortured notes of a public singer."
Saying these words, she rose from her
seat, as the sable curtain of night was  
          
             HOWARD CASTLE.           107

throwing a shade over the glowing land-
scape.

   She had often heard that a romantic fall of water was not far from the spot where
she stood; and the rumbling noise she
heard convinced her she should soon reach
it. She wished to return to Roachwood, 
on the other side of the river, as she should
still have a better view of the chapel which
had attracted her attention-it was now
an object she felt particularly interested in.
She proceeded with a quicker pace, and 
was surprised to find the rustic bridge, 
which she had heard was near the fall, was
further off than she imagined. When
she reached it, all the beautiful colours of 
the sky had settled into the dusk of even-
ing. There was light sufficient left to shew
the beauty of the little, romantic, retired
spot; the river was impeded in its pro- 
gress by rocks, which seemed to have
made every attempt to stop it in its course.
It appeared indignant at the interruption, 
and dashed furiously from rock to rock,
roaring as it fell in irregular cascades, half-
shaded from the sight by weeping birch,
alder, and other trees; they enjoyed the108          HOWARD CASTLE.
 
constant moisture which was thrown in
the finest dew over their leaves.

   Clementina could have lingered on the
spot for a length of time; but the lateness
of the hour, the distance she was from
home, and, above all, the fear of alarming
Mrs. Conway, made her anxious to pro-
ceed. A few hundreds yards above the
fall, she found the bridge which she had
been dr pursuit of; it was only two or three
planks, fastened together, with a slight
railing on one side of it. She did not
give herself time for reflection or fear; she
harried over, and wondered at the courage
she was possessed of.

   A group of cottages on the bank of the
river had long been an object she had fixed
her eyes upon. Their chimneys were
smoking with newly-lighted faggots, pre-
paring the humble repast of the labourers,
who had returned from their day's work.

   A number of children were amusing
themselves with various gambols upon the
green which separated their dwellings
from the river.  Clementina advanced to-
wards them; but her sable figure soon
drove the little group from the scene of

              HOWARD CASTLE.    109

their amusement, and she had the play-
ground all to herself.

     The strange story the children gave to
their parents brought them to see what
could cause such an alarm. Clementina
spoke to them, and convinced them it was
the great lady from the castle which had
created such terror among the younger in-
habitants of the hamlet; but how she 
should be out so late, and without any at-
tendant, surprised them. She gave mo-
ney to divide among them, at the same
time asking if there was a road to Roach-
wood by the old castle?

   A decent-looking woman answered her,
there was a path through the wood,
which led close by the end of the old cha-
pel, and a stile by the great gate, which
would lead her to another path, which, if
she would follow, would carry her straight
to the bridge; but that the way was very
narrow, and in some places much grown up
with briars and brambles--"I do not think
it would be a fit way for your ladyship to
go--it is a dreary road, and we go along
it as seldom as we possibly can. It will
be quite dark in the wood, as night is110     HOWARD CASTLE.

coming on fast; and they say (not that
ever I heard any thing) that there are
strange noises about the old castle in an
evening, which would frighten you terri-
bly; but if you would choose to go that
road, my husband will show you the way;
his being with you will prevent its appear-
ing so lonely."

  Clementina thanked her for her offer;
but assuring her she was not at all afraid,
was proceeding along, when the woman
stopped her, by saying, there was a poor
woman's son, who wandered about the
country, quite wrong in his head, and was
at times very troublesome--"If you will
stop a bit, I will run to his mother, and in-
quire if he is at home."

  Clementina very willingly acceded to
the proposal; and seating herself upon
some stones, which were near one of the
cottages, rested her limbs, which were ra-
ther tired with her ramble, at the same
time gazing at the ruin, which was almost
lost in obscurity. She could now hardly
distinguish the battlements of the castle,
or the arched windows of the chapel. The
wood which surrounded it looked black,              HOWARD CASTLE.          111

sombre, and gloomy.  She resolved, whe-
ther the poor maniac was at home or not,
to accept of the woman's husband as an es-
cort.

  She saw her returning, and rose to meet
her.  The moment she was near enough
to be heard, she called out--" You must
not go alone, my lady, as poor Billy has
been abroad all day.  Joe will be ready in
a minute to go with you."

  He quickly appeared, and they proceed-
ed into the wood.  It was, as the woman 
had foretold, very dark and very dismal;
but they had not got far, before the moon
gave them a partial light; the trees form-
ed such an impenetrable shade, that it only
now and then streaked their path with
light.

  Anxiety to get home, and the chill cool-
ness of evening, made Clementina quicken
her pace.  The peasant thought it was
fear which hurried her along; he ventured
to assure her, he hoped there was no dan-
ger of her seeing any thing frightful--
"Many people have," continued he; "my
neighbour Jones never got the better of a 
sight he saw here, just in this kind of light."112              HOWARD CASTLE,

   "In what manner did he describe it?"
said Clementina.

   "Oh!" answered her guide, "he was
always out of his reason when he spoke
about that night, and continued so to his
dying day. He never would enter the
wood again after the sun was set, nor
indeed would any of his neighbours, for
many years."

   They were now nearly under the walls
of the old castle. The moon shone with-
out interruption, as they had quitted the
thick part of the wood. The moat, which
had been lately cleaned out, looked still
and black, and added to the melancholy ap-
perance of the whole.

   She stopped upon coming opposite the
door of the chapel. The peasant advanced,
frightened at the pause she made-"What
did you see, madam?"
   
   "Nothing," replied Clementina; "I am
not standing from terror."

   The height of the castle walls carried
the sound of her voice-it repeated their
words. The guide knew not echo; with
a tremulous voice he cried-"Oh! do you
not hear them speaking from within? in-                 HOWARD CASTLE               113

deed, my lady, I hear them as plain as can
be."

    Clementina was not in spirits to be
amused with the poor fellow's fears, and
could not be at the trouble to attempt an
explanation.  She found a little rest was
absolutely necessary before she could pro-
ceed, as her trembling limbs almost re-
fused to support her further; she quitted
the path, and leaned her back against the 
chapel-door.

     The peasant declared, if she meant to
enter it, he must leave her, as no power on
earth should make him go into such a dis-
mal place.  She assured him she had no
such intention, and that he might remain
where he was.

     She had hardly got a support for her
wearied frame, before a dismal shriek from
her escort, and an exclamation of- "He's
here!-he is indeed!" alarmed her, and 
she saw him, at the same time, fly from
the spot, and disappear almost instantly.

    The situation where Clementina stood
was completely shaded by the building
from all light.  The moon was shining on
the wood and on the path; but she was

114          HOWARD CASTLE

in so dark a place, and her own figure was
so much the colour of the door against
which she leaned, that she hoped, if it was
the poor maniac her companion had seen,
she might escape his observation.  She was 
confident she had not strength to fly; she
was therefore determined to keep as still
as possible, in hopes the person might pass
on without observing her; but she flatter-
ed herself it was a hobgoblin in the brain 
of the peasant, and that she had no reason
to fear any thing, except the difficulty of
reaching home without a guide.  She
hoped she was at no great distance; and
that if she followed the track, it would
lead her right.

   Thus was she endeavouring to quiet the
alarm which the sudden disappearance of
her attendant has given her, when she saw
a very tall figure emerging from the wood.
A cloud at that moment obscured the light
which the moon had afforded, but still
Clementina could discern a man advancing
towards the spot where she stood. Frolie, 
who had quietly laid himself down at her
feet, began to grumble and bark. Alarm-
ed with the noise he made, as she dreaded                   Howard Castle               115

attracting all the attention of the stranger,
she tried all the means of soothing him to
quietness; but her arts were in vain, and
he flew with fury from her side towards
the figure, which was now nearly opposite
to her.

  He seemed to disregard the dog, but
stopped very near the spot where she was,
ready to sink with fear, as she firmly be-
lieved it was the maniac who was so near
her. Frolic, who had continued to pour
his abuse upon the intruder, returned to 
his mistress, and leaped upon her, express-
ing, as much as he could, that he would 
guard her from harm.

  The person quitted the path, and ad-
vanced to the terrified Clementina. The
darkness of the place, and her sable dress,
precluding his seeing her, until he was very
near her, but the dog convinced him that
there was an object of attraction near; yet
he could hardly believe that any one could 
choose that melancholy receptacle of the 
dead for any purpose; yet he was con-
vinced he saw a figure reclining against 
the door. He was determined to have it
explained, why any person should pause116         howard castle.
in so goony a place-"who thus hidest thy-
self amongst those ruins?"

   "AH!" cried she, in a voice almost in-
articulate, "may I credit my senses? do
I hear sir Theodsius Sydney?"

    "My sense," exclaimed he, grasping
the extended hand of Clementina, " are
more likely deceived me; yet it is her
voice which vibrates on my heart, and this
certainly is her hand, which I press with
ecstasy to my lips."

     "Your having found me so unexpected- 
ly," said Clementina, "must be ab excuse
for the rapture you express; I believe I
was more delighted to hear your voice,
than you could possibly be to hear mine.

I was terrified by your appearnce-you
did not feel the drcadful sensation of alram
which I did."

     "Your did not take me for a spirit?" said
he, laughing.

     "I took you for a more mischievous
things, replied Clementia; "I believed
you to be a poor wandering madman. I 
still can hardly believe it is sir Thcodosius
Sydney who I am conversing with; but                   HOWARD CASTLE.     117

0ne of the supernatural beings who, I un-
derstand, this wood abounds with, has 
taken your form. How, in the name of 
wonder, can you be wandering in this un-
frequented path?"

  "To protect you," said he, "from dan-
ger,and to conduct you safe to yourfriend,
who is alarmed, beyond my powers of de-
scription, at your long absence. How
could you be alone in this melancholy spot?
I do not often feel more uncomfortable in 
one place than another; but there is some-
thing particularly gloomy in this wilder-
ness; and if ever there was ghost per-
mitted to appear, this is certainly a scene
peculiarly adapted for its nightly gambols."

  He drew her hand under his arm as he
said these words, and proceeded, as fast as
Clementina's strength would permit, to-
wards the gate.

  She explained, in few words as she
could, how much longer her walk had
proved than she expected, and how her
protector had been alarmed by his appear-
ance, and had fled upon the first sight of 
him.
In spite of the supporting arm of sir


118             HOWARD CASTLE.

Theodosius, she could with difficulty reach.
the stile, where she seated herself, worn
out with the exertion. They were still
nearly a mile from the house, and he was
convinced his fair companion could not
reach it. There was no person near who
he could send for the carriage,and he could
not leave her alone, at such an hour, and
in such a place. Happily, at the very mo-
ment his thoughts were so employed, à
servant appeared, and informed them the
carriage would be there in a few minutes
--that the peasant had made all the haste
he could to the house, and informed them
how alarmingly Clementina was situated
--that she was completely worn out with
fatigue, and could not move from the old 
chapel, where she had laid herself down,
more dead than alive--" Mrs. Conway sent 
me off," added the man, " to inform you
that the chaise was getting ready with all
speed. Mrs. Mary and I set out at the
same time from the house, but I have got
the start of her considerably, as I have run
the whole way."
  'Clementina was vexed at the alarm she
had spread, and at her own folly in wan,        HOWARD CASTLE.     119

-dering so far from home. She was sur-
prised and pleased to find that the poor
man's fear had not entirely deprived him
of his senses. She believed, had she not
met with sir Theodosius, she could not have
reached the stile on which she was seated;
probably a search would have been made
tfor her, had her attendant not gone to
alarm the tinnily; but she might have re-
mained a considerable time in the wood
before she had been discovered.

She soon had a number of her domes-
tics around her, who all seemed rejoiced at
again seeing her safe. She slowly pro-
ceeded towards the bridge, leaning on the
arm of her maid, who was uneasy at her
being so long exposed to the damp air,
and urged her to exertion, rather than run
the risk of catching a severe cold, which
she feared would be the consequence.

When sir Theodosius found his arm was
no longer useful, he proceeded towards the
house, to relieve Airs. Conway, whom he
had left in great agitation.

The moment he was gone, Clementina in-
quired when he had arrived at Roachwood?

Her answer was—"In ten minutes after 
120           HOWARD CASTLE.

you quitted the house he entered, and al-
most immediately proposed to follow you;
but Mrs. Conway was unwilling that he
should, as she believed you had merely
walked into the grounds, and would return
certainly to tea. The bell was rung—ser-
vants went on the walks near the house,
but no trace of you could they discover.
Then Mrs. Conway became seriously un-
easy, and lamented that she had prevented
sir Theodosius from going in pursuit of
you. Her fears increased as the evening
advanced; she became perfectly miserable,
and sent people in different directions to
search for you. No one thought of your
being in the unfrequented wood, till the
man came and informed us where you were
dying with fatigue."

  The carriage at that moment arrived,
and Mrs. Conway's voice seemed to reno-
vate her worn-out spirits. W hen she was
seated by her friend, whose kind expres-
sions were most grateful to lier feelings,
she thought herself happy indeed, in hav-
ing such an affectionate being interested
in her health and welfare; the chiding, for
her having exposed herself to the evening          HOWARD CASTLE.         121

air, was in so gentle a manner, that it
drew tears from the eyes of Clementina,
who promised that she would not again
stray beyond the common boundary; she
described the pleasure she had enjoyed in
her ramble, the terror of her protector,
the alarm she had suffered by the appear-
ance of sir Theodosius and the joy she felt
when she recognised him.

   Mrs. Conway thought she dwelt with
peculiar delight when she narrated her
sensations upon hearing his voice-"What
a happy meeting would it be to sir Theo-
dosius, if you described to him the joy
you felt in recognising him in the same
glowing colours your have done to me!"

   "My terror and fatigue precluded much
animation of manner," answered she; " I
now can expatiate upon my feelings, and
I hope I shall be able to express my grate-
ful thanks to him."

   "Be aware," said Mrs. Conway," that
every word you utter will sink deep on his
heart, and raise expectations, which will
be cruel, if you do not listen with a fa-
vourable ear to his avowal of love, which,
  VOL.III.    G

122           HOWARD CASTLE.

from former conversations I have had with
you, I should suppose you would do."

   "My situation," said Clementina, "is
greatly changed since I last saw sir Theo-
dosius."

   "It certainly is," replied Mrs. Conway.
"You are now quite your own mistress,
with a fine fortune--nothing to study but
the dictates of your heart; you are one of
the most independet of human beings,
and I think I may say, may make your
selection where you please."

   Clementina felt unequal to support an
argument, and allowed Mrs. Conway to
dwell in her own mind on the few words
she had spoke; she had no intention of
leading her friend to believe that she would
accept of sir Theodosius's hand, if he made
her the offer; but she firmly believed it
would be the most prudent thing she could
do, to secure to herself the protection and
friendship of a man who she really believ-
ed had the most sincere affection for her;
but her heart revolted at the idea; she
thought him agreeable both in his person
and conversation, and she had a good opi-
nion of his abilities and his disposition; but              HOWARD CASTLE.           125

there was an inderscribable something in
her feelings, which precluded the idea of
any near connexion with him; she wished
she could imbibe sentiments favourable to
him, as she really esteemed him; but she
found human nature recoiled at the idea
of vowing at the altar an untruth--she did
not love him.  She retired almost imme-
diately to her apartment.
  Sir Theodosius was ready to hand her
from the carriage, and to express his plea-
sure at seeing her so much restores; he
described hiss feelings, upon hearing of her
illness; and his anxiety personally to in-
quire after her health had been so great,
that he feared he might be deemed pre-
sumptuous in intruding upon her.
  Clementina, with cordiality, thanked
him for the kind assistance he had afforded
her; and concluded her speech by saying,
she should always be happy to see any of 
Mrs. Conway's friends at Roachwood.
  Mrs. Conway had listened with mute
attention to her reply, and was satisfied
there was nothing particularly kind in it;
she was amused with the idea of her being
                    G 2124              HOWARD CASTLE.

called the friend of sir Theodosius, or that
she had the least merit in bringing him to
the country.

   After Clementina had retired for the 
night, sir Theodosius could not refrain from
hinting what his views were to Mrs. Con-
way, who was perfectly aware, from the
moment he was announced, that he aspired
to what she deemed beyond his reach;
Miss Bouverie was a prize, she thought,
very far superior to even the baronet's pre-
tensions; but the few words which had
dropped from her friend in the carriage,
made her apprehensive that she did not en-
tertain the same idea; she was determined
again to start the subject with Clementina,
before she conversed with sir Theodosius;
she was sorry for him, as she was convinced
he was as much attached to her friend as
man could be to woman--but her pity did
not carry her so far as to wish him success;
she even dreaded his working upon her
gentle nature with a woeful account of
his sufferings; she found he could describe,
even to her, his love in moving language,
and that nothing she could say appeared
to shake his hopes.              HOWARD CASTLE.      125

   She entered Clementina's apartment at
rather an earlier hour in the morning; her
maid had informed her Miss Bouverie had
enjoyed a good night, and was perfectly
well; inquiring after her health was the
apology she offered, as she gently opened
the room-door.

   "Is it necessary," said Clementina, tak-
ing her offered hand, "to apologize for
kindness? I am obliged to you for your
anxiety; I have forgot all my aches, and 
all my fears, in the soundest sleep I ever
had; not even a dream of ghosts or hob-
goblins has disturbed me."

   "I should not have suspected superna-
tural beings to have much hold of your
mind, or for a moment to disturb your re-
pose; but I own I did suspect an object
you met with last night would."

   "No," replied she, "nothing did; I
made up my mind before I went to sleep;
and where there is no doubt, there can be
no anxiety."

   She sent her maid out of the room, and
continued the subject with perfect compo-
sure, at the same time in so dubious a
manner, that Mrs. Conway could not, at126        HOWARD CASTLE.

the first, make out her intention towards
her lover. She began to suspect there was
a little playfulness in her manner; and at
last, with a most serious countenance, she
said--"I know sir Theodosius has been in
the library for above an hour. A man in
his situation cannot sleep as sound as you
have done; had he received a hint last
night that you thought favourably of his
pretensions, and meant to give him a kind
answer this morning, joy would have com-
pletely precluded repose. I will take upon
myself giving him comfort, as I certainly
did all I could to drive him to despair; it
will likewise prevent your having the
awkward answer to give, when he pops
the question, of 'Yes, if you please."

   "I shall certainly," replied Clementina,
"not be quite so ready to acquiesce, and
shall not give him the answer you expect."

   "What then?" said Mrs. Conway.

   "Can you suppose I would marry any
man when my person is clothed in this
sable dress?" replied she; "my heart like-
wise is not in the mood to receive an im-pression; it may soften, but at present it
feels very callous. No, my friend, my
             HOWARD CASTLE.      127

answer to sir Theodosius will be short, but
perfectly decided. I have not consulted
you in my decision, as your sentiments
could not change mine; my heart alone
must fix my fate, which in all probability
will be to die a maiden gentlewoman—a
state I highly approve of; every woman
has it in her power to marry at some pe-
riod of her life; she who can bear the stig-
ma of being an old maid, rather than unite
herself to a man who does not possess her
heart, is a praiseworthy being, and I mean
to enter myself into that independent
class."

  Mrs. Conway felt greatly relieved, and
after breakfast was removed, left the room.

  Clementina's manner was perfectly com-
posed; sir Theodosius was evidently em-
barrassed—he never had before felt so awk-
ward and confused, but never before was
he in such a situation; he took a retro-
spection of the progress of his passion—
each time he saw her had added to the
impression her charms had made upon him
at lady Hillyard's ball; he then believed
her engaged to lord Clemaire; at the
very moment he understood she was free,128          HOWARD CASTLE.

he received a large addition to his fortune,
which had pleased him, from the idea of
laying it at her feet--he had wished to
make his sentiments known to her whilst
she remained in London, but her sudden
departure had completely defcated his in-
tentions--he would have written to her, 
but the alarming account of her health had
prevented him--he resolved to visit her,
and humbly disclose to her the state of his
heart.

   Clementina thanked him in the warm-
est manner for his good opinion, but, in
the most unequivocal terms, informed him
a nearer connexion than friendship never 
could subsist between them.

   The conference was as short as possible,
as her very decided answer precluded all
hope; her frank, ingenuous manner mor-
tified him, and at the same time charmed
him; she openly declared her esteem and
sincere regard were his, but that was all
she could ever feel towards---
   
   He stopped her, by exclaiming with
vehemence--"You cannot enter into the
poignancy of my feelings at this moment;
do not, I pray you, torture me, by talking               HOWARD CASTLE.   129

of esteem and regard. My heart must
change before I can substitute such cold
language; it never truly loved before, nor
ever will change its object of affection.
You can talk coolly of friendship, who feel
so totally indifferent towards me; but my
sensations are very different; time may ef-
fect what reason cannot. I must bid you
a long adien, as what I, before this con-
ference, sought with avidity, I must now
avoid, as baneful to my repose."

   The agony he was in distressed her be-
yond measure; but she felt not the small-
est inclination to alter her sentiments.

  He rung the bell, and ordered his car-
riage-"Mrs. Conway will excuse me,"
said he, " from wishing her good morning;
I cannot see any one in the state I am in
She, I dare say, suspects the mortification
I have met with; and as she knows that I
was intoxicated with hope, she will easily
conceive the misery to which you have re-
duced me; I was presumptuous, and as-
pired to what is beyond my reach, and I
fear I cannot bear the disappointment with
the firmness I ought. I never wished to
marry until I met with you."
            G 3 
130 HOWARD CASTLE.

"The charm is broken," said Clemen-
tina; "and I shall hope to hear of your
meeting with a person who is worthy of
you, and who can appreciate your many
good qualities-and that you will be as
happy as I sincerely wish you to be."
 He pressed the hand she extended to
him with fervour to his lips; the agitation 
he was in precluded articulation-he hur-
ried from the room, and throwing himself
into his carriage, drove off; leaving Cle-
mentina grieved beyond measure at the
distress which she had innocently occasion-
ed him. Mrs. Conway soon after joined
her, and the remainder of the day was not
spent with much cheerfulness.

 Clementina's spirits, which had in a 
great degree recovered their serenity since
the death of her father, were now sunk
extremely low; she was convinced she had 
given exquisite pain to one who, she was
confident, was sincerely attached to her,
and for whom she entertained the greatest
regard. She had given a promise to Mrs.
Conway to accompany her on a tour, which
might, in all probability, turn out very
unpleasantly, as she could not help sus-                  HOWARD CASTLE.   131

peeting that lord Howard was to be of the
party; she had foolishly consented to a
scheme which seemed to interest her friend
very deeply, and who urged their departure
with earnest solicitude; she had given a
positive negative to lady Radnor's propo-
sal, for her taking up her abode at Coln
brook, and she believed lady Elenora sus-
pected there was a plan in her going abroad.

    Lady Elenora did think there was an
inducement, but she was convinced it was
not to meet with lord Howard; that an
engagement subsisted between her brother
and Clementina, she could not for a mo-
ment doubt; she had watched their appa-
rent attachment to each other, which she
firmly believed had begun in their early
days; and she knew, since he had gone
abroad, that they had corresponded, as se-
veral of his letters had come under cover to
her. Why there was such a mystery, or
why he should quit his native country, she
could not develop. Clementina's fortune
was now ample, and might remove all pe-
cuniary difficulties, which she believed
her brother rather laboured under, and
which she had fancied was the reason why

 
132            HOWARD CASTLE.

he returned abroad; his allowance she
knew was not liberal, and that he was pos-
sessed of a most generous noble spirit, that
did not brook restraint in any way; per-
haps their plan was to meet in Paris, and
that the next time she saw her lovely
friend, she should embrace her as a sister;
but as profound secrecy had been preserved
by both her brother and Clementina, she
was resolved to keep her suspicions to her-
self; but she should rejoice in the good
fortune of her beloved Montague.

  Thus were lady Elenora's thoughts em-
ployed as she returned to Colnbrook; the
intelligence she had heard during her
morning's visit at Roachwood, had set her
fancy to work, anticipating what she was
almost convinced would happen.



             CHAPTER VI.
              ~~~~~~~~

CLEMENTINA, accompanied by Mrs. Con-
way, paid a visit at Colnbrook before they
quitted the country. Their reception was          HOWARD CASTLE.     133

as kind as possible, and the invitation
which lady Radnor had given her on paper
was again renewed—"Your plan of ac-
companying Mrs. Conway," said she, "is
most natural; I consider travelling in such
company a happy opportunity for your
amusement and improvement; your health
will be perfectly established by change of
air, and your spirits by change of scene;
when you return, we shall hope to see you
here, for as long a time as you can spend
in dull retirement."

  Clementina assured her, in the society
of her friends no situation could appear
dull; and that as soon as she returned to
her native land, she should visit Coln-
brook.

  Lady Radnor inquired how far they
meant to go?

  Mrs. Conway replied with a smile, as
far as they found it agreeable—"We are
not limited, either in regard to time or
distance; Miss Bouverie is enthusiastically
fond of fine scenery—I admire the beauties
of nature exceedingly; so that we may
ramble far in search of the sublime and
romantic."134                 HOWARD CASTLE.

  "Do you mean to visit Switzerland?"
asked lady Radnor.

  "It is our intention,"replied Mrs.Con-
way.

  "Then,"said lady Radnor, turning to
Clementina,"you will surely see my son."

  Lady Elenora watched the countenance
of her friend; Mrs.Conway's penetrating
eyes followed in the same direction; the
increase of colour which those words pro-
duced, convinced them both that it was
an interesting question.

  Lady Radnor had no suspicion of their
correspondence; she continued the subject
--"Lord Montague is in the neighbour-
hood of Geneva; his health, he finds, is
better there than in this country; he would
be terribly mortified if his pursuits should
lead him to a distance when you were there.
You must write, Elenora, and inform him
of the happy prospect he has of meeting
with his favourite Clementina."

  Lady Elenora smiled, which Mrs.Con-
way observed; they both suspected he was
well aware of his cousin's intended tour.

  Clementina, with perfect composure of
manner, assured her aunt that she should             HOWARD CASTLE.     135

be much mortified if they should be at
Geneva without meeting with his lordship.

  "He has a cottage," said lady Radnor,
" near the village of Crassé, in the Pays
de Vaud.  You had better give Clemen-
tina his direction, as  I believe he is not
often in Geneva;  and I should be sorry if
you were not to meet: I wish you could
persuade him to return to this country.
Mrs. Conway, will you take him in your
train? he will be useful, as he knows every
step of the wild mountains which are ac-
cessible."

  Mrs. Conway replied, that she would
leae the persuasive part to Miss Bouverie;
all she could promise was, that he should
be welcome to join their party, if he was
so inclined.

  Lady Radnor insisted on lady Elenora
giving Clementina his address; and that
she should write by the first post, to ap-
prise him that he would have an unlooked-
for and most welcome visitor.

  Lady Elenora asked Clementina if that
was necessary--or to give her his direc-
tion?

  " We may not get so far," replied she;

136           HOWARD CASTLE.

"acquainting him with our intentions may
lead to a disappointment."

   Lady Radnor persevered, and Clemen-
tina received the paper with much gravity;
and soon after they bid them farewell.

   She had been some time in expectation
of hearing from lord Montague; she wish-
ed not to quit England until his letter ar-
rived, as by the tenor of it she should re
gulate her conduct; if he appeared happy
and satisfied, she should have no fear in
seeing him--if his expressions in any way
tended to discontent or melancholy, she
should avoid him. She expected an ac-
count of Louisa and his son being with
him, and she ardently hoped he would
soon find comfort and happiness in their
society.

   Mrs. Conway's impatience to set off grew
almost beyond bounds; she was under the
necessity of spending a few days at Howard
Castle before she left the country: the
weather was delightful, and she rather
suspected lord Howard would remain in
Paris until they arrived. The last idea
she kept a profound secret; but his answer
to her letter, announcing her intention of
          HOWARD CASTLE.     137

visiting France, led her to suppose she
should find him in the capital; she durst
not drop a hint to her friend, till they were
fairly across the Channel, then she thought
there would be no retreat. She became
so extremely pressing for the day to be
fixed, that Clementina, with reluctance,
consented to leave Roachwood the begin-
ning of the following week.

  Only three days remained for the wished-
for packet to arrive; the answer to hers,
apprising him of their intended tour, was
to be directed to Paris.

  Mrs. Conway and she were seated in the
library, when a footman entered with the
newspaper and letters; one was laid before
Clementina, who quickly took it up, but
not before Mrs. Conway had perceived the
foreign mark. Pleasure illumined the
countenance of her friend as she broke the
seal, at the same time rising from the couch,
and retiring into the window to peruse its
contents, which were as follows:—

                 --------

        "I have delayed writing to the
friend who I know is interested in all my138     HOWARD CASTLE.

concerns, until I could give you a satis-
factory account of my proceedings and my
feelings. Your letter, melancholy as it
was, relieved my mind from a state of tor-
ture not to be described. Elenora wrote
to me of your father's death, and that your
life was in danger; that your senses wan-
dered, and that you were reduced to the
most alarming state of weakness. Judge
what a situation this scroll threw me into
--addressed to an exile, banished to a dis-
tan country--impossible even to hear
tidings of you. A shock so severe upon
sensibility, such as you possess, I knew
must be dreadful, and I anticipated the
worst. I went to Geneva, where I re-
mained for two tedious weeks, waiting in
dreadful suspense for letters from England.
I wrote to my sister, I believe in a very
extraordinary style; I hardly knew what
I did, or what I said; my mind was torn
with anguish, and I was on the point of 
setting off to Roachwood, and committing
a thousand extravagancies.

"Louisa arrived during my most frantic
misery; but how can I describe to you the
soothing kindness which she treated meHOWARD CASTLE. 139

with! I told her the cause of my misery,
and she entered into my feelings with all
the warmth of affection, as if she had been
your sister; the joy your letter conveyed
to me, seemed to animate her with the
same sensation, and she fervently thanked
Heaven for restoring you to your friends.
In spite of the evident depression of your
spirits, your handwriting raised mine as
high as they had been sunk before its ar-
rival ; I pressed the precious paper to my
heart and to my lips, when I saw by whom
the superscription was written. Louisa
was present, and witnessed my extrava-
gant joy; she participated in my happiness
-never for a moment did a cloud of sus-
picion or jealousy steal over her expressive
features.

"I feel grateful for your restoration to
health, and so delighted with still possess-
ing your friendship, that I am not only
tranquil, but gay and cheerful.

"We are living at present near Crassé, a
village beautifully situated in the Pays de
Vaud; I have hired a small house, of which
I recollect envying its former possessor,
being so romantic a habitation; I can sit
140       HOWARD CASTLE.

in my apartment, and contemplate the
Lake of Geneva, with the glowing colours
of the setting sun reflected in the clear
smooth body of water; the distant hills,
with their snow-covered tops, forming a
bold boundary.  The rich cultivated coun-
try in which this house is placed, upon the
banks of the lake, is scattered over with
the most luxuriant vineyards, corn fields,
woods, and meadows; it is diversified
with villages, towns, and innumerable pic-
turesque hamlets, which finish the glow-
ing landscape.  The room I am writing in 
has two windows which command this en-
changing scene; not a cottage--not even
the stump of an old tree, could be left out
without making a blank; all are thrown
together by change and nature, and form 
the most beautiful semblage in the world.

  "My wife is gentle and amiable--is
fond of a garden--has taste in improving
it, and selecting beautiful plants; we are
as busy as our first parents were in Eden;
as I am the head gardener, I trust no 
subtle serpent will interrupt our tranquil-
lity; an angel has pointed out the way to
happiness, and I am obeying her injunc-       HOWARD CASTLE.     141

tions.  Could she reconcile my parents to
my marriage, all might yet end well: our
son would be a good passport; he is a 
lovely boy; and could my mother see him, 
without knowing he was her grandson, she would think him the finest fellow in the 
world.  You shall be the means of com-
pletely restoring me to happiness; but the 
period is not yet arrived that an explana-
tion can take place.

"We may even have society in this se-
questered spot; within an English mile of
us, a countryman of mine has taken a cot-
tage; the Swiss say he is very melancholy
— I will rouse him, if I can, from his tor-
por, and we may prove of use to each
other.

"Write to me, dear friend, and as-
sure me (if the truth) of your restoration
to health and spirits.  I have written this letter with perfect composure of mind; I
now could converse with you in the same
tranquil style in which I have addressed
you; every feeling has subsided into the
most sincere friendship, and as pure as
ever existed in the heart of man; and that
I may prove worthy of a return from you,

142       HOWARD CASTLE.

is the most ardent wish and prayer of your
faithful
                          "Montague."


    The pleasure Clementia felt in the per-
usal of this letter was beyond her hopes;
she now should look forward to their ex-
cursion with heartfelt satisfaction, as she
had not the least fear in meeting with lord
Montague, but anticipated the greatest
happiness in visiting the delightful re-
treat; she only wished she could put the
letter into Mrs. Conway's hands, as she
was vexed at the seeming mystery attend-
ing the correspondence; she had promised
secrecy, and was determined to adhere to
it; she hoped it would not be long before
all would be explained, and lady Montague
introduced to his family and to the world.
     Clementina returned to the table, where
her friend was still perusing the newspa-
per; she had, to be sure, held it in her
hand, but her mind had been engrossed
by Clemntina's countenance, as she had
           HOWARD CASTLE.           143

taken possession of her features: she asked
Mrs. Conway if she had any news to im-
part?

     " I rather expect to have some from
you," replied Mrs. Conway, " as I am
sure you have received pleasure."

     Clementina coloured, and said—" My
letter contains nothing which can interest
any one but myself."

     " Indeed!" replied Mrs. Conway, and
again took up the newspaper, vexed at
her concise answer.

     Clementina felt quite as much discom-
posed as her friend; she disliked even the
appearance of concealment, from one who
was, from the kindness and affection she
had shewn her, entitled to the utmost
openness and candour; had she been at li-
berty to explain lord Montague's situation,
she thought it would be a most difficult
and unpleasant history for her to give;
she must have begun with her earliest
days, and owned a susceptibility which
she felt ashamed of; on all accounts, she
believed the subject had better be buried
in oblivion, and resolved never to mention
lord Montague's name. Mrs. Conway144           Howard Castle.

knew they were related to each other; she
thought the conversation at Colnbrook
would at least convince her, that his mo-
ther did not suspect any correspondence
being kept up between them; she there-
fore hoped that who her unknown friend
was, might not be suspected by Mrs. Con-
way. She retired to her apartment, and
busied herself in preparations for her de-
parture; she settled her affairs in such a 
manner that she might remain for any
length of time from home; she appointed
her father's old and faithful servant, James,
to manage her domestic affairs, and con-
tinued to employ her father's agent in the
direction of her estates. She settled an 
annuity upon Mrs. Moore for life, and
allotted a certain sum for charitable pur-
poses; as she found her father had been
liberal in his donations, she wished no one
to feel a change for the worse in their cir-
cumstances, from the death of their lament-
ed patron; she ordered all improvements
which had been planned previous to the 
general's illness to be put in execution,
and expressed upon all occasions, that it
was her wish every thing might be done                HOWARD CASTLE.          145

as he would have ordered it. She joined
her friend at dinner, in better spirits than 
she had seen her in since her father's
death.

     Mrs. Conway's thoughts had been busily 
employed; the secret correspondence which
Clementina carried on puzzled her exceed-
ingly; why there should be such a mystery
in her receiving letters from her cousin,
who she was convinced was the person
who wrote to her, astonished her; that 
they were engaged to each other, she
thought there could be no doubt; why 
his friends should be ignorant of their at-
tachment was extraordinary, as lady Rad-
nor evidently had no suspicion of it; she 
had called her his favourite Clementina;
but that expression did not lead her to
suppose she meant more than the regard
of a relation. She almost entirely relin-
quished the idea of seeing her the wife of 
her Howard; should she endanger his
peace of mind, by the introduction of so
much beauty, and so much sense, which
were, she feared, beyond his reach? She
would give the world to know if there

     VOL. III.      146        HOWARD CASTLE.     

really was an engagement between lord
Montague and her friend; if there was, she
ought to put her son upon his guard. She
determined, after much mature delibera-
tion, not to say a word of what she sus-
pected, but to watch with the eyes of 
Argus.

  Clementina observed a restraint in Mrs. 
Conway's manner which was unusual; but
as she suspected what had occasioned it, 
made no comment; they talked of the ap-
proaching journey, and Clementina ex-
pressed more pleasure in the prospect than 
she had ever done before; the letter, Mrs. 
Conway believed, was the cause of her im-
proved spirits: she told her how she had 
arranged her affairs, that she had made her 
father's faithful James happy, by fixing an 
annuity upon him, and appointing him 
the manager of her household concerns; 
she had likewise made Mrs. Moore inde-
pendent of servitude, but she was so at-
tached to her generous mistress, that she 
requested permission to remain in her ser-
vice--"Those marks of affection, even in
servants," said Clementina, "are very 
pleasing."                 HOWARD CASTLE          147

  "Certainly," replied Mrs.Conway:
"but where a servant has to kind a mis-
tress, as to render her independent of ser-
vitude, if she has a spark of gratitude in 
her,it ought to call it forth; have you set-
tled your concerns, in such a manner that
your presence will not be necessary at
Roachwood?"

   "Every thing is to go on," replied she,
"as near as possible to what we suppose 
my dear father would have ordered; his
agent has been long in that capacity, and
is a man of great integrity and abilities. I
am perfectly satisfied he will act much
better than I can order; I shall leave every
thing to his direction, and be satisfied all 
will go on right."

   "Then you will have no call to return
to your native country?"
 
   "None," replied she, " but inclination."

   "And will inclination bring you back?
will Switzerland not have more powerful
charms for you than Great Britain can hold
forth?"

    "I dare say I shall be much pleased
with the scenery, and with the excursion:
                H 2
148            HOWARD CASTLE

but I certainly shall have no wish to re-
main longer than is agreeable to you."

   "Shall we train bring lord Mntague
back in our train, as lady Radnor pro-
posed?"

   Clementina coloured at the question-
"How can I decide for lord Montague?"
was her reply. "I do not suppose he has any intention of returning to England."

   "He has no idea probably of the tempt-
ation he will undergo," said Mrs. Conway:
"does he expect to see you?"

   "I do not suppose he does," was her an-
swer, " and I assure you it would be no
inducement to him to travel in my com-
pany.?

   "Would it not?" said Mrs. Conway,
with animation. "Isuspect your humility
is carrying you too far when you make
that declaration.?

   "I rather think not," was her answer;
but as she believed her friend was fishing
for information, when she did not wish
to give any upon the subject, she re-
solved to drop it she therefore added-
"As I am ignorant, in regard to lord Mon-     HOWARD CASTLE.     149

tague's plans, I am not entitled to discuss
them."

  The gravity with which these words
were uttered effectually stopped Mrs. Con-
way from all further inquiry.

  Next morning every thing was prepared 
for their departure. Mrs Conway was to 
accompany Clementina, in a new travel-
ling carriage, which she got for the jour-
ney, with four very beautiful horses, which 
her father had purchased for her; she was
resolved they should be used as he had in-
tended, and a favourite Swiss servant, who
had been abroad with the general, should
attend them. Mrs. Conway's chaise was 
to follow, with their female servants and 
baggage; and an old faithful domestic, who
had been long in the family, was likewise
to be their escort.

  Clementina's spirits sunk as she was pre-
paring to quit the sweet shades of Roach-
wood; the recollection of the journey she
had taken with her father, and the extraor-
dinary events which had been the conse-
quence, haunted her mind; surely no
other year of her life would produce such
a variety of strange circumstances; her150          HOWARD CASTLE.

feelings had been torn with painful sensa-
tions; she believed at the time, she had felt
the most poignant distress on the discovery
of lord Montague's marriage; but how did
it sink when compared with the affliction
she had recently met with! all her former
sorrow seemed to be swallowed up in the
death of her beloved parent; she felt a
blank in her heart, which at the moment
she fancied could never be filled up. She
regretted the necessity of leaving her little
favourite companion at Roachwood, but
it was impossible he should accompany
them.

   Mrs. Conway was not fond of dogs; her
compassionate nature made her wish them
to be happy, and well taken care of; but
she thought a kennel a fitter place for the 
canine breed, that either an elegant-fur-
nished drawing-room, or to be shut up in
a carriage; she therefore heard Clementina
give strict charge to Mrs. Moore, to study
Frolic's happiness in every respect.

   The good housekeeper, with tears in her
eyes, promised the strictest attention to
her orders; at the same time adding--"For
your sake, madam, and for his late mas-             HOWARD CASTLE.           151

ter's, he will hold a large share of my re-
gard, and I hope you will find him in good
plight when you return."

    "At last the carriages drove off; Clemen-
tina's agitation prevented conversation,
Mrs. Conway saw the depression of her
spirits, and gave her free scope to indulge
them. Her busy mind was never for a
moment idle; it one castle fell to the
ground, another was soon reared; but as
they were generally founded with great
good sense and reason, many of her aerial
schemes had come to maturity; her ima-
gination was never-failing fund of amuse-
ment, and her companion was ample food
for her fancy to work upon; never were
plans laid that she wished so much to see
realized, as those which occupied her 
mind.

     Clementina was roused from her lan-
guor and dejection upon their entering the
park at Howard Castle; the beauty of the
scene attracted her attention; she exclaim-
ed-" What a noble place this is!" The
amazing extent of the grounds, which
reached far beyond her eye; the beautiful
clumps of forest trees and plantations, which
152     HOWARD CASTLE.  

were disposed of with the greatest taste;
the varied shades of green, which appeared
to have been mixed with all the care of a
landscape painter; and the different elegant
buildings, some half hid by the surround-
ing foliage—all crowded upon her admira-
tion; she had admired the place exceed-
ingly the first time she saw it, but con-
fessed she had not seen half its beauties.

A herd of deer were browsing near the
sand-walk, which was kept with the nicest
care for two miles, from the lodge to the
house; these, with innumerable sheep and 
cattle, gave the park the most lively ap-
pearance; large clumps of flowering shrubs
and evergreens made the approach at
times appear like a walk in the pleasure-
ground.

"How are those beautiful plants pre-
served from being destroyed by the deer?"
asked Clementina.

"They are guarded by invisible railing,"
replied Mrs. Conway, "which is so light
as not to be seen, yet strong enough to re-
pel any animal; all the clump near the
road are fenced by it; but as it is ex-
tremely expensive, green rails are substi-
                   HOWARD CASTLE.         153

tuted where they are not exposed to the
eye.  Lord Howard," continued she, "al-
though he has never lived at this place, is
extremely fond of it, and is yearly improv-
ing it; he means, when he returns to this
county, to make it his principal resi-
dence."
   
   " Where has he generally lived?" asked
Clementina.
   " Chiefly in London," was her answer;
" the summer months he rambles, as he
delights in seeing different places; he has
a fine estate in Yorkshire, where he has a
good house, and where his hounds and
horses are kept, and where he spends part
of the autumn and winter; he is fond of
field diversions when he has no better pur-
suit, but a rainy day is no punishment; at
Bruneliff Manor he has a library, in which
he has a never-failing source of amuse-
ment: if we are not tempted to remain
abroad all winter, we will take an excur-
sion into the North, and see some of the
wild views in our own country ; you are a
good horsewoman, and could manager ex-
tremely well in the cross-roads in York-
                      II 3
154     HOWARD CASTLE.

shire, where six cart-horses could hardly
drag a carriage through."

  "Good libraries," replied Clementina,
" must be very necessary there, as the in-
habitants must depend upon their own re-
cources for amusement, not upon society."

  "And yet I am told," answered Mrs.
Conway, "that they contrive to meet and
spend very pleasant winters in the coun-
try; all the roads are not so miserably bad;
the turnpike roads are passable, and at all
times you may move on horseback."

  "If a carriage cannot be safe, I should
suppose both the horse and his rider would
be swallowed up in a quagmire."

  "There are flat pavements," answered
Mrs. Conway, "in all the lanes and bye-
roads, on which the inhabitants walk and
ride with great safety."

  "I should never quit this lovely place,"
said Clementina, "if I was lord Howard,
to endanger my neck."

  The water was full in their view; there
were several barges and beautiful little ves-
sels floating upon it all displaying their co-
lours, in honour of Mrs. Conway's arrival.  A
fort, which had been recently built upon a       HOWARD CASTLE.   155

rising ground, and commanded a view of
the water, had a fine effect, both from the
castle and the road; it was ornamented
with the union flag, and immediately
upon their quitting the carriages, fired a
salute.
   " I Suppose," said Clementina, " you
have ordered that we might be received in
princely style; the time I was here, it
reminded me of former days of feudal
grandeur; the charm is kept up--I almost
expect to see the great hall filled with vas-
sals, and the baron in the midst of them,
ready to welcome our approach."
   "I wish your vision could be realized,"
said Mrs. Conway, " that may Howard
might appear, and give us the reception I
know he would wish to do; his manners
and inclination are well calculated to keep
up old English hospitality; this place, I
hope, will again be the scene of much hap-
piness, as well as of baronial grandeur."
   Mrs. Conway was soon immersed in bu-
siness, so that her friend had full opportu-
nity to explore the beauties of the place.
An old favourite horse of lord Howard's
was deemed perfectly quiet and safe; she
156          HOWARD CASTLE.

enjoyed the finest weather, and believed
Howard Castle to be one of the most beau-
tiful places in the kingdom. Ten days
slipped quickly away, and Clementina al-
most lamented leaving such scenery; she
became extremely fond of riding, and re-
gretted parting with the gentlest animal in
the world, and almost wished to take him
in her train.

   When they reached London, the con-
trast struck her between the rich and va-
ried prospects at Howard Castle, and the
straight lines of houses, and unvaried suc-
cession of dull streets. The discordant
notes of those who ply the streets with
their various articles appeared to her par-
ticularly disagreeable, after the beautiful
notes she had listened to, with such exqui-
site pleasure, both at Roachwood and at
Howard Castle; the confined air and va-
riety of smells disturbed her, after the
fresh breeze of the country, and the per-
fume of even the hedges as they passed
along--"Oh!" exclaimed she to her friend,
"what a vitiated taste for any human
being to prefer breathing this contami-
nated air! who would not leave this un-        HOWARD CASTLE.    157

interesting scene for one where Nature shews herself in all her glory, such as we have lately seen? who could think it pleasure to be cooped up at this season of the year, when the fields and woods abound with beauties?"

   "The fields and woods," said Mrs. Conway, " would be a wretched exchange to many, who would prefer any thing within the confines of London, to all the rural scenes of shady groves and purling streams; the half of the gay world would have died of ennui, had they been a whole week precluded from society at Howard Castle; lady Almeria Villyers, and all such gay flutterers, would have declared it the most horrid bore in life, and I should have been teazed to death, to have quitted the dull place before my business was half executed."

   " Do they live in London all the year?" said Clementina.

   " No," replied Mrs. Conway, " the fashionable watering-places are filled by the restless part of the community, who are always in search of amusement."

   " How fatigued I should be, " said Cle-

158       HOWARD CASTLE.

mentina, "were I tacked to such a restless companion!"

  "Where you married to a gay man, whose greatest happiness consisted in shewing both himself and you to the world, and was never quiet or easy but in a crowd of company and public amusements, how could you help it?" 

"If my body could bear it," replied she, "my mind could not; I am sure he could not be a companion at all suited to my taste-I run no risk of being so united."

  "A lover and a husband,' said Mrs. Conway, "are very different characters; the first will adopt what he finds is pleasing to his mistress; the latter will please himself, and his wife must obey."

  "Then" cried Clementina, "let me keep my time in my own disposal."
 
Mrs. Conway agreed with her, that unless she met with a kindred spirit, there was little chance for happiness-that spirit was lord Howard.

     HOWARD CASTLE.     159

     CHAPTER VII.

As Mrs. Conway had very little to detain
her in London, she was perfectly willing
to indulge in her friend, in spending as short
a time there as possible; she found a very
satisfactory letter from lord Howard, ex-
pressing the utmost pleasure in the pro-
spect of seeing her and her friend; that he
was at perfect liberty to shew them the
lions of Paris, and to accompany them on
their intended ramble. He hoped the lady
who was to be of the party was neither
old or infirm, or would act, in any degree,
as a clog upon their perambulations, as he
was resolved to introduce them to Nature's 
grandest works. Mrs. Conway treated
Clementina exactly in the same way she
had done herself, when she received the
interesting letters from abroad; she read
her dispatches, and put them away without 
giving any information.

  Clementina was convinced one of the 160         HOWARD CASTLE.

letters her friend has received was from
lord Howard; she wished, above all things,
to know if he was meaning to leave Paris,
as Mrs. Conway had before hinted; or if
what she suspected would be the case, that
he would remain there to receive them.
She found all her attempts ineffectual, as
her friend kept her intelligence to herself.

   Mrs. Conway answered her son's letter,
fixing the time for their joining him, if
the winds and waves were favourable; but
as she was a most dreadful coward upon
the sea, he must not be uneasy if they did
not appear at the exact period; assuring
him her friend would be no incumbrance
to the party, as she was quite as able as
herself to undergo fatigue, and was a
very good-tempered, accommodating wo-
man, whom she meant as a companion on
her travels, that she might be more inde-
pendent of him, as she had no wish to con-
fine him to a tour he had often made be-
fore.

   The morning before their departure from
London, lady Augusta Sydney discovered
that Clementina was in town, and imme-
diately drove to Mrs. Conway's, where she            HOWARD CASTLE.         161

found both the ladies at home; she flew
to Clementina with extended arms--"How
happy," exclaimed she, "to be again per-
mitted to press my friend to my heart!
I heard last night, by mere accident, that
you had been seen; of course, you did not
escape observation---I sent this morning to
inquire; your servants confirmed the re-
port, and that you were to set off to-mor-
row for France; not to the convent, I
hope?"

   "We shall certainly take the direct
road to Ronen," replied Clementina.

   "You will indeed! if you again get into
that horrid place," said lady Augusta, "do
not trust her, Mrs. Conway; she has a
strong inclination to turn catholic, and be
the lady abbess of the convent; the nuns
were all so fond of the little heretic, that
she lamented leaving them."

   "Then," said Mrs. Conway, " if it was
merely gratitude for their affection, surely
Miss Bouverie will not quit her English
friends."

   "Oh," said lady Augusta, "I wonder
she is such a tolerable creature, considering
how she has been idolized since her birth;
162         HOWARD CASTLE.

she was the pattern in the convent; she has
been the criterion of perfection in the gay
world, where she has made more mischief
than all the belles put together. My bro-
ther has been in a dying state—is now ra-
ther recovering; sir Theodosius Sydney is
on the list of incurables, and is sent abroad
for the restoration of his intellects; poor
Stopford is now in private confinement;
they may all hide their heads in silent sad-
ness, as there is not a man in this country
who will, in any way, please Miss Bou-
verie."

  " If I. am to be the abbess of the con-
vent," was her answer, " you surely would
not accuse me of ever regarding the male
sex with an eye of admiration—you fixed
my destiny."

  " Your destiny will be fixed, I believe,"
said lady Augusta, " on this excursion ; if
you keep out of the cloistered walls, you
will not proceed far before you meet with
a congenial spirit, who will arrest your
steps."

  " But will that spirit arrest Miss Bou-
verie's heart?" said Mrs. Conway. " I
shall have her steps under my guidance."                 HOWARD CASTLE. 163.

"But not that wayward thing which
will guide her actions," said lady Augusta;
"perhaps, in the mountains of Switzer-
land, she may find wherewithal to call
forth her affections. I hope poor lort
Howard will escape, and return to his na-
tive land, as he left it, gay and happy.
Mrs. Conway, you must warn his lordship
that this lady is one of the most dangerous
of her sex; but I really do not suppose they
will admire each other."

"For what reason?" asked Mrs. Con-
way.

"He has too much life and spirit," an-
swered lady Augusta, "and she has not
half enough to please him; why should
we not all have a chance? she ought not to
go and seize on his lordship in a foreign
country, where he has no variety from
which to make his selection. Lady Caro-
line Seymour declares there is not such an 
elegant creature in the beau monde, nor 
one of them half so agreeable."

Clementina felt relieved when lady Au-
gusta rose to depart, as the flow of spirits
she was in had the effect of depressing
hers. She gave her strict charge to re-
 164           HOWARD CASTLE

member her to her friends in the convent, 
to assure them she enjoyed liberty exceed-
ingly; "and it it was not cruel to them,
they would do the same, I should send
that message by you."

 Again Shaking hands with Clementina, 
wishing Mrs. Conway a pleasant excursion,
and that she might bring her companion 
back with her, she left the room.

"Lady Augusta," said Clementina, "is
fatiguingly lively this morning; her rattle
has worn me out."

"It rather amused me," replied Mrs.
Conway; "her unaffected cheerfulness is
extremely pleasing."

She regretted, in her own mind, her 
ladyship's paying so short a visit, as she
probably might have gained more informa-
tion from her apparently-communicative
humour. Mrs. Conway had heard enough
to convince her that her friend was en-
gaged.

 Clementina was delighted to feel her-
self again out of the hurry and noise of
London, and once more to see the beauti-
ful face of nature. Few females who had
been so much admired as she was during
her short stay in the great world, would
have felt such admiration for the verdant
green spangled with daisies, or the fra-
grant hawthorn which perfumed the air
as they drove along; or would have pre-
ferred the country to the morning drive
in Bond-street, or the crowded opera, in
the evening, where she had gained such
marked attention; she felt not the least
wish to attract notice. The fear of meeting
with lord Howard in Paris increased as
they advanced towards Dover. A quiet
tour with her friend would have been
delightful, but she feared there was no
such plan; her spirits were tranquil, and
even cheerful, but she felt quite unequal
to gaiety.
  Mrs. Conway had promised to accom-
pany her to Rouen: if her son was to at-
tend her into Switzerland, why might not
she remain with the abbess? she ventured
to hint the idea to Mrs. Conway, who
treated it, as she feared she would do, with
redicule--"I shall suspect lady Augusta's
account of you is quite correct; if I succeed
in getting you past Rouen, I fear I shall
lose you in Switzerland."166    HOWARD CASTLE.

  "Never should I wish to be separated
from you," said she, with warmth, "but I 
cannot make one of a gay party; you will
meet with lord Howard in Paris; I shall
be immediately introduced to strangers,
whose good spirits and animation must
not be checked by my dejected manner;
with you I can be cheerful; even the mo-
mentary life and spirit of lady Augusta
made me feel sad and melancholy. I am
not equal to the undertaking of meeting
with the gay; lord Howard's lively dispo-
sition must not be checked by me; I
know I should either appear sullen or
stupid."

  "My son," replied Mrs. Conway, with
much gravity of manner."is one of the 
most rational beings in existence; he is
neither particularly talkative, nor is he si-
lent; his conversation is generally reckon-
ed agreeable, as it is fraught with infor-
mation; but no one can accommodate his
manners better to his company than he
can; he will not attempt to descant on
learned subjects with either you or me. If
he finds we are not inclined for any sub-
ject at all, he will take a book, his never-              HOWARD CASTLE.         167
failing source of amusement, and leave us
to our own pursuits."

  "As ignorant beings not worth his no-
tice," said Clementina.

  "Perhaps," replied Mrs. Conway, "as
interesting, but beyond his comprehen-
sion; we shall soon judge; if he is tired of
our society, he will not proceed with us. I
promise you, if you are tired of his, I will
return to Great Britain with you,"

  "That I will never permit," interrupted
she, with quickness; "you shall pursue
your route, and I will mine. I should have
no fear in taking the journey back to Eng-
hand, attended only by any own servants.
I must learn to make my way in the world
without fear or dread; probably many of
my steps must be trodden without having
always the comfort of your society."

  "They need not," said Mrs.Conway,
"Particularly in the present instance; pro-
mise me to proceed to Paris, and I will
promise you to be implicity guided by
you, without even using argument of per-
suasion."

In this manner they compromised the
matter, not perfectly to clementina's satis-
168             HOWARD CASTLE.

faction; she believed nothing could in-
duce her to disappoint Mrs. Conway in
her projected tour, and she had no idea
that she should enjoy pleasure, if escorted
by lord Howard.

   No disaster happened to them on the
road to Dover, where they arrived a very
little time before a packet was ready to
sail: all were soon in a bustle. Mrs. Con-
way had not been accustomed to sea expe-
ditions; she felt timorous as she looked at
the water, which was a good deal agitated,
from a high wind which there had been the
day before; she would gladly have waited
till it was as smooth as a mill-pond, and
proposed to Clementina to stay till the next
tide, when she hoped it would be calmer. 
The master of the vessel heard her, and
not in the gentlest terms in the world, in-
formed her she might wait fifty tides be-
fore she got such a fine fair wind; he
would stretch it over casily, as there was a
good breeze; and he thought, from the ap-
pearance of the clouds, there would be a
little more.

  "Then," said Mrs. Conway,"there will
be too much."  
  "Lord help you!" said the master, "if you think there is any wind to-day, what would you think of some days I am out in; yesterday I was crossing, in the hardest of the squall; indeed I thought I should have been obliged to bear away for Havre, but my vessel is the best on the passage."
  Mrs. Conway still stood irresolute; the wind was blowing her about, the sailors were making a prodigious noise, the ropes were rattling through her fingers, the sails were loosened, the carriages and horses were on board. Mrs. Conway turned to Clementina for advice-" Are you afraid to venture?"
  "Not in the very least," replied her companion; "I am not timorous; I think the sailors would not venture their own lives, if they thought there was any danger."
  "Why yes," answered the master, "my life is surely as precious as yours; I have a wife and five children depending on it; however, I can stay no longer; the tide will not wait for your determination;" so saying, he was marching off.
  Mrs. Conway, with a look of horror,
 VOL.III.
170         HOWARD CASTLE.
called to him, she would go, and taking
hold of Clementina's arm, walked towards
the boat, When they where safcly on
board, and Mrs. Conway sung in the ca-
bin, her spirits sunk at the idea of being
so soon on the bosom of the occan; but
when the vessel got fairly out, and was
tossed about in the breakers, her fears were
dreadful; but her violent agitation was 
soon over, as sea-sickness quickly rendered
her insensible to terror.
   Clementina left her to the care of her 
maid; had she remained below, she should 
have been in the same situation her friend
was in.  The day was perfectly clear;  the
French coast, to which they were distinctly 
seen;  the view of Dover cliffs, and all the 
surrounding objects, delighted her; the
number of vessels of different sizes and
forms amused her, as they quickly passed;
she regretted that Mrs.  situation
deprived her from enjoying the scene.
    The master of the packet looked at her
with eyes of admiration; her beauty was
not the charm which struck him; it was
her courage, watching the white waves
HOWARD CASTLE. 171

which curled round the bow of the vessel,
as she swiftly cut her way through them
-"You have a fine stout heart of your
own," said he; "yours is built of the best
oak, but your mother's is a sad crazy bulk;
I thought it would have split with terror
as she got on board; however, there has
not been a tighter passage made this sea-
son than the one you shall have to-day."

"We are going very pleasantly," said
Clementina.

"Ah! you know fore and aft," said he;
"you have been at sea before, or I mistake
it."

"I have crossed this passage twice be-
fore."

"I thought so," replied the sailor; "and
I hope, when you cross it again, it will be
in this here boat; there was a very fine
gentleman with us yesterday got a pretty
wet jacket; the waves were dashing over
us; however, he was, like you, not a cow-
ard; he stood upon the deck all the time;
whilst his servant was frightened to death,
he was obliged to keep below hatches, that
he might not see the waves; but he was a 
12172         HOWARD CASTLE

poor land-swabber, not fit to serve a gentleman; he ought to be the ladies' attendant who is in the cabin."
  Clementina asked if he knew who the gentleman was?
  "No," answered the master, "though he has crossed before in my boat with lord Howard."
  "Do you know his lordship?" asked Clementina.
  "Lord love him! that I do," was his answer; "he is an noble a gentleman as ever stepped between stem and stern; he has crossed twenty times, I believe, with me; when he comes down to the beach, he hollows with his own mouth; he is none of your gimerack, fair-weather fowls, sending his French idiots jabbering nonsense to us; he knows Jack Stephens as well as I do myself; I wish he would come back again with all my heart, but he is plaguy fond of France."
  Clementina was entertained with the honest tar's expressions; she went below, to inquire after Mrs. Conway, who was better, and amused with the account of her son: they supposed, and were not mis-                                                                         HOWARD CASTLE.              173

taken, that it was sir Theodosius, who had
crossed the day before.
   When they landed at Calais, the master 
hailed Mrs. Conway, as she stepped out of
the boat, if ever she had made a better
voyage in her life?
   She told him it was the first she had
ever made.
   " I hope then you will prefer Jack Ste-
phens, who has carried you over so safe."
   She promised to remember him, if he
was at Calais when she returned. He bade
Clementina a kind farewell, with whom he
was much pleased. 
   They were soon comfortably seated in
the carraige; Mrs. Conway forgot the ter-
ror she had suffered at sea; all was new to
her, as she had never before been out of 
Great Britain.  Clementina recollected the
road prefectly well,and frequently gave Mrs.
Conway information as they passed along. 
The marquis of Clemaire had pointed out all
the places worthy of observation between
Rouen and Calais; as they approached the 
former, Clementina's feelings were delight-
ful; the idea of folding to her hear the be-
174       HOWARD CASTLE.

loved abbess was unspeakable pleasure to
her; what a short space since they had
been separated, yet how much had hap-
pened to her! She had given her friend a
minute and faithful account of every cir-
cumstance of her life, and she, for some
time, had heard frequently from her; their
correspondence had not been so regular;
she had received no answer to her two last
letters. As she was certain of a welcome
reception, she proceeded with confidence
of meeting her friend as she had left her:
it was late when they arrived at the hotel
—too late for a visit to the convent.

  Next morning she attended at an early
hour, when the well-known gates were
opened to her, and she was again admitted
into the parlour; her feelings were in a
tumult. Alas! no friend was there to wel-
come her return; a nun soon appeared,
whose melancholy countenance prepared
Clementina for unpleasant information;
her friend was very ill, and had been con-
fined to her room for above a week—
" But," added the nun, who saw the
agitation which this intelligence hadHOWARD CASTLE. 175

thrown her into, "I dare say you may be
admitted to her presence; I will inquire."
Saying these words, she quitted the room.

Clementina sunk into the chair, on
which the abbess had been seated the last
time she saw her, overcome with grief and
disappointment; she had anticipated so
much pleasure in the prospect of their
meeting, that this unexpected blow was
doubly severe; yet she still hoped, with 
her care and attention, she might recover.

The nun returned, and said, in a few
minutes she might be admitted into the
abbess's apartment.

Clementina asked many questions, but
could get no satisfactory answers; weak-
ness was her principal complaint, and she
appeared hovering on the brink of eternity.

"Indeed," added the nun, wiping the
tears from her eyes, "I am afraid our so-
ciety will not long be blessed with her ma-
ternal care; every day she visibly grows
worse; this morning she appears particu-
larly languid, and has been long in fervent
prayer with father Francis, who is now 
with her."
It was with difficulty Clementina could176        HOWARD CASTLE

compose her feelings sufficiently to attend
the abbess. When she entered the apart-
ment, she found her alone, supported in
her bed with pillows; her emaciated form
and ghastly countenance bespoke the ex-
treme weakness of her frame; her voice
faltered as she spoke; with difficulty she
articulated, at the same time casting up
her eyes--"My God, I thank thee for
hearing my prayer, and for blessing me
once more with a sight of my beloved
child!"

   Clementina was kneeling by her bed-
side, hiding her streaming eyes; she held
the extended hand of her friend, and fer-
vently kissed it, but was perfectly unable
to speak.

   "You must not allow yourself to be so
much agitated," continued the abbess, re-
covering, in some degree, the firmness of
her voice; "you find me happier far than
when you left me; this frail shell of clay is
nearly gone, and I feel myself almost an in-
habitant of another world; my soul, I
trust, is ready to take its flight to the
blessed mansions above, where I confident-
ly hope it will be received; and I not then.

             HOWARD CASTLE.        177

my dear Clementina, an object of envy?
this world and all its sorrows are nearly
past, and I would not be again recalled to
it upon any consideration; do not then la-
ment the weak state you find me in, but
rejoice with me in the prospect of my hap-
py release."

  The abbess was exhausted with this ex-
ertion, and sunk upon her pillow.

  Clementina, alarmed with her appear-
ance, gave her a little cordial which stood
by the bed; it had the desired effect; she
was again, after a few minutes pause, able
to converse. Clementina was now more
composed, and asked her friend how she
had been so cruel to her as to conceal her
illness?

   " I did not wish to throw a damp over 
your pleasure",  replied the abbess; " my
decay has been very gradual; when I
parted with you, I durst not flatter my-
self with the hopes of seeing you again,
as my health was then in a very precarious
sate; soon after you left me, I became
much worse, and many of my letters were
written with labour and difficulty. I have
                    
                     13


 178 HOWARD CASTLE.

been insensibly wearing away for the last
three months; I have suffered no bodily
pain-my senses have been spared to me-
my prospects of futurity have brightened
in my sickness; I have received every
earthly attention, and the strongest marks
of affection from the community; I have
again see you, my dear child-you have
returned to me unchanged by the great
world, your heart apparently the same.
What reason have I to be thankful! I have
received the utmost satisfaction in being
assured that your gentle nature is uncon-
taminated by the adulation of the gay! It
is not in those scenes where you will find
the happiness all are in search of; remem-
ber, my Clementina, the dying assurance
of one who has tasted the bitters of the
world, and the sweets of religious retire-
ment: I was enthusiastically fond of gaiety,
but disappointment was invariably may at-
tendant; I had no idea of religion to sup-
port me under the trials I met with.
You have experienced, in a slight degree,
that the world is chequered-to some the
black is predominant, and was so to me in
an eminent degree; I retired from it, and             HOWARD CASTLE.           179
in the pursuit of religion have found true
happiness. I do not mean, me dear child,
to recommend a monastic life to you, nor
any change in your principles; act accord-
ing to your own judgement in the material
points, and I hope the God of Heaven will
guide you through this transitory scene,
in a more screne and tranquil path than it
was my lot to follow. Your friend, Mrs.
Conway, is a treasure; hold fast by her;
but in choosing a companion for life, fol-
low the dietates of your heart; be not rash
in your decision; study temper, and above
all the character of the man you marry;
consider what you are intrusting to his
care-probably your happiness here and 
hereafter; he is to be your guide, your
rule, your every thing. I wished to write 
to you when your father died, but I was 
incapable; I have now had the satisfaction 
of conversing with you, for which I am 
thankful. You must accompany Mrs.
Conway to Paris, as I will not permit you
to remain with me; your last letter in-
formed me of all your plans, which appear
to be laid with moderation and prudence;
I approve of your intended excursion; and


180 HOWARD CASTLE.

should lord Howard prove what I should
expect the son of Mrs. Conway to be, I
should wish him to be your husband."

  Clementina started at these words- 
" My husband !" repeated she' " I have
never seen lord Howard

  " I know you have not," was the answer
of the abbess; " I only wish you may please
each other; if he is as amiable as he is re-
presented, he would make you happy."

  Clementina felt surprised at the idea;
but as her revered friend appeared fatigued
with the exertion she had made, she allow-
ed the conversation to drop.

  After a few minutes pause, in which 
exhausted nature seemed in some degree
restored, the abbess said-"You must go, 
my love; I require no new proof of your 
affectionate regard; the melancholy office
of closing my eyes for ever would be too 
great a trial on sensibility such as you pos-
sess; I wish that nothing may occupy my 
thoughts for a moment from the great
change which will soon take place-no
person is so likely to draw my attention
again to this world as you are."

  During these words Clementina was al-



  


 
           HOWARD CASTLE.     181

most convulsed with sorrow; at last she
articulated-"Why will you not suffer
me to have the mournful satisfaction of at-
tending you in your last moments? I 
often bitterly lament my absence from my
dear parent; it seems the particular inter-
vention of Providence, in sending me here
at this critical moment, when I my gra-
tify my feelings, and may profit by the
example of a calm preparation, and wit-
nessing the peaceful end of a Christian; it
is recommended to us to be in the house
of mourning, and to accustom ourselves to 
dwell with composure upon our removal
out of this world. Why should I then fly
form you, when I may receive so much
benefit? Were you to banish me from your
presence, and insist upon my proceeding
with my friend, you would inflict a severe
punishment upon me; my mind would
dwell upon the scenes which were passing
here--my spirits would be far more de-
pressed than if I allowed to watch by
your bedside, and to administer the little
comfort it is in my power to bestow. In-
dulge me," said she, as she grasped the182      HOWARD CASTLE.

hand which lay almost motionless upon
the bed.

   The abbess feebly returned the pressure,
saying--"You have conquered."

   At that moment the priest, attended by
several of the nuns, entered; it was the
hour for prayer, and Clementina retired to
the parlour, to give vent to her feelings;
all the pleasure which she had anticipated
from meeting with her numerous friends
and companions, was totally sunk in the
universal sorrow which prevailed; no joy
was expressed by any of the community,
they were so deeply affected by the separa-
tion which awaited them.

   Clementina was unable to go to Mrs.
Conway, but explained by letter the si-
tuation of the abbess, and her determina-
tion to remain with her for the short pe-
riod of her life, begging that Mrs. Conway
would proceed to Paris, where she would
join her as soon as possible.

   Her friend, alarmed at the idea of leaving
her in the convent, answered the note in
person; her fears quickly vanished, as she
was soon convinced that the abbess had                  HOWARD CASTLE.     183

not long to live, and she hoped Clemen-
tina's wish for a monastic life would die
with her; but she feared for the health of 
her young companion; she saw her over-
whelmed with sorrow, and she was con-
vinced the melancholy scene would renew
her grief for the death of her father. Mrs.
Conway at last said--"If you should again
be ill, and I at a distance from you, I will
remain at the hotel till you can accompany
me."

   Overpowered with the kindness of the
idea, Clementina could hardly articulate
her thanks, but firmly refused the kind of-
fer, in language which expressed her gra-
titude, promising to delay not a moment
in proceeding to Paris, as soon as the me-
lancholy event had taken place; at the
same time assuring her, the shock upon
her nerves was over, and that her health
was not likely to suffer in the same way
as when she had, in so sudden and un-
looked-for a manner, lost her beloved fa-
ther; the illness of her revered instruct-
ress has opened afresh the wound which
his death had occasioned; she felt the

184             HOWARD CASTLE.

deepest sorrow, but still it was different
from what she had experienced upon her
late severe affliction.

  Mrs. Conway gave her the direction
where to find her in Paris; she with reluc-
tance quitted her, and Clementina return-
ed to watch over the pillow of her dying
friend. In spite of every human aid being
used, and the unremitting attention of
Clementina, the abbess every hour grew
weaker, but she retained her affection for
her faithful nurse, who seldom quitted her
apartment; she had no foolish dread in-
being left alone with the dying saint, whoso
low moanings were all that convinced hex-
she was alive, as the power of speech was
denied her. The dead silence which
reigned in the convent was only interrupt-
ed by the bell which summoned the inha-
bitants to their devotions: never was there
a more melancholy situation for a young
person than the one Clementina was placed
in, but she did not shrink from the ar-
duous task; although she did not join with
the nuns in their prayers, she would not
suffer one of them to relax in their duties;
             HOWARD CASTLE.           185

she remained with her dying friend, whilst
all the pomp and ceremony of the Catholic
religion was used in the chapel.

  Clementina was putting up her unosten-
tatious but fervent prayers by the bedside
of the abbess, who, by a feeble pressure of
her hand, seemed to express her gratitude
for her unwearied assiduity. Three days
she watched by the side of her dying
friend; nature's lamp was nearly extinct;
at times it seemed to expire, and again
life trembled on her lip. Clementina could
hardly believe, when she heaved a gentle
sigh, that il was the last breath of her be-
loved monitrcss. So tranquil was her
exit, that there could be no shock upon
the nerves of any of her attendants; her
countenance bespoke the composure of her
mind; the placid smile which spread itself
over her features seemed to say—" I have
made a joyful escape from frail mortality
to endless happiness."

  Clementina's feelings were perfectly
composed, but the present awful scene re-
newed the recent severe loss she hud sus-
tained; the wounds which had hardly
closed since the death of her father were186    HOWARD CASTLE.

fresh torn open; she hoped she was re-
signed to the will of Providence; but
losing two such friends within so short a
period sunk her spirits; she had only time
for a few short but fervent ejaculations,
and to close for ever the eyes of her la-
mented friend, before she quitted the
apartment. She retired to the one which
had been allotted her, and there indulged
in private the feelings which she gave way
to. She regretted more than ever the ne-
cessity there was for her going to Paris;
her body was worn out by watchiong; one
night's repose, she feared, would hardly
enable her to proceed on her journey, and
she was convinced her mind was not at all
fit to encounter strangers who were gay
and cheerful. She laid plans, and changed
them as fast as they were formed; the ab-
bess had charged her to eling to Mrs. Con-
way, as her best friend; her own inclina-
tion pointed the same way, as she loved
her with the purest affection; but situated
as she then was, she should have preferred
returning to Englans, and spending her
days quietly at Roachwood. She was well
aware that she should offend Mrs. Conway             HOWARD CASTLE.        187

and break her promise.  What could she
do?  Propriety whispered, go to Paris;
and as she wished at all times to be guided
by it, she resolved to set off next morn-
ing, however painful the struggle might
be; she could not remain in the convent,
as there was such pomp and ceremony to
be gone through on the death of an ab-
bess, that the sooner she removed the
better.



               CHAPTER VIII.

                 --------

CLEMENTINA, with a very heavy heart,
quitted the convent the following morn-
ing at an early hour; in spite of her leav-
ing her own horses at the first stage, and
proceeding as rapidly as four miserable
animals could drag her, it was late in the
afternoon when she arrived in Paris. The
bustling hurry of a great town again an-
noyed her, although the different pursuits
and amusements of the inhabitants arrest-
ed her attention; the scene was totally dif-
188           HOWARD CASTLE.

ferent from the streets of London; all
seemed so gay and lively, that she con-
eluded it must be a holiday, and the spi-
rits of the lower class of the people must
be exhilarated by some joyous event. But
every day whilst she remained in Paris,
she witnessed the same appearance of hi-
larity.

  When she stopped at the hotel, and in-
quired for Mrs. Conway, the waiter de-
sired that she would follow him, and he
would acquaint the lady that she was
wanted; he shewed her into a spacious
dining-room, where the fruits and wines
still stood upon the table, as if it had been
recently occupied; there was a door of
communication to another apartment,
which was open; she could hear distinctly,
that the company who occupied it were
English, and concluded her friend was one
of the number, whom she expected to see
every moment. She wished to retire to
her apartment, as the fatigue she had un-
dergone was an ample excuse for not join-
ing a party of strangers: her thoughts
were so occupied, when she heard a person
approach the door, saying—" I will quickly            HOWARD CASTLE.         189

decide it, as I know the paper is in the
next room."

  At the same moment a gentleman enter-
ed; she was seated near the window, where
the newspaper in question was laid; it
was a few seconds before he discovered it,
and at the same moment he saw Clemen-
tina: she rose, from an awkward feeling of 
embarrassment, in thus being discovered.
The gentleman suddenly stopped, and ex-
claimed--"I beg you ten thousand par-
dons; I did not know this room was occu
pied, otherwise I would not have in-
truded."

Clementina's face was crimsoned over,
and she turned aside from the scrutinizing
eye of the stranger, who appeared lost in 
astonishment--" I ought to apologize, as
I fear I am the intruder; the waiter cer-
tainly has not delivered my message."

  " Can I," answered he, " be of any use
in calling for the person you wish to see?"

  As he uttered these words, Mrs. Conway
entered the room, and flew with extended
arms to Clementina--" This is indeed an
unlooked-for happiness; instead of a letter,
which I have been expecting, to find you
190              HOWARD CASTLE.

quietly seated here is very delightful.
Lord Howard," turning to the stranger,

   "this is the friend you have waited for-
I present Miss Bouverie to you. Clemen-
tina, I have long wished you to be ac-
quainted with my son; I need not say this
introduction gives me pleasure, as I wish,
above all things, to see two people so dear
to me intimately known to each other."

   "Lord Howard gracefully bowed, and
muttered something, which Clementina
concluded was very civil; at the same
time taking her hand, he added, in more
intelligible language-"Permit me to in-
troduce you to some friends of mine, who
are in the adjoining room." He gently
drew her hand within his arm, as he said
these words-"You see how soon I have
profited by my mother's advice, and taken
upon me the office of an old acquaintance;
some of the party, I believe, have the ho-
nour of being known to you."

   There was no retreat for Clementina,
who had not intended seeing any strangers
that evening; her steps were guided by
lord Howard, and in a few seconds she
found herself in the company of sir Theo-

            HOWARD CASTLE.     191

dosius Sydney, whose countenance be-
trayed the emotion which seeing her oc-
casioned; she felt pleased at meeting with
one for whom she entertained a very sin-
cere regard; she hoped all love was extin-
guished on his part, and that they now met
as friends. She held out her hand to him,
which was a cordial to the drooping spirits
of sir Theodosius; it revived a hope, which
animated him to more exertion than he
had shewn since his arrival in Paris. He
did not expect to see one who never for a
moment was absent from his thoughts; he
hoped change of scene might restore his
peace of mind; but seeing the beloved ob-
ject undid all his plans; her appearance
created such sensations in his bosom as
none can understand but those who have felt
them. The simple offer of her hand, which
Clementina had made him, filled him with
intoxicating thoughts; she could not be
so cruel as to sport with his feelings; per-
haps her sentiments had changed, and she
now might listen to his protestations, which
were as sincere as ever man made to
woman.
  
   Clementina, by her good humour, and192               HOWARD CASTLE.

strong inclination to have sir Theodosius
on the list of her friends, brought a pain-
ful task upon herself; she saw too late the impropriety of her manner, and anticipated
the distress of being again obliged to re-
peat her sentiments.

  Lord Stanhope was her other acquaint-
ance, but her knowledge of him had been
of so short a duration at Carnsworth Cas-
tle, and her mind had been so occupied
with the melancholy occurrences which
took place, that she had a very faint recol-
lection of his lordship; the truth was, that
lord Stanhope was one of those quiet, inof-
fensive beings who is never missed in so-
ciety, and when absent, is apt to be forgot-
ten by his acquaintance.

  Clementina was not of that description;
lord Stanhope, the moment she entered 
the room, recognised her as the beautiful
Miss Bouverie, who was engaged to marry
lord Montague, and with whom he had
spent some delightful days at Carnsworth
Castle.  He approached her; at the same
time lord Howard said--” I need not pre-
sent lord Stanhope to you, as he has the
happiness of being known to you.“             HOWARD CASTLE.           193

   "Yes," said lord Stanhope, "Miss Bou-
verie cannot forget our meeting at Carns-
worth Castle."

   He laid a particular emphasis on our,
as if first seeing him had been a remark-
able event of her life.

   Lord Howard presented his other friends,
Mr. Camden, nephew to her old admirer
the general, and Mr. Byron.

   Sir Theodosius Sydney evidently gave
way to love and happiness.  He kept his
place by Clementina, who was grave and
silent; he saw her spirits were depressed,
and lamented the frequent shocks she had
met with.  As an apology for wishing to
retire early, she complained of fatigue.

   "You have hardly had any sleep since
we parted at Rouen: from your looks,"
said Mrs. Conway, "you have watched
by your friend night and day."

  "What a happy end," said sir Theodo-
sius, "to die with an angel hovering over
the pillow!"

   "But what a miserable feeling," said
lord Howard, "to part with that angel for
ever!"

   VOL. III.         K194             HOWARD CASTLE.

   "It is a very miserable sensation," said
sir Theodosius; "but perhaps the good lady
abbess's feelings might be blunted: to you,
or I, Howard, it would be misery."

   "Clementina rose from her seat. She was
overpowered with languor, and wished,
above all things, to retire from the com-
pany. Mrs. Conway indulged her, and
accompanied her to her apartment, where
she hoped to have a little conversation.

   Clementina dwelt with peculiar interest
on what had passed since they had parted
-described the mournful duties she had
gone through, and the happy end of her
revered friend.

   Mrs. Conway was rather impatient whilst
the poor abbess was the theme. She felt
very well satisfied that she was fairly laid
at rest, as she had now no fear of Clemen-
tina's returning to the convent, which she
had more than once threatened. She tried
to lead her to a far more interesting sub-
ject-her meeting with lord Howard, and
what she thought of his appearance.

   Clementina smiled-"I must pardon a
mother's vanity, and indulge it, by saying
her son is certainly extremely handsome;  

   HOWARD CASTLE 195

I never saw a finer figure, nor a more ex-
pressive countenance, than lord Howard's.
Does this panegyric satisfy you?"

"No," replied Mrs. Conway, laughing:
"you have not said you admire his man-
ners."

"That must be reserved till I am more
acquainted with him. His bow is grace-
ful; but when nature has bestowed such
an elegant form as he has, it is impossible
any motion could be awkward. His re-
ception of me," she continued," was what
I should have expected from your son-as
polite as possible; but I was so worn out
with fatigue, I could hardly judge of any
thing, or any body."

"Could you not see that sir Theodosius
Sydney was happy beyond expression,
and that lord Stanhope's face brightened
up on finding who my friend was?"

"I met sir Theodosius as a friend," said
Clementina, "and perhaps with more kind-
ness of manner than I ought; but it is
difficult to know how to behave. I dislike
any thing put on, so I gave my naturally
easy manner free scope, and greeted him
K2.196        HOWARD CASTLE.

kindly. I fear he mistakes it for encon-
ragement, and will again distress me with 
an avowal of regard, which, alas! never
can be reciprocal."

  Her maid coming into the room as her
mistress finished the sentence, Mrs. Con-
way wished her good-night, and left her 
to the repose she so much required. 

  At the usual hour she was again at her 
room-door, and rejoiced to find her refresh-
ed by sound sleep,and seemingly restored,
both in looks and spirits; her countenance
had regained, in some degree, the colour
which had almost totally forsaken it the
night before--she was pallid, and looked
completely worn out.

  When lord Howard found it was the
celebrated beauty to whom his mother had
introduced him, he was a good deal sur-
prised at the encomiums he had read upon
her unparalleled charms in the English
newspapers: he thought her appearance 
particularly interesting and elegant, but
did not think she eclipsed either lady Al-
meria Villyers, or his old flame, lady Ca-
roline Seymour. When he saw he enter 
the breakfast-room next morning with              HOWARD CASTLE.            197

Mrs. Conway, he was struck with the
change in her countenance, which still
wore a pensive, melancholy expression:
but he allowed, in his own mind, that it
was most completely beautiful, and that
the P---'s taste certainly was the criterion.
He approached her with all the softness and
anxiety of manner imaginable, hoping she
was completely restored to her usual health.

  She thanked  him with the sweetest 
smile, and assured him she felt quite well,
and ready to proceed on their journey as
soon as Mrs. Conway chose.

  Lord Howard asked her, if she had ever
been in Paris before?

  She replied in the negative.

  " Then by all means," said he, "you must 
permit me to be your guide, and shew you
the capital of France. Here,"said he, "the
fine arts flourish; all that genius and sci-
ence can produce are to be found collected 
in Paris--sculpture, painting, architecture.
When you have examined the works of
man, then we will explore the wonders of 
nature, and proceed into the wilds of Swit-
zerland."

   " Ah!" said lord Stanhope, " you will
198                 HOWARD CASTLE.

there meet with something more interest-
ing than rocks and barren mountains--
Miss Bouverie will meet with a friend."

  "She will meet with those, I firmly be-
lieve," said lord Howard, "in any quarter
of the globe she will traverse."

   He took no notice of lord Stanhope's
hint; but Mrs. Conway did. Quick as
possible, where she was so deeply inter-
ested, she replied--"Do you think, my
lord, her impatience to get to that Swiss
friend will permit her to comply with lord
Howard's wishes,and examine all he has
mentioned in Paris?"

  "That is quite beyond my power of
supposition," replied lord Stanhope; "but
probably her friend will join the party
here. If you remain, I am sure he will be
impatient of delay."

  SirTheodosius entered as lord Stanhope
finished the sentence.

   Mrs. Conway was the only one on whom
the words just uttered made any impression.

  SirTheodosius returned to all his former
assiduity, as a night's reflection had almost
convinced him of success. Her manner
had been so kind, and she was so humane,

                   HOWARD CASTLE.         199

that he was almost certain she would not
give him false hopes; and hopes she had
raised in his breast; but they were found-
ed on his affection for her, which had mag-
nified every eivil word into marked kind-
ness, and revived expectations of happi-
ness from again meeting with her, which
he had, with the most severe struggle up-
on his feelings, nearly conquered. Her
appearing so unexpectedly threw him
quite off his guard; the languor and de-
jection of her manner seemed as if she felt 
pity for his sufferings; and the gleam of
joy which animated her countenance, as
she extended her hand to him, all worked
together to inspire him with confidence
and happiness. He resolved, the very first
opportunity, to again pour forth his pas-
sion, and plead what was perfectly true-
that the affection he felt for her should
always prompt him,when he had the good
fortune to meet with her, to try if there
was anny change on her in his favour. He
had heard that she was engaged to marry
her cousin, and lord Stanhope had men-
tioned it more than once since his arrival
in Paris; but sir Theodosius gave no credit200        HOWARD CASTLE

to it: if there was any truth in the report, 
why did lord Montague continue abroad?
why did he not fly on the wings of love,
and claim his bride? All had been revolved
in sir Theodosius' mind, and it rested
perfectly satisfied that Clementina had no
engagement.

   Mr. Camden and Mr. Byron were not 
at the breakfast-table, and she found they
had quitted Paris at an early hour for Eng-
land. She was not sorry that their party
was smaller; and she suspected that it
would still lessen, as she did not suppose
sir Theodosius would persevere in the 
plan.

   Lord Howard was animated and lively,
but at the same time so perfectly elegant
in his manners, that no one for a moment
could wish them engaged. Clementina
listened with pleasure to a conversation
which was kept up with much spirit be-
tween his lordship and sir Theodosius. She
was highly amused with lord Howard's
playful manner of arguing, which very
evidently betrayed his superior abilities.

   Clementina had no exertion to make, as
she preserved a total silence. Mrs. Con-
           HOWARD CASTLE.            201

way observed the attention she paid, and
was pleased to see her so interested.

  Lord Stanhope had thrown himself upon
a couch, and was perusing an English
newspaper: he at last exclaimed—" Here
is a piece of news which will interest you,
lord Howard."

  " I have read the World," was his an-
swer, " and have found nothing either to
amuse me, or in any way to arrest my at-
tention."

  " Have you so soon forgotten lady Ca-
roline Seymour?" said lord Stanhope.

  " Lady Caroline Seymour, I hope, is
well ?" said Clementina, with quickness.

  " Very well, and very happy, I should
suppose," was his answer; " as the para-
graph I allude to announces her intended
marriage with lord Villyers."

  " I sincerely wish her well," was Cle-
mentina's reply,

  " I heartily join with you," said lord How-
ard, "in that ejaculation; and I should hope
that, from lady Caroline's extreme degree
of good humour, there will be little doubt
of her enjoying a competent share of hap-

                      K 3202        HOWARD CASTLE.

pines, although I do not think she has
chosen the most brilliant peer of the realm."
   " Perhaps" said sir Theodosius, " the
peer she would have preferred to all others
was not within her reach."
   " And was it necessary," replied lord
Howard, who did not appear to under-
stand the allusion, " that she was obliged
to make a selection? LadyCaroline is young
and beautiful,and a general favourite--why
marry a man who is inferior to her, and
who cannot posses her heart? Even was
she on the wane, and her charms fading,
it would be no excuse in her vowing to
love a man for whom, I am convinced, she
feels none."
   " It is a crime," said Clementina, " I
hope lady Caroline will not be guilty of:
if she marries lord Villyers, I am convin-
ced she has an affection for him."
   " Affection," repeated lord Howard, "is
a cold term. The man whom lady Caroline
marries ought to posses her love.  Affec-
tion is what will succeed love."
   " Does it not accompany it?' said Cle-
mentina.
   " Certainly," said Theodosius, with

          HOWARD CASTLE.       203

warmth: " affection is the solid basis;
marry with real affection, and love will
succeed."

  " Let me begin with it," said lord How-
ard, " and I shall not fear a failure on ei-
ther side."

  " And I should not be afraid," said sir
Theodosius, gravely," to marry the woman
of my heart, if I was assured of her having
a sincere affection for me,, or even a very
sincere regard."

  " You would be more easily satisfied,"
said lord Howard, " than I should."

  " Because," said sir Theodosius, " you
are not in love."

  " Then, when I love, I hope I shall be
beloved again ; and trust I shall be able to
say, towards the close of my life (should it
be a married one)—

       ' My first, my early, and my only love;
       Dear source of comfort!--
       Thou art tho softener of my every care,.
       My friend, my sweet compurion, and my all."

  The tone with which lord Howard re-
peated these words, and the feeling which
seemed to animate him, made the most of
his auditors believe he had not only felt204              HOWARD CASTLE.

the tender passion, but did feel it in no
slight degree.

  The subject was dropped with lord
Howard's quotation. Sir Theodosius seem-
ed lost in thought—Clementina was like-
wise busy with wandering fancy; lord
Stanhope continued intent upon the news-
paper. Mrs. Conway and her son, who
was walking about the room, only appear-
ed to know at all what had passed—"Shall
I order the carriage?" said he, addressing
his mother; "we must not trifle our time,
but arrange our plans with method. I
wish to shew you as much of Paris as
possible, and will attend you this morn-
ing, to view some of the wonderful works
of art which are collected in this empori-
um of all that is beautiful in the known
world."

  Saying these words, he turned to Cle-
mentina—"Will it be agreeable to you,
after the severe fatigue you have lately
undergone, to move this morning? If
your body suffers," added he, smiling, "I
know your mind will be gratified; so
which will you indulge?"
  "Both," she replied; "I shall be happyHOWARD CASTLE. 205

to accompany Mrs. Conway and. your lord-
ship."

"Sir Theodosius," said lord Howards 
"you appear in a contemplative mood, 
and quite fit for examining the galleries of 
science. You will make such deep re-
marks as will benefit society in general."

"I am afraid," replied sir Theodosius, 
"my senses will wander from the dead to 
the living."

Lord Howard quitted the room; Mrs. 
Conway had gone a few minutes before; 
Clementina was following, to prepare for 
going out, when sir Theodosius seized her 
hand—" Give me, for Heaven's sake! one 
moment of your company."

He gently drew her to the drawing-
room, and shut the door, saying—" I can-
not longer refrain from addressing you—
this meeting, Miss Bouverie hag awakened 
what, alas! never was extinct—my love 
for you! Will Lime and constancy work 
no change in my favour?"

"None," replied she, with a firm voice;
my sentiments never can alter."

"Then," exclaimed lie, "from this mo- 
ment I bid you an eternal adieu. May
206 HOWARD CASTLE.

Heaven guard you as its choicest care!
You spurn from you a man who is devoted
to you, and whose life would have been
spent with you in endless happiness; now
I must wander forlorn and wretched!"
He pressed her hand to his lips-"Ex-
cuse this freedom, and indulge me for one
moment-the last we shall ever spend to-
gether."

Clementina's nerves were weak; the
agony of his looks, and the tremor of his
voice, shocked her; tears were tracing each
other down her cheeks, as she stood pale
and agitated. At that moment lord How-
ard entered; he immediately saw that his
presence was not wished for. Clementina
started, and drew her hand from sir Theo-
dosius, who fell on his knees at her feet.

Lord Howard saw the emotion they were
in, and suspected it was an interview which
gave pain to both; but he quickly with-
drew.

Clementina observed his writing mate-
rials were placed on a table in the window, 
and that several written papers were thrown
about. She guessed at the cause of his
entering so hastily into the room-she               HOWARD CASTLE.      207

wished to recall him; but the entreaty of
sir Theodosius restrained her--"Grudge
me not these few moments," said he, "I
will not long intrude upon you."

   "Arise, then, sir Theodosius," said she,
"from that posture. My answer is per-
fectly decided, and nothing can work any
change on my sentiments; I again proffer
you my hand, as a very sincere friend, but 
nothing more can we be to each other."

   "Can no event change your sentiments?
There, perhaps, is an engagement? whilst
there is a possibility in my favour, I would
linger at a distance from you, and watch
if there should be any change in your si-
tuation."

   "Nothing can change my determination;
so let us part; get the better of this un-
fortunate predilection, and let us be steady
friends to each other. Gratitude is all I
have to bestow--believe me, you possess it, 
and a very great portion of my esteem."

   "I am not like lord Howard," said sir
Theodosius; " I could be content with
those feelings, and trust to my own love
to ensure yours after marriage."208         HOWARD CASTLE.

     Clementina shook her head, saying - 
"It is impossible!"

     "Then God bless you!" said he, at the
same time passionately kissing her hand:
"May you meet with a heart as truly de
voted to you as this is! I must remain
here a few minutes, to seek that compo-
sure of countenance and manner which are
foreign to my feelings, but which are ne-
cessary to be put on."

     Clementina left the room, almost as
much distressed as sir Theodosius was.
She did not escape to her apartment with-
out being seen by lord Howard, who im-
mediately joined his friend, as he dreaded
the poignancy of his feelings. Mrs. Con-
way had informed him that he was an un-
successful lover of Clementina's, and that  
she feared their meeting might renew a 
very painful scene.

     When he entered, he found sir Theodo-
sius in the greatest distress; he had thrown
himself upon a sofa, and seemed overpower-
ed by his feelings- "I am not ashamed of 
betraying this weakness to you, my lord,
as I am convinced you will commiserate
my sufferings. You have, I believe, never     HOWARD CASTLE.          209

felt the agony of hopeless love; but still
you may pity me."

  "I do, from the bottom of my heart,"
said lord Howard; "but I fear no words
of mine can in any way give you relief-
is all hope extinct?"

  "Perfectly so," was his answer.  "Miss Bouverie's mind is equally beautiful as her
person; she has, from the first moment of
our acquaintance, been in the possession of
my admiration, and, I may with truth say,
of my fondest love.  At first I believed
her destined to marry the marquis of Cle-
maire, and admired what I believed was
beyond my reach: when I found she would
not listen to the splendid offers of the mar-
quis, I ventured to be presumptuous, and
made a declaration of my humble suit;
but all in vain.  Meeting with her has
again rendered me miserable; it has awa-
kended my hopes, which are now complete-
ly annihilated.  She has offered me her
friendship; but who could be satisfied with
such terms, if they felt as I do?  She says
it is all she has to bestow."

  "The report, then," said lord Howard,
"that she is engaged to marry lord Mon-210              HOWARD CASTLE.

tague, is probably well founded; why he should remain in Switzerland, when he has such an inducement to be England, appears enigmatical.  I should, were I in your situation, strive to recover my reason--look upon her as the betrothed wife of another--accept of her offered friendship, and conquer this fatal discase, which will inevitably destroy your peace.  If you fly, still your mind will dwell on her charms.  Remain with us, and learn by me to withstand female allurements.  Mis. Bouverie is beautiful--she is pleasing, elegant, and interesting; but if those perfectins are combined for no purpose but misery to our sex, she ought to be avoided like a contagious disease."
      " Your advie," said sir Theodosius, "may be dietated by prudence, but to follow it is impossible.  I must fly, as I am resolved not to undergo the same torments which I have done.  Change of scene may amuse my mind; and the thorough conviction that I have not the least chance of succeeding may restore me to reason; but remaining in her company would undo all my resolutions: absence alone can restore          HOWARD CASTLE.    211

me to my senses. To gaze on her charms,
or listen to her bewitching conversation,
would not assuage the anguish of my mind
--I must bid you farewell, as this day I
mean to quit Paris. My capricious fancy
will guide my steps; where I shall wan-
der to I cannot tell--but wander I must,
and alone."

   He shook hands with lord Howard, de-
siring him to apologize to Mrs. Conway,
who would quickly comprehend the mean-
ing of his flight. If Miss Bouverie should
ask where he was, he begged he would
says, that she could account for his absence.

   Lord Howard objected to the speech,
and intreated he would leave it to himself
what answer he should give, if she made
the expected inquiry.

   The carriage had been waiting some
time.  Sir Theodosius again desired his
friend would leave him, as he must remain
alone before he gave his servants the ne-
cessary orders to prepare for his depar-
ture.

   Clementina obeyed the summons.  A
deep veil hid her completely from obser-212             HOWARD CASTLE:
vation. As lord Howard handed her into
a very beautiful open carriage of his, HE
raised his eyes to the drawing-room win-
slows, where he saw sir Theodosius taking
a farewell gaze of the interesting object;
he believed he was putting up ejaculations
for her health and happiness,
Clementina’s spirits were very evidently
affected. She made few comments on
what she saw; when she did make n re~
mark, lord Howard listened with profound
attention, as it displayed taste and judg-
ment; but the dejection of her manner
seemed almost to preclude her taking an
interest in any thing.
Lord Howard admired her for the feel-
ing she displayed--it was real heart-felt
sorrow, which convinced him she was cap-
able of returning the warmest affection.
Had she witnessed the distress of his
friend, and had shewn no commiseration
for his sufferings,he should have concluded
She was devoid of sensibility; he now be-
lieved her to he as amiable as she was beau-
tiful. If lord Montague was her favoured
lover, he thought he was not conscious of
the treasure he possessed, otherwise he
           HOWARD CASTLE.       213

would not remain at such a distance from her.

   Lord Howard strove in vain to raise the
spirits of his fair companion. Mrs. Con-
way saw the depression which hung over
her: as she suspected the cause, it gave
her no uneasiness; she saw it interested
her son, but that his polite attention had
not roused her friend from the melancholy
mood she was in.

   When they returned to the hotel, Cle-
mentina retired to her apartment, and there
indulged the weight of sorrow which op-
pressed her. She lamented her way-
ward fancy, which could not return sir
Theodosius' love. The pain she knew she
had inflicted lay heavily at her heart.
Tears in some degree relieved her; but 
she was afraid to indulge her feelings. If
she should be unable to appear at dinner,
what would Mrs. Conway--what would 
lord Howard think of her? The first day
he had spent in her company, to see her
spirits so overwhelmed would be terrible,
and without any cause, as she could not
say he felt so poignantly for sir Theodo-
sius, because she had refused to listen to
his addresses; she even wished to hide, if214        HOWARD CASTLE.

possible, that she was not in her ordinary
spirits; she dressed herself, and attended 
the summons to dinner.

To her great joy, she found only her
friend, both the gentlemen being engaged
- "What an exertion I have made," said
she, as she entered the room, " to com-
pose my manner before I joined, I feard, a
gay party! Had I known I should have
met only with you, I Should have taken
no pains - where are the gentlemen?"

"One of them," said Mrs.Conway, "you
certainly did not expect to meet with, as
sir Theodosius told my son he had bid you
farewell; he sent a message to me, and is 
now many miles from Paris. Lords Stan-
hope and Howard have been engaged to 
dine at the count de Brille's villa before
my arrival. I would  not permit an apo-
logy to be sent, as I assumed them we could
exist one day without a bean. The truth
is, I saw you was depressed beyond mea-
sure when we were out, and I thought 
you would recover the distressing scene
you went through this morning better in 
my society, than when there was more ex-
ertion required. I wish to hear what pass-
          HOWARD CASTLE.              213

ed between you and poor sir Theodosius.
By lord Howard's account, he is very much
to be pitied; he told him his sad tale, and
has moved his compassion exceedingly."
   "Believe me," said Clementina, " I have
strove with myself to regard sir Theodo-
sius in a more tender light than mere
friendship, but my heart recoils from the
klea; and this day I have, in the plainest
terms, assured him that no time, or change
of circumstances, can make any relation
in my sentiments. My answer was so de-
termined, that he never can again have the
least expectation of success. I cannot ima-
gine how any woman can marry from pru-
dential motives, if her heart is not inter-
ested in the cause."
   "You are so perfectly independent,"
said Mrs. Conway, " that you may discard
lovers as you please."
   "Not so independent," said Clementina;
"most young women of my age are blest
with parents to protect them. I have few
relations who are interested in my welfare."
   " Report says you have," said Mrs. Con-
way, " a relation who is very tenderly
concerned."
216           HOWARD CASTLE.

   "The Radnor family are, I hope I may
say,my sincere friends. Lady Elenora and I
are more attached as sisters than cousins."

   " Are you not sisters by anticipation?"
said Mrs. Conway.

   "We were brought up together,"replied 
Clementina, "and loved each other from 
our earliest days."

   Mrs. Conway found she was determined
not to understand her; and as she had not
been entrusted with the secret, a little feel-
ing of wounded pride prevented her from
farther interrogation: in her heart she
blamed Clementina for closeness on a sub-
ject where she could not suppose there was
any mystery.

   Mrs. Conway's character had no conceal-
ment in it; to her friend she would open
her mind without any reservation; she
could not understand why Clementina was
not equally explicit. All expectation of
her long-meditated plan answering was 
over. Lord Howard had not betrayed the
least symptom of admiration, which gave 
her pleasure, as she more firmly believed
than ever that both her heart and hand
were engaged.
   

            HOWARD CASTLE.          217

The evening passed better than Mrs.
Conway expected. Clementina's spirits
became more composed as she conversed
with her friend, and they parted for the
night apparently cheerful.

 
               CHAPTER IX.
                ~~~~~~~~


  WITH the solitude of her apartment, Cle-
mentina's mind reverted to the past events
of her life, and to the misery which poor
sir Theodosius was suffering; the look of
agony with which he parted from her was
imprinted on her mind, and haunted her
as she tried to compose herself to sleep.
In the morning she arose, noway refresh-
ed from the night she had spent; she joined
her friend in the breakfast-room, with a
pale and languid countenance.

  Mrs. Conway, who observed every change
on a person in whose happiness she was so
deeply interested, felt disappointed to see
the dejection which pervaded her whole

     VOL. III.             L218             HOWARD CASTLE.

appearance-"I cannot permit this exqui-
site sensibility," said she, taking Clemen-
tina's hand.
   Just as she said these words, lord How-
ard entered the room; he looked gay and
animated as he approached the ladies,
hoping both were well.
  "I was accusing Miss Bouverie," said
Mrs. Conway, "of not bringing her usual
blooming countenance this morning."
  "It is an uncommon accusation," said
lord Howard, "to be made of any female
in Paris; nature is so rarely to be met
with here, that even a pallid cheek looks
lovely in my eyes."
   "But where there was so lately the most
brilliant tint." replied Mrs. Conway, "I
cannot submit to the being substituted
for the rose."
   "Take Miss Bouverie's greatest beauty
from her," he answered, " and you will
probably restore her sparkling eyes and
glowing cheeks. Feeling, such as hers,
surpasses even exterior charms."
  Clementina smiled as she replied-
"How good you are to remove Mrs.Con-
             HOWARD CASTLE          219

way's uneasiness!" She felt her face crim-
soned over by lord Howard's remark.
  
   "Could I arrest that colour," said he,
"my mother might then be satisfied all
was right; but that is not in every one's
power to do. Could I hold a glass to your
eyes, and shew you my friend, composed
and tolerably tranquil, I should restore
yours; time must alone reconcile him to
his fate, and let him learn, as perhaps many
others of his sex must do, to submit with a
good grace to disappointed hopes; many, I
dare say, have aspired to the same honour,
but one alone can be selected."

   Clementina, as she had done from the
first moment of her meeting with lord
Howard, felt  constrained, and unable to
reply; his manners were peculiarly soft
and pleasing--he admired her shewing so
much sympathy for sir Theodosius; and,
without the very least idea of supplanting
him, paid her the most polite attention.
He was possessed of a humane disposition,
and admired exceedingly in others what
he had in a high degree: he deprecated
all marriages but those of pure affection,
                  L 2220          HOWARD CASTLE.

which he deemed absolutely necessary on both sides.

  The account which sir Theodosius had
given him of Clementina's ingenuous
behaviour to him, raised her character in
his estimation; and the painful sensationa,
which he was convinced had filled her bo-
som since she had witnessed his distress,
gave him a very exalted opinion of her 
heart: the interesting melancholy which 
hung over her made him strive by every
little art to amuse her, without the most
distant wish to ingratiate himself into her
favour farther than friendship might sane-
tion: she occupied his thoughts, but it
was merely the strong wish he had to in-
terest her mind, the recent death of ther
father and of her friend had shook her
nerves, and made them almost unable to
support the trying interview with sir The-
odosius, who owned he had used every
endeavour to move her compassion.

  Lord Howard was convinced, from the 
few remarks she made in the gallery of the
Louvre, she had excellent abilities; but
she certainly was extremely silent, when 
there was nothing to attract her attention     HOWARD CASTLE.     221

-he had never seen her with her natural
flow of spirits.

  In the solitude of Roachwood, Mrs. Con-
way had found her not only a very cheerful
companion, but of superior information; 
she was surprised with her knowledge and 
great accomplishments, as no part had been
neglected by her attentive instructor-the
useful and ornamental had gone hand in 
hand, and combined to render her very 
superior to most of her sex. Unless her
knowledge was drawn forth by circum-
stances, it would remain concealed for
ever; she had no idea of displaying, in any
way, either her natural endowments, or
those art had taught her; what fell from
her lips was the impulse of the moment,
not studied nor digested before it was ut-
tered. The reserve she felt in the society
of lord Howard surprised her, as nothing 
could exceed the elegance of his manners;
perfectly easy, without familiarity-lively, 
without boisterous mirth-and brilliant in
conversation, without making others feel
their inferiority.

  Lord Howard was the most agreeable
man she had ever seen, yet in his com-222 HOWARD CASTLE.

pany she felt silent, dull, and stupid; Mrs. 
Conway saw the change, and wondered 
what could produce it. The first evening 
she arrived, there was not the same expres-
sion of dejection as she now exhibited; her 
feelings for sir Theodosius, she could not 
suppose (unless she repented having given 
him so decisive a negative), could depress 
her spirits in so wonderful a manner: the 
only reason she could assign was, that Cle-
mentina was disappointed at not meeting 
with lord Montague in Paris; she was con-
vinced there was a cause, which she was not 
acquainted with--grief for the death of the 
abbess could not be preying so much upon 
her mind.

The carriage was again ordered, as in 
Paris there is an endless source of amuse-
ment. Lord Stanhope had recollected an 
engagement, and had quitted the break-
fast-table, leaving a book which he had 
been perusing thrown upon the couch 
where he usually reclined; Mrs. Conway 
had gone to write a letter, previous to her 
going out; and lord Howard had likewise 
left the room. Clementina ventured to 
look at the subject of lord Stanhope's stu-
       HOWARD CASTLE.     223

dies, which she did not expect to find be-
yond her comprehension: it proved, what
she had heard of, but never perused, ma-
dame de Stael's Corinna.  She seated her-
self, meaning to read a few pages of the book, pour passer le tems, when lord Howard re-
turned.  He immediately said—" I have
brought a picture for your inspection; I
wish it to be expremely like the original,
and must have your criticism before we quit
Paris, as any fault may still be rectified."

He opened a morocco case, and present-
ed to her a likeness of lord Montague.
She had risen from her seat; lord Howard's
eyes were fixed on her countenance, which
betrayed evident emotion; she sunk upon
the sofa, unable to bear a scrutiny: she
had no reason to dread; but there was
something so abrupt in lord Howard's
manner, and seeing a likeness of lord Mon-
tague so very unexpectedly, all worked
together to throw her into an agitation,
which was not lost upon lord Howard: he
was not surprised, as, to such exquisite sensibility as hers, seeing a likeness of the
man who possessed her heart must give
her a visible sensation of pleasure; he224       HOWARD CASTLE.

thought, probably, the miniature was meant
by lord Montaque to be presented to her,
although he said it was for lady Elenora.

  Clementina gazed upon the picture with
apparent earnestness; but her thoughts
wandered from the subject, to the person
who had put it into her hands; he evidently
expected her to make her comments upon
it, as he continued to stand where he first
placed himself, watching each turn of her
expressive countenance. She at last closed
the case upon the picture, and returned it,
saying- "The likeness certainly is strong,
but may be improved.  How did you
know, my lord, I was acquainted with the
original?"

   "Can Miss Bouverie suppose," replied
he, with quickness, "that she is not an ob-
ject of peculiar interest? as such, where
she places her regard must be know."

  "And is it known," said she, " that
lord Montague is very nearly related to
me?"

  "I believe it is," was his answer; "but
I must hear the faults of the picture, and
have them rectified."  He again held it
before her- "I wish it to be faultless."        HOWARD CASTLE.     225

"The eyes," said she, "are too much
opened, and the mouth has not the pleas-
ing expression which the original has;
 those errors will be easily altered."

She again returned it to lord Howard—
"Will you," said he, "accompany me to
the painter's? I am convinced, by your
remarks, he will be able to make it a per-
fect resemblance. Have you seen lord
Montague since the severe illness he had
at Carnsworth Castle?"

Clemcntina looked surprised.

"I know," added lord Howard, "that
he met with you there; and there he had
so near terminated his existence."

"If you know," said she, with evident
embarrassment, " his whole history, you
must know I did not see him after."

"My last letter (for we are old and in-
timate friends)," replied lord Howard,
"was written from Geneva, and evidently
in wretched spirits. I have since - heard
that you was then dangerously ill."

Clementina felt the strongest inclination
in the world to say—"Are you acquainted
with his very peculiar situation?" but as

     L 3226    HOWARD CASTLE.

such an inquiry must lead to an explana-
tion, she thought it more prudent to hold
her tongue: was lord Howard intimately
acquainted with him, in all probability his
marriage was no secret; if it was known,
he could not for a moment suppose there
was any serious attachment; if it was not
known, she would not divulge it. Lord
Howard had hinted it was suspected where
her regard was fixed, which almost con-
vinced her lord Montague's situation was
not divulged to him;—time must unravel
the mystery which at present enveloped
them both.
   Lord Howard's plan had the desired ef-
fect: he saw and lamented the extreme
dejection which seemed to oppress Clemen-
tina; the idea struck him as he sat at
breakfast, that seeing what he believed to
be an exact representation of lord Monta-
gue's features, might rouse her from the
languor which pervaded both her appear-
ance and manner: if he was a favoured
lover, which he had no reason to doubt,
he hoped his placid countenance might re-
store a smile over hers, which he thought
pity for sir Thcodosius had completely put               HOWARD CASTLE.     227


to flight; her countenance looked more
animated than he had seen it, and her con-
versation less constrained; she made a few
remarks as they drove along the streets,
which seemed to amuse lord Howard, and
Mrs. Conway was pleased.

     In this mood they arrived at the minia-
ture painter's; lord Howard immediately
produced the picture, and Clementina
pointed out the faults, but with such mo-
dest diffidence, that the artist was delighted
both with the critic and the criticism.

     Mrs. Conway was surprised; she knew
not whose likeness it was they were exa-
mining with such strict attention--"Who
is the gentleman?" asked she; "his fea-
tures must have made an impression on 
your mind, as when absent you can point
out the fualts: I never saw the face be-
fore," at the same time taking the minia-
ture; "it is pleasing, and very handsome."

    "It is a picture of my friend Monta-
gue," was lord Howard's reply; "Miss Bou-
verie is correcting some trifling errors, which
certainly materially injures the likeness."

    "How long is it since. you saw his lord-
ship?" asked Mrs. Conway.228             HOWARD CASTLE.

clementine replied--"Five months."

   "And do you recollect him so perfect-
ly?"

   "I certainly do," was her answer; "the 
expression of his countenance is engraven
on my memory, as I remember it in my
childhood--we were brought up together."

   "I should rather suspect," said Mrs.
Conway, "the deepest impression has been
made since time has changed him into
manhood."

   "The features of a boy," said lord
Howard, "are not so apt to impress the 
mind, as when they convey more espres-
sion. There is a picture," continued he,
holding a very striking resemblance of
himself before her, "which I cannot flat-
ter myself you will correct, although it
will soon be the property of a friend of
yours."

   "There is no room correction," said
she, as she examined it; "I do not see a
single fault it has."

   "There is no interesting melancholy ex-
pression to be thrown into my features."
said he, laughing.
             HOWARD CASTLE                    229

"No," said she, "and I hope there never will be any cause,"

  "I should not suppose," said Mrs. Conway "that lord Montague's countenance (if it is melancholy) can betray his feelings, as surely he can have no cause for dejection-his prospects seem of the brightest kind."

  "Most people, I believe," said Clementina, "have, at times, their sunshine obscured by clouds-he is not exempt."

  Lord Howard had been examining a picture with the most minute attention, whilst his mother and her friend were discussing lord Montague's happiness; Clementina saw it was the portrait of a young and beautiful female.

  The artist shewn it him, saying he thought it was a good likeness of the lovely belle Angloise.

  "Am I to have it?" said lord Howard; "it is finished?"

    "Not perfectly," was the answer; he would send it, with lord Montague's picture, to the hotel in a few days.
 
   Lord Howard desired a little alteration might be made on the upper lip, which

  230        HOWARD CASTLE.

was remarkably beautiful in the original.
He turned to Mrs. Conway, shewing her 
the picture--" Is it not a pretty figure?"
said he. It represented an elegant female,
in  fancy dress,apparently not more than
sixteen or seventeen years old.
  " Is this a study of the painter?" said
Mrs. Conway; as they conversed in Eng-
lish, they were not understood.
  " No," replied lord Howard; "the ori-
ginal is friend of mine, and is fully as
pretty as she is represented."
  " A friend of yours, and not known to
me!"
  " I have many friends whom I have not
had an opportunity of introducing to you;
and perhaps," said he, " you might not
give all a good reception."
  " Your picture, you said, was for a 
friend."
  " Yes," he replied, " it is meant for a
female who is very dear to me, and who,
I firmly believe, will be pleased with the
gift. It was taken for you, my dear mo-
ther; there is not a human being in the
world who will prize if half so hghly."
  Mrs. Conway was delighted with the
              HOWARD CASTLE. 231

present; as it was perfectly unexpected, it
was doubly welcome. She had, in her own
mind, concluded it was for the interesting
female whose lovely countenance had ra-
ther disturbed her. Why it should be in
the possession of her son, as the picture
certainly was his, puzzled her; although
she was conversing with Clementina, she
heard what the artist said, which proved
the original was a country woman of theirs.
Her likeness was to be sent to lord Howard
when finished: what could she suppose,
but that the original was, in some way or
other, connected with him?

   Mrs. Conway was not by nature sus-
picious; but where her heart was so feel-
ingly alive as it was to lord Howard's con-
duct and interest, and when she had flat-
tered herself he was as nearly perfect as
human nature could be, she felt alarmed at
the idea of his having an attachment which
he had concealed from her. His rank, his
fortune, entitled him at least to an equal
alliance; his personal attractions and un-
common qualifications, she believed, would
ensure him success wherever he chose to
pay attention. Clementina's fancied en-
232          HOWARD CASTLE.

gagement was a disappointment; still there were many women of beauty, fashion and fortune, in England, who would not reject his _liance: she resolved to remain as short a time in Paris as she could, if the fair form who created her uneasiness was an inhabitant of it. She however rallied her spirits and turning to Clementina said-"I believe it is a true remark, that those who are rich would always have more-this treasure has made me long for another; with a resemblance of you, my dear Clementina, I should be rich indeed; indulge me in the request; we may not again have so good an opportunity, as those pictures are beautifully executed."

   Clementina was standing with her black veil thrown back, her face and hair partly shaded by it.

   Lord Howard spoke in Italian to the artist, and asked if he had ever seen such a model?

   Clementina understood the language, and immediately turned from the ardent gaze of the painter, who entreated permission that she would indulge the lady, and allow him to copy her features.

    HOWARD CASTLE.    233

  Lord Howard had walked round the
room, examining the different pictures
which were hung up, apparently inatten-
tive to what was passing, but in his own
mind determined to have a copy of the 
finest face he ever saw, he would prize it
as the criterion of feminine beauty, al-
though he had had no pretensions to the origi-
nal.  Lord Montague would not surely
object to a resemblance of his wife being
in his cabinet collection; he heard Cle-
mentina assent, if Mrs.Conway would re-
turn the gift, which she very readily con-
sented to do.

  Lord Howard did not again venture to
give his directions before Miss Bouverie,
as he knew not how far her knowledge of
languages extended, she spoke French as
fluently as her native tongue, and he found
Italian was familiar to her.  He handed them
to the carriage, after fixing the next morn-
ing, when the ladies were to sit for the
first time, resolving, in his own mind, that
two likenesses should be done of Clemen-
tina, one for his mother, and one for him-
self.

  After seeing a great many fine buildings,284	HOWARD CASTLE.
exquisite paintings, and statuary, in the 
Louvre, they returned to dinner, and to 
prepare for going to the theatre in the 
evening.

Lord Howard was their constant escort; 
Mrs. Conway was pleased with his atten-
tion, and asked her friend if he was the 
volatile being she had fancied him to be 
before they met?

"He is as totally different," replied Cle-
mentina, "from what I expected to find 
him as possible."

She stopped—Mrs. Conway continued 
to listen, in expectation of hearing how 
agreeably she had been disappointed; as 
the attention of his manner and the pains 
he took to amuse them, she was convinced, 
must have pleased her.

After a pause of some time, Clementina 
said—" What a sweet face lord Howard's 
young lady has !—it is quite bewitching! 
shall we see the original this evening?"

It was not a termination to her silence 
as Mrs. Conway had hoped; instead of 
praise she had listened for, a subject was 
started as unpleasant as possible—" I do 
not suppose she is an inhabitant of Paris,"
                HOWARD CASTLE.             235

was her answer; "probably the picture we
saw is not for himself, but is entrusted to
his care, as lord Montague's is."

   "Do you really think so?" she replied.
"I suspect we shall see her to-night; I am
sure I shall recognize her."

   Mrs. Conway persevered in her opinion:
how was she disturbed, when Clementina 
touched her with her fan, and directed
her eyes to the box where a party had just
entered, and where they saw the original
of the picture!

   Lord Howard and lord Stanhope were
both in attendance; the latter had quietly
secured a commodious seat between Mrs.
Conway and her friend; lord Howard
stood, using a glass in surveying the com-
pany.

   Clementina's attention was completely
engrossed by his lordship; she felt inte-
rested in the son of her much-loved Mrs.
Conway--she believed no other motive
made her anxious to watch his scrutinizing
eye; at last it fixed upon the box where
she suspected his heart was likewise--he
bowed with much animation, and soon
quitted his place.236               HOWARD CASTLE.

  Mrs. Conway sighed, and clementina
heard not a word that was passing on the
stage; she saw him re-appear, and she saw
the lovely Hebe smile at his approach; he
seated himself by her, seemingly gay and
cheerful. Clementina was convinced that
she was the subject of conversation, as they
both looked towards her. She was afraid
they shoud perceive that he eyes were
bent upon them; if she withdrew them,
and fixed them upon the stage, it was but
for a moment: at last lord Howard quitted
his place, and returned to the box, where
he found his seat was occupied by a stran-
ger.

  Clementina had observed, in their morn-
ing rambles, a very remarkable figure, who
seemed to haunt their steps. When they
were in the Gallery of Paintings in the 
Louvre, there were several pepole walking
about, but a very tall man had arrested
her attention; his countenance was parti-
cularly dark and gloomy, and he was
wrapped in a loose kind of coat. She did
not say any thing to her companions, but
the earnest manner in which he followed
her with his eyes gave her an uncomfort-

                HOWARD CALTLE.        237

able feel.  The next day she had again seen him; and just before lord Howard's return to their box, the stranger had placed himself by her; he was in the same odd dress, and his dark features conveyed more the idea of an assassin than any thing she had ever seen before.
     Lord Howard looked surprised; but as the box was not particularly taken for them, he had no title to ask why he had seated himself there.  Had the stranger understood good manners, he would have inquired if he had not taken lord Howard's place? but not a word passed.
     Clementina felt uncomfortable--Mrs. Conway was absent, her mind fully occupied with what she had seen--lord Stanhope in his usual stupid state--and lord Howard looked grave; he dis not approve of the addition which their party had received, and proposed quitting the house before the curtain dropped.
     " Is the carriage in waiting?" said Mrs. Conway.
     "If it is not," was his answer, " I can easily procure one."
     Saying these words, he left the box; in



238                        HOWARD CASTLE.

a few minutes he returned, offering his
arm to Clementina, and desiring lord Stan-
hope to take care of Mrs. Conway.

The stranger rose at the same time, and
said, in German, to lord Howard-"Why
in such haste?"

Lord Howard gave no answer, but hur-
ried Clementina along: she clung to his
arm, alarmed beyond measure, as she ob-
served the stranger followed their steps.

Lord Howard saw the fear which ago-
tated her-"This arm will guard you from
danger," exclaimed he; "I entreat you
to be perfectly composed. When I see
you safe home, I will return, and inquire
into the cause of this intruder's behavior."

"Oh no, my lord," cried Clementina,
with the utmost agitation, "you shall not
run any risk; the man has a weapon con-
cealed: has he not the countenance of an
assassin? Do not expose your life on any
account."

"A thousand thanks," said he, smiling,
"for your anxiety; I fear no stilettos, al-
though I suspect the fellow is an Italian;
I am convinced, from the few words he
spoke, that he is not a German."           HOWARD CASTLE.       239

   The man at that moment forced himself
past them, still earnestly gazing in Cle-
mentina's face.

   A coach was in readiness, into which
lord Howard was going to hand her, when
the stranger again advanced, and said, in
bad German--"What is it you are afraid
of?" He stood between Clementina and
the carriage, and then said in Italian--
"That angelic face cannot belong to a bad
heart: fear not a poor wandering maniac;
I have fought--I have conquered; I am
wounded, and now deserted--will you also
fly from me? I thought you would pity
me, but I am mistaken; you hurry from
me, with fear painted in that sweet coun-
tenance."

   Mrs. Conway expressed anxiety to get
into the carriage.

   "Pass on!" he exclaimed; "I wish not
to detain you."

   The language she did not understand;
and Clementina had no power to explain
his words.

   Lord Howard said, in Italian--"Per-
mit this lady to go home; I will remain
with you."240            HOWARD CASTLE.

  "Ah no, my lord!" exclaimed Clemen-
tina, grasping his arm, "you must not
leave us!"

   The anxiety of her manner and words
struck lord Howard as more persuasive
than any thing he had ever heard; there
was light sufficient to shew him the most
animated expression of countenance.

  "I would not for the world injure any
thing," said the stranger, "which inte-
rested so fair, so lovely a creature. Go,"
addressing lord Howard, "attend your
bridge; she loves thee, and thou art an ob-
ject of envy. Farewell!"

  He left the, and lord Howard accom-
panied them home.

  As soon as they were beyond the reach
of the poor maniac (for they were con-
vinced his intellects were deranged), Mrs.
Conway congratulated Clementina upon
her escaping so well, as she was evidently
the object of pursuit.

   Lord Stanhope pronounced it dangerous
for her to remain in Paris, as there was no
knowing what a madman might attempt.

   Lord Howard, who had sunk into the
most pleasing reverie, had not opened his
        HOWARD CASTLE.     241

lips since the poor object of their terror left
them; he knew what had passed was the
raving of a diseased brain, but they were
a combination of words, which it was dan-
gerous, but pleasing to dwell upon; her
anxiety for his safety, her voice, her man-
ner-all forced themselves on his imagina-
tion, and created an emotion, which he
believed was criminal; he seemed to awake
from a delirium, by asking himself a sim-
ple question-Could he not trust with
perfect confidence the woman he loved,
and to whom he was betrothed, to lord
Montague, without fear or dread? Cer-
tainly he should, and never for a moment
doubt his honour. He roused himself
from the dangerous contemplation, and re-
solved not again to give way to ideas which
were inimical to his peace of mind.

Clementina had not spoken a word;
her thoughts were likewise engrossed by
what had passed. It was strange, very
strange, the poor man's diseased brain
should have taken such a fancy, that she
was lord Howard's bride, and that he was
the object of her love.

  VOL. III          M242     HOWARD CASTLE.

  Mrs. Conway again said--"I hope you have got the better of your alarm?"

  "I was not so much afraid for myself,"
replied Clementina; "I had no idea he
would murder me; but lord Howard's
plan of either returning, or remaining with
the man, did alarm me exceedingly; be-
fore I suspected he was mad, I believed
him armed, and much more dangerous
than I now think him--he is an object of pity."

  "He is," said lord Howard; "and if I
see him again, I will try to find out where
he comes from; he talked of being wound-
ed, which probably has occasioned the de-
rangement. Do you mean to return to
the theatre?" addressing lord Stanhope.

  "I had no such intention, but I will ac-
company you, with much pleasure."

  "After the play is over, I am engaged,"
said lord Howard, "for the evening."

  "I think the evening will be pretty far
spent before the after-piece is concluded,"
said lord Stanhope. "I shall not return,
but go quietly to bed."

  The ladies saw nothing more of either
of the gentlemen. Mrs. Conway remark-
       HOWARD CASTLE.             243

ed to Clementina, their time was almost
as quietly spent in Paris as at Roachwood.

  " You are most ungrateful," was her re-
ply, " when lord Howard has taken such
pains to amuse us; we are never for a mo-
ment idle, except a short time wc have to
ourselves before wc separate for the night.
Of course, your son has many friends in
this great place; he seemed to know the
greatest part of the company in the thea-
tre, and with some of the inhabitants of
Paris, I dare say he is particularly inti-
mate."

  Mrs. Conway sighed, and they soon
after separated.


              CHAPTER X.
              ~~~~~~~~~~

THE party met at breakfast, apparently
with renovated spirits. Clementina eagerly
inquired, if lord Howard had seen any-
thing more of their playhouse acquaint-
ance ?

                 M 2244            HOWARD CASTLE.

   He answered in the negative--"All
charm for him was over when Miss Bou-
verie disappeared; I have heard his his-
tory, which is well known in Paris, where
he has been for some months; he is a great
admirer of beauty, and generally selects
one lady, whom he is violently in love with;
you are at present the favourite fair one;"
bowing at the same time to Clementina.
"I had the satisfaction," continued lord
Howard, "to find he is perfectly harm-
less, and would guard and protect you, as
far as he possibly could."

   "Poor soul!" said Clementina, the tear
of sensibility glistening in her eye; "I
shall not be again alarmed by his strange
appearance. Do you know what circum-
stances he is in?"

   "Not rich," said lord Howard; "but he
has the comfort of his sister living with
him."

   "Do you know where?" said Clemen-
tina.

   "I do," was his reply.

   "Then, perhaps, you will inform me."

   "If it is for pecuniary aid," said lord
Howard, "you would wish to visit them,

         HOWARD CASTLE.        245

I have taken care they shall not be in
want."

  Clementina gratified him by a look of
approbation.

  He continued—" It would not do for
poor Pelatro to be relieved by Bliss Bou-
verie—he has not sense to discriminate be-
tween charity and affection."

  " Pray do not by any means encourage
such a lover," said Mrs. Conway: " I
should be afraid of keeping company with
you, if you had so horrid and grim-looking
an attendant."
 
  At that moment one of the servants en-
tered, with a large parcel of letters and
newspapers, which he laid before lord
Howard.

  " I am to have the distributing of plea-
sure: lord Stanhope, an English packet;
Mrs. Conway, the London post-mark;
Miss Bouverie, Geneva;" be presented
the letter to her, at the same time he
broke the seal of one for himself, without
any comment, or change of either manner
or countenance.

  Mrs. Conway was much more interested
in her friend's epistle than in her own,
246          HOWARD CASTLE.

which was merely containing the chit-chat
news of London. Clementina's counte-
nance betrayed the agitation she felt; it
was not seeing lord Montague's hand-wri-
ting—it was receiving the letter from lord
Howard; she felt confused, and hardly
knew what she read.

  After each had perused their different
packets, Mrs. Conway said—" I think it-
would be a good scheme if we should read
our letters aloud; surely they contain
some intelligence extraordinary ?"

  "Mine," said lord Stanhope, who took
her literally as she spoke, " is from my man
of business, acquainting me he had mort-
gaged."

  " I shall not divulge the contents of
mine," said lord Howard, with quickness;

  " I advise you, my lord, and I intreat
Miss Bouverie, Anil hot gratify female cu-
riosity."

  Mrs. Conway laughed.

  Lord Stanhope joined her, at the same
time saying—" I thought it was a good
plan—my letter contained nothing pleasant
—I expected to be a gainer by the pro-
posal."
    HOWARD CASTLE.    247

  "Very well," said Mrs. Conway, " I
will set the example, and hope it will be
followed by Miss Bouverie and lord
Howard."

  She then opened the paper, and read a
list of deaths, marriages, suppositions, ex-
pectations; and ended by reading, or pre-
tending to read, that the rich and beauti-
ful Miss Bouverie was gone abroad, to
meet with a very much envied lord, who,
if report spoke truth, was to be united to
her in Paris--"Now," said Mrs. Conway,
laying down her letter, "this intelligence
must be very interesting; here sits the
lady in question, with two lords; she
knows no other in Paris---one of you must
be the happy man."

  Clementina's colour mounted into her
face. Lord Howard looked uneasy at his
mother's raillery---"Whoever the lord is,"
said he, "who possesses Miss Bouverie's
heart, I am convinced possesses a treasure,
which, I hope, the man she honurs with
her hand will be sensible of."

  "This seems a serious subject," said Mrs.
Conway, "and I rather suspect you have
deep designs, my lord."
248           HOWARD CASTLE.

  She believed, as much as possible, that
her friend was really on the point of mar-
riage with lord Montague; otherwise the
subject would have been deemed a most
serious one, as all her hopes would have
revived, which were now completely an-
nihilated: in spite of the probability of her
never being nearer allied to her, she loved
her with unabated affection.

  Clementina's letter from lord Montague
was precisely what she wished it to be;
expressing the joy her intended visit gave
to Louisa and himself; describing the lit-
tle preparations they were making for her
reception, and the plans they had laid for
her amusement; he, at the same time,
urged the necessity there was for secrecy,
as he was resolved no friend should be in-
formed of his marriage before it was known
to his parents; he believed, it was the ef-
fects of illness which had made him disclose
his situation to lord Clemaire; no other
human being but his lordship and herself
knew of it, and he was resolved she was
the person who should introduce his wife
to his family.

  Clementina wished most earnestly she
          HOWARD CASTLE.           249

could put her letter into Mrs. Conway's
hands, and that lord Howard might know
every word which was in it: as that could
not be done, the sooner the subject was
dropped the better. She had heard all Mrs.
Conway's news, part of which, she believed,
was made for the occasion : that both she
and lord Howard were convinced she was
to marry lord Montague, there was no
doubt; and, situated as she was, she thought
it was better they should continue to think
so. Lord Howard's heart was probably
engaged to the young lady she had seen at
the play, whose beauty must have made
an impression upon him, and she could not
hesitate for a moment in thinking it was
mutual : his attractions she was perfectly
sensible of, as he was most insinuating in
his manner.. 'The attention he paid her
imperceptibly raised her spirits; the re-
straint she had at first felt in his company,
after a few days wore off', her cheerfulness
returned, and lord Howard thought her a
bewitching companion :. as each believed
the other engaged, they enjoyed the society
most pleasing, without the danger which

                    M 3250          HOWARD CASTLE.

otherwise would have attended their being
constantly together.
   As Clementina did not contradict Mrs.
Conway's intelligence respecting herself,
they both concluded the letter she had re-
ceived was fixing the period for lord Mon-
tague's arrival, and of their marriage.
" What a strange secrecy !" thought Mrs.
Conway; no preparation! not a word
ever escaped her lips which could, in any
way, explain their plans; the recent death
of her father might perhaps prevent the
ceremony taking place, until the time
usually allotter for mourning had passed;
she was sure Clementina's feelings and
sense of propriety would make her delay
an event, which she hoped would be at-
tended with much joy to her; and she
fervently prayed it might be the means of
securing her permanent happiness.  Thus
did she settle it in her own mind; her
friend would return to England, with the
name of Bouverie, but all hopes for her son
were completely over.
   Clementina had, by not contradicting
her assertion, proved beyond a doubt, that
an engagement did exist.  Whilst all their                HOWARD CASTLE.           251

thoughts were busily employed, except
lord Stanhope's who was as usual reclining
with the newspaper in his hand, the ser-
vant again entered with letters.

   "More dsipatches!" said Mrs.Conway;
   "this day seems to teem with events."

   He delivered them to lord Howard, and 
left the room.
  
   Lord Howard's countenance, as he open-
ed one of the notes,expressed the greatest
pleasure.

   "If your face, my lord," said Clemen-
tina," is a true index to your mind, that
bit of paper contains something very pleas-
ing."

   "It does," he replied, "as it concerns 
you."

   At the same time he presented her with
a card, and gave one to his mother: they 
were invitations from the count and count-
ess de Brille-inviting them to a ball which 
was to be given at their chatcan; there
was an ample apology for not having pre-
viously waited upon them--ignorance of
their arrival in Paris, they hoped, would
plend their excuse; the countess was un-
avoidably engaged that morning, but the252           HOWARD CASTLE.

following she would do herself the honour
of calling upon them.

    "Lord Howard declared-" This is
what I most wisher for; I have been en-
gaged with, I believe, all the beau monde
of Paris, for nearly a month, to attend the
splendid gala which is to be given in ho-
nour of the count's birthday, but it would
have lost half its charms, had I gone alone;
now my prospect brightens, as I trust
there will be nothing to impede your ac-
cepting of the invitation." He took Cle-
mentina's hand- "You look grave, Miss
Bouverie,a nd do not give the ready assent
which I excepted; you will be charmed
with the count and countess-they are as
amiable as they are agreeable, and will do
every thing in their power to render the
evening delightful. Their chateau is the 
most beautiful in this neighbourhood; the
grounds are laid out with great taste, and
the views from it are enchanting."

    "Views are seldom seen at a ball," said
Clementina, smiling.

    "The ball-room is to be lighted by the
noblest lustre in the world," was his an-
swer;" the dancing is to commence in the             HOWARD CASTLE         253

open air, and the sun is to witness the fes-
tive scene."

   "Then it is a gala given to him," said
Mrs. Conway; "he is generally put to bed
before any thing is begun--he is even al-
most excluded from the dinner-table in
summer."

   "But, I trust," said lord Howard, " he
will, in three days, see a luminary appear,
who will almost eclipse his radiance."

   "I think, my lord," said Clementina,
"you seem inclined to anticipate the
meeting, as you are mounting too high
for ordinary capacities to follow you."

   "Those cards," said Mrs. Conway,
"must be answered: will you, my lord,
give our assent, as I conclude we have no
prior engagement?"

   "You must excuse me," said Clemen-
tina; "I cannot make one of the party."

   Lord Howard's countenance expressed
astonishment; Mrs. Conway's disappoint-
ment--" I answered without considera-
tion," said she; " I did not at the moment
recollect, that I am not acquainted with all
Miss Bouverie's plans.254     HOWARD CASTLE.

  "You are acquainted with her feelings,"
replied she, with evident emotion.

  "I am afraid not with all," was her re-
ply," as I can see no impropriety in your
accompanying me to a private party; you
must have a reason known only to your-
self."

  "I believe it is likewise known to me,"
said lord Howard.

  Mrs. Conway, with much quickness,
inquired what it was? and Clementina
looked with anxious expectation.

  "Shall I divulge your secret, Mrs Bou-
verie?"

  "I give you full liberty," was her reply.

  "You have an engagement with lord 
Stanhope; he declined a pressing invitation
to make one of the party."

  Lord Stanhope, upon hearing his name
mentioned, raised his eyes from the paper,
but his body still continued the easy atti-
tude into which he had sunk upon the
couch-"What have I declined doing?"
  
  "Every thing which can occasion trou- 
ble," said lord Howard.

  "Certainly," was his answer; "and IHOWARD CASTLE.         255

always shall, when it is in my power: if it 
was the count de Brille's invitation, to at-
tend a ball at his villa, you mean, I had no hesitation in my answer; it was to dance, 
in daylight, and in hot weather: at all 
times I dislike dancing; the only apology 
there can be for it is, in very cold weather 
it may have the effect of circulating the 
blood."
     "Is there no pleasure," said lord Ilow-
ard, "in flying with an admired object, 
convinced that the same thing delights you 
both, the same pursuit employs your at-
tention, the same tune gives life and ani-
mation to your actions?  I could not for a 
second suppose that any man made such a 
remark."
     "I am then an exception," replied lord Stanhope:" I have danced with Miss Bou-
verie, and felt none of those delightful sen- sations: in the first place, I never fly ; 
in the second place, I am never delighted in danging; and the tune has no effect upon 
my senses."
     Lord Howard was highly amused with 
the description; and Clementina remarked,
 256        HOWARD CASTLE.

"The real state of a case was seldom heard:
she believed, in the present instance, it
was the truth."

  "Without any varnish," added lord
Howard; "but you must permit me," con-
tinued he," to answer my friend's invita-
tion as I choose, not as you would dic-
tate; you have no encouragement to re-
main in Paris- go with those who earnestly
wish for your company."

  "If Miss Bouverie," said Mrs.Conway,
"is determined to refuse your solicitations,
I, of course, must remain with her."

  "By no means," was her earnest reply:
"I have letter to write which will occupy
me in your absence; I will not intrude
my company on lord Stanhope, but em-
ploy myself with my pen."

  "Your letters," said Mrs.Conway, "I
dare say will interest you more than any
thing you can see or hear at the count de
Brille's; but you must not follow lord
Stanhope's example, and do what pleases
you the most; other people must some-
times be studied."

  The grave tone with which her friend
uttered these words called for a grave an-HOWARD CASTLE. 257

swer-" Does not this dress preclude
gaiety? How do the habilements of woe
accord with a birthday ball? My feelings
were not put on with this sable habit, nor
will they probably be cast off with it: how
very recently have I been plunged in the 
deepest sorrow! My spirits, by your kind
attentions (looking both at lord Howard
and his mother), have been wonderfully
restored; but they would sink in a crowd,
and I should feel I was not in my proper 
place. The French are a gay, lively peo-
ple: what a figure I should cut amongst
such an assemblage!"

No argument she could use had any ef-
fect upon her auditors; they prevailed, and 
cards of acceptance were written by lord
Howard, who seemed highly delighted
with their success. He promised to ex-
plain to the countess, why Miss Bouverie
had objected to appearing at her ball-
that a birthday ought to have no mourners
present. Lord Howard tried all in his
power to dissipate the uneasiness which he
saw hung over Clementina.

From the arguments he used to recon-
cile her to what she had done, she sup-258       HOWARD CASTLE.

posed he had an idea that she disliked
gaiety-" You mistake me, my lord-my
nature is not repugnant to mirth; I am fond
of amusement, and particularly of dancing,
but not in the present state of my feelings;
I am convinced you are one who would,
in some degree, study appearance. Let
me ask you, were you a stranger, admitted
at the count’s ball, and saw one of the
company joining in the amusements of the
evening, dressed as I am, if you would not
suppose her mourning was outward, and
that her heart had nothing to do with her
sable appearance?"
  " Were I a stranger, and to see Miss
Bouverie," replied lord Howard, " I should
be thoroughly convinced there was no de-
ception in her; that she had kindly obliged
her friends at the expence of her own judg-
ment; and I should think more highly of
her than I can express."
She smiled, as she said-" I may drop
the subject, as I find you arc incorrigible."
" I hope I shall only persevere in a good
cause," was his answer, " and that you will
not only go to the bail, but that you will
honour me by dancing with me.”              HOWARD CASTLE.                   259

  Clementina again shook her head; and Mrs. Conway said-"If you will not dance, why will you go? I wish to shew the natives of Paris something superior to what they have seen before, which I should do, if you will be my son's partner."
  Clementina again rebelled; she positively must follow, in some degree, her own inclination.
  "I am sorry," said Mrs. Conway, "it should be so very contrary to mine: I have made you go to the ball, and I shall insist upon your doing as other people of your age do; I shall sit down to cards; lord Howard, of course, will be engaged, and you will be left to a voluble Frenchman, to pour compliments into your ears."
  "What a horrid picture of the evening!" exclaimed clementina; "how happy is lord stanhope, that he can do as he pleases, and remain peaceably at home!"
  Mrs. Conway's description of how she should pass her time again made her change her plan, and she consented to be lord Howard's partner. He poured forth his thanks in the most animated manner.
  "My character," said Clementina, "in
260       HOWARD CASTLE.

spite of the pleasure you are pleased to ex-
press, must appear as undetermined and
changeable as the wind; I form resolu-
tions, and break them as fast as they are
made."

  " I believe," said Mrs. Conway, " that
you are firm as a rock, where firmness is
required; but pliant to the wishes of your
friends, where it can be of no consequence,
which certainly is the case at present. I
do not suppose you will pass unheeded at
the ball, but not a soul in the room knows-
any thing of you, or your situation; if
you followed the fashionable rules, you
would change your mourning, as it is now
three months since your father's death."

  " And how long since my revered friend
was numbered with the dead?"

  " She has been dead to the world for an
age," said Mrs. Conway; " she is only now
come to life, and you ought to rejoice in
her liberation."

  Thus were Clementina's scruples silenced
by her friend, but they were not removed
by all her sophistry. She resolved to pre-
tend a total ignorance of the French
tongue, which she hoped would save her a              HOWARD CASTLE.     261

great deal of trouble and fatigue; she se-
cretly wondered if the belle Angloise would
be of the party.

    Mrs. Conway's thoughts bent the same
way, although no remark was made to each
other. Clementina believed it was an un-
pleasant subject to her friend, and Mrs.
Conway avoided it as much as possible.
The hour they had appointed for attend-
ing the painter was recollected by lord
Howard ; he was more than ever interested
in Clementina's picture being like, and
wished the artist not to be hurried; the
ladies obeyed the summons, and accom-
panied him.

    Lord Howard found a favourable mo-
ment to impart his wish to the painter, and
received the most gratifying assurance that
he could take an exact resemblance of her
features- that he would spare no pains in
finishing it highly, and making it as com-
pletely beautiful as the original was. Lord
Howard charged him, as he quitted the
room, to make the most of the precious
time, which he did.

   Mrs. Conway pronounced the outline to
be as like her as possible. Clementina was262       HOWARD CASTLE.

equally pleased with the first sketch of her
friend; whilst Mrs. Conway was engaged,
she begged to be permitted to look at the
picture of the young lady, which he had
shewn to lord Howard. She told him she 
admired the painting, and she wished to
examine features, which she thought, from
the slight survey she had the day before,
were very pleasing. The painter, delight-
ed that any of his works could interest
her, immediately brought the resemblance
of lord Howard, and of the female who had
caused such speculation both in her bosom
and in Mrs. Conway's; it was a large mi-
niature, which shewed a good deal of the
figure; a white transparent veil was held
to one side by a beautiful hand, and finely
turned arm; it shaded part of her hair, but
exposed a lovely face looking from under
the thin covering, with a degree of arch-
ness which conveyed both beauty and 
sense.

Clementina was pleased with the fancy,
and resolved that her picture should be
done exactly in the same attitude, only her
black veil to be substituted for the white:
her hair and complexion were fair, whichHOWARD CASTLE.                               263

would make a good contrast: the portrait she was examining was dark, and required the relief of white drapery; she consulted the painter, if it could be done, without giving him much trouble.

He told her, he had meant to ask permission to do hers in the same manner, as her form ought to be shewn as much as possible-"The picture of the young lady," added he , "is flattered; neither your figure or face can be better than Nature has made them."

"Do them justice," said Mrs. Conway, "and you will satisfy me."

"The dress and attitude of the young lady," said the painter, "was the taste of lord Howard; it has been greatly admired."

Mrs. Conway abruptly turned from the picture which she had been contemplating, till the words of the painter seemed completely to obliterate its beauty; she confessed, however, that she liked the style of dress; a painting of Clementina, in the same attitude, would be extremely beautiful. She inquired if the portrait of her son was finished?264		HOWARD CASTLE.
	
	It was not-he had been so much en-
gaged, but promised she should have it in
a few days; he had made the alterations
on lord Montague's mouth and eyes, which
Clementina had pointed out; he now held
before her the most exact likeness she had 
ever seen.
	Mrs. Conway heard her pronounce it
was perfect; and she fancied she saw more
pleasure expressed in her countenance, as
she gazed on the face of her relation, than
she had ever seen before-"How well,"
thought she, " could I dispose of those
pictures, and of the originals!" She would
present the pretty brunette to lord Mon-
tague, and, of course, give his in return:
the two she was most interested in, it may
be readily supposed how she would bestow
them-she would willingly give up her
right, in lord Howard's gift to her, if Cle-
mentina would accept of it, and would
prize the original as much as she wished
her to do; how happy would this arrange-
ment make her! but she feared there were
impediments on all sides, which would
completely frustrate her hopes.
	They spent the remainder of the morn-                 HOWARD CASTLE.      265

ing in seeing the various public buildings,
and admirable institutions, which crowd
upon the eye of a stranger for admiration.
They first drove to the Palais-Royal, where
lord Howard had appointed to meet them;
there they quitted the carriage, and pro-
ceeded under his guidance; the extraor-
dinary scene, so unlike any thing they had
ever seen before, surprised both Mrs. Con-
way and her companion; the view of the
edifice, the length of the double piazzas,
the variety of shops, the motley throng,
the buz of tongues, the sound of music,
both vocal and instrumental, and the va-
riety of amusements which presented
themselves, astonished them with the he-
terogeneous mixture which is daily ex-
hibited in the Palais-Royal. After walk-
ing in the gardens, and making some pur-
chases, in the nicely decorated shops, they
returned to their carriage, convinced there
was not such another scene displayed in
Europe.
     When they arrived at the hotel, lord
Howard told them, he had withstood seve-
ral invitations, as he was resolved to in-

     VOL.III.       N266     HOWARD CASTLE.

dulge himself by spending the day with
them, and attending them, in the evening,
to the gardens of the Thuilleries. Never
did hours glide more swiftly, in Clemen-
tina's idea, than those which were passed
in lord Howard's company: he was in his
usual agreeable spirits. Mrs. Conway was
cheerful and animated; even lord Stan-
hope, who made one of the party, seemed
more alive than common.

Their intended tour was discussed, and
when they should quit the great city of
Paris. Lord Howard declared there was
so much to be seen in it, and in the neigh-
bourhood, that they ought to remain at
least a month longer.

"A month!" repeated Clementina,
"surely you mean a week."

"I generally mean what I say," was his
reply, "but I will willingly adapt both
my language and my actions to your will,
and be guided by you."

Clementina felt surprised by his answer;
she said--"I believe we are to be guided
by you, my lord, at least by your instruc-
tions."

"Am I," said he, "to be intrusted with             HOWARD CASTLE.          267

that important office, to conduct you safe
beyond the Alps, and then give up the en-
vied prize for ever?"

   "It sounds a cruel intention," replied
she, " to desert me so far from my native
country."

   "Desert you," repeated lord Howard,
with peculiar emphasis, at the same time
rising from his seat, and taking a few turns
in the room. His composure was soon per-
fectly restored, and he again placed him-
self by Clementina-" You say only a
week longer in Paris: even the pictures
cannot be finished; if you are so precipi-
tate, every day you remain here, I will
engage to shew you variety."

   "Is it variety Miss Bouverie is in search
of?" said lord Stanhope; "I do not think
you wished for any when you was at
Carnsworth Castle; if you had the same
society, Paris or Palestine would be the
same."

   The surprise which the remark threw
Clementina into was very evident; she
made no reply, nor was there a comment
made by any of the party. Lord Howard

268           HOWARD CASTLE.

was too well bred ever to pursue a subject
which he thought would give uneasiness
to any one; by Miss Bouverie's counte-
nance, he was convinced that lord Stan-
hope had blundered out the truth. Mrs.
Conway's thoughts were as busy as possi-
ble ; the .short sentence had given the party
ample food for meditation: it was an un-
common thing for any remark of lord Stan-
hope's to arrest attention, even at the mo-
ment it was uttered; in the present in-
stance, his words dwelt on the imagina-
tion, and created various sensations.

     Clementina was convinced it would re-
quire very little to confirm Mrs. Conway's
suspicions, and that both she and lord
Howard would imagine the anxiety she
had expressed for quitting Paris was to
meet with lord Montague: they knew he
was in Switzerland, which had occasioned
lord Howard's speech of seeing her safe be-
yond the Alps; her correspondence with
him was no secret, as Mrs. Conway had
given many hints, that she knew from
whence her letters came. Thus did she
torment herself, till she believed that, from
the foolish words of lord Stanhope, she                  HOWARD CASTLE             269

night lose the regard of Mrs.Conway,
and the good opinion of her son.

      The evening was delightful and Cle-
mentina's spirits were restored by the
never-failing animated conversation of lord
Howard, who studied to remove the em-
barrassment which he had observed in the 
manner of his very interesting companion;
he envived lord Montague, if he possessed 
Miss Bouverie's heart; at the same time
he thought,were he a favoured lover, no 
consideration could detain him in Switzer-
land, when she was in Paris.

      The gardens, and the crowd of gay company, astonished Clementina;the lively
and cheerful air, which seemed to pervade
the whole,raised her spirits; she leaned
on lord Howard's arm, who seemed uni-
versally acquainted, both with the com-
pany and with the surrounding views;
most of the objects which arrested her at-
tention he explained to her. She looked in
vain for la belle Angloise, although, from 
the appearance of the gardens, she could
hardly suppose any woman of fashion was
absent, as the gay through seemed to increase every moment;but nowhere could
270       HOWARD CASTLE.

she discover the person she was in search
of: she at last inquired if all the inhabi-
tants of Paris were not collected?

   "No," replied lord Howard, "you will
look in vain or signor Pelatro; I have
observed your scrutinizing glance at the 
passing throng-I believed you were in ex-
pectation of seeing something interesting;
was it your poor playhouse friend you were
in search of? His wandering intellects are 
too well known for him to be admitted
here; his health is undermined by a wound
which has baled all surgical aid, and
which, at times, affects his brain; the pa-
roxysm was on him when he alarmed you,
and he has been worse since."

  "Where did you get your iltelli-
gence?"
  
  "From his sister, who lives with him;
I have conversed with signora Pelatro."

  "I will accompany you," said Clemen-
tina "if you will shew me their dwelling.
Can  I walk to it?"

  "You certainly can," was his answer,
"but I advise you not to explore so miser-
able a place."
  
  "The very reason I should wish to go!       HOWARD CASTLE.      271

perhaps it may be in my power to render
it less wretched. Is there time to-night?"
said she; "I would quite the gardens im-
mediately."

  The animated expression which illu-
minated her face, and the flush of eager
anxiety which lighted up her countenance, 
were not lost upon lord Howard; her
beauty surpassed anything he had ever
seen; and the benignant expression of both
her words and looks filled him with ad-
miration. He exclaimed, with more 
warmth than usual-"I such a minister-
ing angel was to speak peace to the weak-
mined Pelatro, I know not what would 
be the consequence-it requires all the
firmness of reason to conquer feelings
which would be injurious to friendship."
He paused for a few seconds, seemingly to
recover himself; and then added in a
composed manner-"I have taken care
that the object of your anxiety, and his
sister, shall be removed from the wretched 
lodgings they now occupy. You shall
visit the young woman, when she is in a 
more suitable place for you to enter than
where she is at present; your seeing her
272                HOWARD CASTLE.

must be guided by her brother, as your
pity would undo him: it is surely no proof
of madness, his admiring you; but from
the account his sister has given me, he has
been more unsettled in his mind since he
saw you; and I am sure you would not 
add to his misery."

     At that moment two ladies separated
from a large party, who were passing, and
addressed lord Howard, with the utmost
gaiety- "Again do I see you so grave,
so unlike yourself? it cannot be the ani-
mated, lively lord Howard, who is thus
pacing, with slow and melancholy steps,
these walks, which are dedicated to mirth
and hilarity?"

     Clementina felt no interest in the attack
made upon her companion, whose words
still vibrated in her ears, and had taken full
possession of her senses; she continued to-
tally engrossed with her own thoughts,
and inattentive to the lively badinage of
the Frenchwoman, till she heard her ex-
claim- "I will inform Miss Clifford of the
change this lovely countrywoman of yours
has made upon you- I will rouse your fa-
vourite to jealousy, and wake you from
                HOWARD CASTLE.             273

this horrid torpor-anything is better than
stupidity."  So saying, she tripped after
her party.

" Would you believe," said he, as soon
as she was gone, "those ladies are mother
and daughter?"

" I should not indeed," said Clementina.
Her answer was returned without being
conscious of what had passed; the mention
of Miss Clifford (who must be the belle
Angloise), at the very moment her fancy
was dwelling with peculiar delight on the
flattering expressions of lord Howard,
struck her foreibly; she continued grave,
and felt relieved when Mrs. Conway pro-
posed returning to the hotel.

Lord Howard perceived the change in
the manner of Clementina; he attributed
it, not to the real cause, but to her feeling
the distress of the poor Pelatros, whose si-
tuition he regretted having mentioned, or
in any way to have caused for a moment
uncasiness to a mind, amiable as it was in-
telligent- " How seldom," thought he,
" is there such a combination!"  Such ex-
treme personal beauty, birth, wealth, ac
                      N 3

274      HOWARD CASTLE.

complishments, and uncommon abilities,
to be possessed of such sensibility, were
rarely to be met with;and he most ear-
nestly hoped would be highly prized by
the happy man, who certainly was for-
tune's favourite; as he believed there was
not another human being to be compared
to the peasing, fascinating Miss Bouverie.

                    CHAPTER XI

Lord Howard accompanied the ladies in 
the carriage; lord Standhope had met with
a friend, and prolonged his walk, much to
the surprise of the party, as he generally
preferred being carried, to any exertion of
his own. Clementina recovered, in some
degree, her cheerfulness, and the evening
passed tolerably. A servant brought sand-
wiches into the room, but no one seemed
inclined to eat. Mrs. Conway had looked
at her watch, and declared it to be near
bed-time; Clementina, who felt very will-
ing to enjoy the solitude of her own apart-           HOWARD CASTLE.          275
ment, was preparing to accompany her
friend, when lord Stanhope entered the
room, with more haste than usual, and a
degree of animation in his countenance,
which, in some measure, raised their cu-
riosity.


" I have been busily engaged," said he,
addressing lord Howard, " and I have the
satisfaction of telling you, I have been of
service to your belle Angloise; and have
had the unspeakable honour of her arm
within mine, and of nearly bearing her
weight, until I could procure a carriage to
take her home, where I have seen her
safe."


" I trust no accident happened to Miss
Clifford?" said lord Howard, with a voice
and look of much anxiety.


" An accident certainly did happen,"
was his answer, " and I was the happy
means of extricating the young lady from
a very perilous situation; however, she is
perfectly safe, not at all hurt, and her
alarm was soon over."


" Was Mrs. Biddulph's carriage over-
turned?" inquired lord Howard.
" An empty coach was driven against
        276     Howard Castle.

it, with such fury," said lord Stanhope,
" both were broken, and Miss Clifford
was screaming with terror; the coachmen
and servants were so enraged with each other, they could attend to nothing but
swearing and scolding. I luckily was
passing--knew the lovely face of your 
protegée, and was so happy as to get her
out of the carriage--of abusing the ser-
vants, and being the means of the em-
ployers parting with them."

 Lord Howard appeared to listen with
profound attention, and walked about the
room with seeming uneasiness of mind;
soon after, he abruptly quitted it, without
speaking another word.

 Mrs. Conway forget her intention of re-
tiring for the night, and Clementina was
occupied with her thoughts; lord Stan-
hope continued more alive that usual: the
active part he had taken, in the young
lady's cause, appears to have roused him
from his natural indolence.

 Mrs, Conway hoped she might gain
some information on a subject which
deeply interested her, The first mode of
attack was, to congratulate him upon the



               HOWARD CASTLE.             277

great service he had rendered to both lord Howard and his friend, and how very grateful the lady must have been for his assistance.

     Lord Stanhope seemed flattered with the encomiums bestowed upon his, and appeared willing to impart all the intelli-gence he could on the subject; but it did not extend far, nor could he gratify Mrs.Conway's curiosity. The first question she put was, if he knew the person?

   " He was sorry he could not answer at all in a satisfactory manner, as he did not."
   " Do you know the lady she lives with?"
   " i have been in Mrs.Biddulph's com-pany, but I believe Miss Cliddord is a stranger to her; i have been informed no one knew her but lord Howard, and that she is entirely under his protection."
   Mrs.Conway paused and sighed; at last she said-"Form her name, I suppose she is English?"
    Lord Stanhope was of that opinion; he added-" She is extremely pretty, and was very grateful to me for my interference."
278                HOWARD CASTLE.

    As there was no further comment or
question, lord Stanhope concluded he was
at liberty to follow his own inclination,
without having more interrogations to an-
swer; he quietly seated himself by the
sandwiches, which he seemed to enjoy after
the fatigue of his knight-errantry.  The
party continued for nearly half-an-hour,
without any of them speaking, till lord
Howard's return roused them from their
stupor; he appeared to have recovered his
spirits, and expressed pleasure at finding 
the ladies in the drawing-room-" I was
afraid," said he, as he seated himself by
Clementina, "that my mother's threat of 
retiring for the night would be put into
execution; have I to thank lord Stanhope
for detaining you?"

    "If you are under obligation to any one
for my being here, it is to Mrs. Conway
you are indebted; I felt no anxiety to re-
tire."

    "Nor perhaps do you feel any to re-
main," added he; "are you in a happy
state of indifference?"

    "I could not combine the words toge-

there," was her answer; "it must be a mi-
serable, selfish feeling, not to be interested
in what is passing."
  "I am convinced," said he, "that Miss
Bouverie is not one of that class; I firmly
believe that you are not a selfish being, and
that there is no indifference in your nature;
you poignantly participate in the woes of
others."
 "Are we not," replied she, "in duty
bound, in some degree, to bear each others'
burthens?"
 "What an enviable lot," exclaimed he,
" to share your sorrows and your joys!
how it would lighten every pain to have
so sweet a comforter!"
 "It is hard to say," was her answer,
"whether I should be a soother or tor-
mentor; sometimes a wife acts in the lat-
ter capacity--if a wife I should ever be."
 "I do not comprehend," replied lord
Howard, "how a wife should ever prove
an evil; I cannot imagine so solemn an
engagement to be formed, without a tho-
rough knowledge of each others' tempers
and affections; they are the first consider-
ations: if I sincerely loved a women, and

 280           HOWARD CASTLE.

if I was confident I had her heart, I would
marry her in the full expectation of hap-
piness; of course, she would give way to
my freaks of temper, and I should study
hers: it must be a mutual yielding, and
who would not yield to a boloved object."

   "Are there no other considerations?"
said Mrs. Conway; "if a man studies only
the dictates of his heart in his selection,
may he not repent the step he has taken?
and what can sour the temper equal to re-
pentance? If, by a woman's means, a man
joses his own esteem, and the regard of his
friends, can happiness be his lot?"

   Clementina perceived that Mrs. Con-
way's feelings were touched, and that Miss
Clifford was the object she had in view.
Lord Howard's suspicions bent the same
way, and as he believed no mischief could
accrue from the idea, he was determined
not to undeceive her; it was a chimera
which she had formed without the slight-
est foundation, and as he had given her no
reason for uneasiness, he resolved time
should convince her, her fears were ill-
founded.

   "I could not suppose," said Clementina,                HOWARD CASTLE.      281

"that either man or woman could think of
degrading their situation in life by the con-
nexion they formed."

  "Then where is love?" said lord How-
ard; " I find prudence is not left in the
background by Miss Bouverie?"

  "I hope it is not," was her answer; "it
shall be my guide and I dare say it will
be yours, my lord."

  "Is love always guided by prudence?"
asked he.

  "in marrying, study the heart! you ought
to have added, with prudence."

  "Is there no alternative?" said Clemen-
tina, "is there no possibility for either sex
to remain single?"
  
  "It is not always convenient," said lord
Stanhope, who had finished the last sand-
wich; " a man must sometimes look out
for a rich wife, whether there is much love
in the case or not; and I suppose a woman
may be, in the same situation, tempted by
a good fortune, when she has little of her
own."    282        HOWARD CASTLE.

   Mrs. Conway smiled, as she said--
"Yours, my lord, is a weighty argument."

  "And very generally attended to," said
Clementina.

   "I could not suppose," cried lord How-
ard, "that Miss Bouverie could for a mo-
ment have approved of a mercenary con-
nexion."

   "You mistake me, my lord: from those
ill-assorted matches which are founded on
convenience, arise many of the unhappy
married couples there are in the world;
but where either man or woman give up
all considerations but that of love, I cer-
tainly think it would be a dangerous ex-
periment."

   "A man," cried lord Howard, "that is
really attached, must feel every joy on
earth sink in comparison to the possession
of the beloved object.  With her as his wife,
he would run the risk of offending parents,
and all the world; he would fancy a desert
with her would be preferable to the most
splendid scenes of life without her."

   "I am not capable of discussing this              HOWARD CASTLE        283
point," said Clementina, at the same time
rising from her scat: " shall we," turning
to Mrs. Conway, " permit his lordship to go and dream of this happy vision?"

     " Then," said he, " I shall dream of 
you."
  
     " It would be a dangerous vision," said
lord Stanhope.

      Lord Howard gave an answer, but nei-
ther Mrs.Conway nor Clementina distinct-
ly heard him; they quitted the room,each 
convinced that he had made his selection,
in spite of prudence, or any other consider-
ation than love.

     Next morning the counters de Brille
called, as she said, to thank Mrs.Conway,
and Miss Bouverie, for their acceptance of
her late invitation: she knew not of thier
being in Paris, which must head plead her apo-
logy. She spoke the English language 
fluently, and appeared all that lord How-
ard had described her to be.

     A proposal was made for Mrs.Conway 
and Clementina's attending the Opera Buf-
fa in the evening; but as the weather was 
extremely hot,they both declined it. Lord 
Howard regretted being engaged--he284 HOWARD CASTLE.

should not have it in his power to spend
the day in the same delightful manner he
had the preceding.

  Clementina smiled-" Does prudece
dictate that speech?"

  "It was the impulse of the moment, and
of my feelings; the truth was spoken with-
out consideration."

"Had you given time for reflection," re-
plied she, " you would not have said what
you did."

  "Perhaps not," was his answer; " I often
think what I dare not speak."

  "And," said she, smiling, " Perhaps
sometimes the reverse-you say what you
do not think."

  "Miss Bouverie, I believe, is at this mo-
ment doing what she accuses me of," was
his reply.

  "Why should either attempt to deceive 
the other?" said Mrs. Conway. "If we
were possessed of more condour, sincerity,
and poenness with each other, it might
prevent much anxiety of mind, and per-
haps future mischief."

  Lord Howard observed the marked
manner in which his mother uttered these
HOWARD CASTLE. 285

words; he again believed she had a mean-
ing. and that his acquaintance with Miss
Clifford prompted her to say what she had
done. He disliked suspicion above all
things-why Mrs. Conway should suppose
he meant to commit an imprudent action,
he could not divine; he firmly thought
the idea of his being engaged could not be
attended by any very serious consequence,
as Miss Bouverie was beyond the power
of his interesting her, or injuring her hap-
piness: his mother would find he had no
intention of either deceiving her, or de-
grading himself; but he was resolved ra-
ther to teaze her, as a punishment for her
want of confidence in him.

Clementina immediately took the speech
of her friend, which was evidently meant
should not go unheard, to herself. She la-
mented most sincerely her correspondence
with lord Montague, or that she had con-
cealed it from Mrs. Conway: she found
too late that a mystery of any kind was
painful to keep up with a person who was
so deeply interested in her welfare as Mrs.
Conway was. She had not courage, after
all that had passed, to declare lord Mon-286          HOWARD CASTLE.

tague's situation, though she could have,
with the most perfect confidence, relied
upon the secrecy of Mrs. Conway; but
would she not suppose, after her having so
long kept it buried in her own breast, that
her motive for disclosing it could be no
other than a partiality to lord Howard,
and a hope that, upon his knowing she was
at liberty, he might return her regard?

   Lord Stanhope, in the most unequivocal
terms, had declared her strong attachment
to some one at Carnsworth Castle--who
could he mean but lord Montague? All
the reports had combined to make Mrs.
Conway believe her engaged, and knowing
she corresponded with him and confirmed
it beyond a doubt. What could she think,
were she now to declare him a married
man?--that she had kept up a most impro-
per intercourse; she had no one to vouch
for the purity of her conduct--by a con-
fession she might lose what was most va-
lued by her, Mrs. Conway's affection and
protection.

   The day passed without either conver-
sation or amusement. Lord Howard, the
ladies concluded, was happy and gay in
         HOWARD CASTLE.             287

the company of Miss Clifford; lord Stan-
hope was engaged to dine with a party of
his own countrymen; Mrs. Conway was
discomposed with suspicions, and Clemen-
tina out of spirits from various causes;
each retired to their respective apartments
to write letters, but the latter's real motive
was to indulge her unpleasant reflections in
solitude. She wished, in the agony of her
thoughts, that she had never quitted Eng-
land ; she knew the excursion had raised
different ideas—all centered in lord Mon-
tague, and she believed would tend to her
disadvantage. She touched upon every
reason, but the real one, for regretting the
journey she had token; the dangerous so-
ciety of lord Howard was what gave her
the most serious uneasiness, yet she would
not allow herself to think he had gained
more interest in her heart than as the son
of her friend: that he was the most agree-
able man she had ever known, she acknow-
ledged to herself; and that the little flat-
tering speeches he at times made to her
were engraven on her memory; still she
only regarded him as extremely pleasing--
it would be ungrateful were she not sensi-
288	     HOWARD CASTLE.

ble of his attentions, which sometimes, she
thought, bordered on tenderness; but it
was, she supposed, a peculiar manner which
he had, probably to all females; she did
not investigate her heart very narrowly,
otherwise she would have discovered his
attractions had sunk deeper than she was
aware of.

     Mrs. Conway and Clementina retired
early for the night, before either of the
gentlemen returned: the next evening
was to be the countess de Brille's ball,
which made Mrs. Conway think all the
repose they could procure would be neces-
sary. Clementina thought so likewise, but
her senses were not so pliant as her friend's,
to sink into forgetfulness because it was
proper: the agitation of her thoughts pre-
cluded sleep until a very late hour; she
heard lord Howard return, although he
came with all the gentleness possible: he
hoped he had not disturbed her, when
they met at breakfast, as he had been later
abroad than usual. She assured him he
had not, although she had heard him
come in.
He looked at her as she spoke, with atender, but an interrogatory scrutiny, which
distressed her; he saw a languor in her
countenance, that convinced him she had
passed a sleepless night-"Where did
truant fancy carry you?" said he, as her
took her had; "I am convinced your
slumbers were disturbed, by either painful
or pleasing thoughts: I hope the latter, and
that you were anticipating what I sincer-
ly wish ou to enjoy, the utmost happi-
ness."

"When I am alone," said Clementina,
"my thoughts generally dwell on the past,
not on the future; I seldom attempt to
peep into the book of fate, fearful it might
still be a darker prospect."

"Neither the past, the present or what
is to come of Miss Bouverie's life," replied
he, with energy, "can be tinged with the 
somber pencil; all the colouring must be 
bright: so pure, so ingenious a mind can
have nothing to torment it but the little
casualties or life; and I am convinced you
will meet those as firmly as human nature
can do: a diseased imagination, or self-re-
flection, are the evils least to be home: and
290          HOWARD CASTLE.

I can answer for your being perfectly free
from them."

  " Can you ?" said she, with an incredu-
lous shake of her head.

  " She may feel contrition," said lord
Stanhope, " for creating misery to so many
individuals as she has, or may do."

  " Bravo, Stanhope!" exclaimed lord
Howard; " the Parisian air begins to take
effect."

  "Just when we are on the eve of quit-
ting it," was his answer; " I am afraid the
mountain-breeze of Switzerland will blow
it all away."

  " I have a thousand civil things," said
lord Howard, " to deliver to you from
Miss Clifford, who was most eloquent in
your praise: she is extremely grateful for
the prompt assistance you afforded her,
and fully expects to see you, that she may,
in person, express the obligation: will you
call with me this morning ?"

  " I suppose," answered lord Stanhope,
  
  " she will be at the ball to-night?"

  " If you mean to go to meet her there,"
said lord Howard, " I am afraid you will                 HOWARD CASTLE.                 291

be disappointed--she is not to make one of the party."

  "Then," said lord Stanhope,"I will go 
and flirt with Miss Clifford: is she a good
speculation?"

  "In what way?" asked lord Howard.

  "In the only way needful" was his an-
swer; "has she a good fortune?"

  "As I dislike mercenary marriages as
much as Miss Bouverie does,"said lord
Howard, "I shall not answer the ques-
tion; nor, if you have any plans in regard
to the young lady, will I introduce you to
her."

  "I require no further introduction,"said
lord Stanhope; "I am surely entitled to
inquire after her health, when I believe I
saved her life: gratitude will make her 
give me a good reception, and if I have it
proved that she is rich, I will supplant
your lordship if I can."

  "That will be very easily done,"replied
he, carelessly; "I give you full liberty to
make the attempt."
  He feels so secure, though Clemen-
tina, that he has no dread of lord Stan-
hope's interference.

                        02292           HOWARD CASTLE.

   After breakfast the plans for the day
were arranged; they must return early
from their morning excursion, to be ready
for the count de Brille's gala, as part of the 
evening's entertainment was to be a fête-
champetre. The company were invited to
be there at seven o'clock; of course, they
must leave Paris at six, as the chateau was
several miles from the capital.

   Clementina's spirit were not elevated
by the prospect of gaiety; lord Howard 
spent the whole morning with them, and
exerted himself to cheer the depression
which he saw hung over his fair and inte-
resting companion--little did he suspect
that he was the cause: had Clementina re-
mained in England, and paid her visit to
her aunt, lady Radnor, her spirits, in all
probability, would have regained their
tranquillity, and her cheerful disposition 
would have been completely restored, in 
the society of lady Elenora; but fate 
seemed determined to torment her, and to
keep her bosom in a state of agitation.
She wished most earnestly that she could
teach her stubborn heart to acknowledge
sir Theodosius Sydney as its master, but





       HOWARD CASTLE.       293

all her efforts were in vain: her thoughts
wandered imperceptibly, when she tried to
fix them upon him, to something lord
Howard had either said or done, which
was particularly pleasing. She banished
those ideas as much as she possibly could;
as she firmly believed it was almost as cir-
minal to suffer her imagination to dwell
with delight upon his agreeable manners,
as it was to think of lord Montague in
any other light than as a sincere friend:
she almost determined, in her own mind,
to quit the society of her beloved Mrs.
Conway, and return to her native country.
Thus were her thoughts occupied during
the drive to the chateau.

   Mrs. Conway was equally silent; Miss
Clifford was hardly for a moment absent
from her mind. She was vexed that lord
Howard should have formed a connexion,
which she feared could neither tend to his
credit or happiness, and that it was be-
yond the power of possibility to prevent
it: her fears magnified every word which
he had uttered on the subject, and she was
convinced that she either was his mistress,
or would be his wife. He attended them,
294          HOWARD CASTLE.

in a beautiful low hung curricle, in which
he had used his rhetoric to tempt Miss
Bouverie to accompany him; she with-
stood all he could say, as she determined
to go in her own carriage. W hen ho
found his intreaties were unavailable, and
that she gave him no invitation to go with
her and his mother, lie led the way, solitary,
but not forlorn. Could lie have believed
that Clementina's refusal arose from a pru-
dential motive, he would have been flat-
tered in the extreme; and it might have
led him to dwell with rapture upon charms
which he banished as much as possible
from his thoughts: be admired her, in
every way, but he felt towards her as the
destined bride of his friend.

  Had Mrs. Conway and Clementina been
in a mood to admire the beauties of na-
ture, they would have been charmed with
the drive, which was as delightful as pos-
sible ; the innumerable villas, and variety
of picturesque retreats, which belonged to
the inhabitants of Paris, crowded upon
them for admiration. Clementina saw
them, but they arrested not her attention;
a more interesting object engrossed her            HOWARD CASTLE                  295

senses, and rendered her heedles to the 
seenes which they rapidly passed. They
were both, however, roused from their
contemplations by passing through the 
gates of entrance into the park belonging
to the chateau, the gaiety of which com-
pletely attracted their attention--it was
lively beyond any thing they has ever
seen. All ranks were admitted to witness
the festivity; carriages of every descrip-
tion were driving towards the ground
which was prepared for their reception.
The evening was delightful-the sun was 
not seorehing, nor did its brilliancy inter-
rupt the surrounding views, which were
exquisitely beautiful; hardly a breath of
air moved a leaf; nature seemed propitious
towards the amusements of the day, as she 
never was more favourable to shew off the
chateau, and the grounds which belonged
to it.

Lord Howard checked his horses, as he
wished to point out a few objects he
thought most worthy the observation of
the ladies: they stopped on a rising ground
which commanded the whole- the distant
view of Paris, the venerable church of 296      HOWARD CASTLE.

Notre Dame, the Val deGrace, and other
public buildings, make a fine contrast with
the beautiful home scenery of the park,
which possessed every requisite for the
pencil of Poussin. The Seine seemed 
to have gained animation—its sluggish
stream became more lively, as it wound
amidst the variety which ornamented its
banks: it was the boundary on one side of 
the park—the count had taken all the ad-
vantage, as he had planted a natural ter-
race with beautiful shrubs and evergreens, 
which hang over it, and where there were
delightful walks.

  Lord Howard seemed to know every
turn, and described them to Clementina,
with enthusiasm—" Perhaps," said he,
" although you would not permit me to
drive you to this Elysium; you will allow 
me to wander with you, and point out to
you what I admire?"

  " Are we not invited to a ball?" said
Clementina.

  " We are," was his answer; " but as
waltzes are universally danced, and as I 
have heard you object to them, I formed a
plan as I came here: when all were busily HOWARD CASTLE. 297
employed, we would quit the gay and 
noisy throng for the delightful pleasure-
arounds."

Clementina turned to Mrs. Conway-
"You will perhaps .accompany us, if the 
scheme will answer?"

"With the utmost pleasure," was her 
reply.

Lord Howard smiled—" Prudence I 
ever find is Miss Bouverie's guide."

"And would to Heaven it was yours!" 
said Mrs. Conway, with unusual quick-
ness ; at the same time calling to the ser-
vants to proceed.

Lord Howard had no time to answer.

They followed the path the other car-
riages had taken, and arrived at an elegant 
pavilion, which was erected for the dan-
cers: it was of great dimensions, and co-
vered with canvas, which was painted to 
represent a grove of trees, and supported 
upon wooden pillars, connected by arches, 
over which hung, in wild luxuriance, the 
sweetest plants, which perfumed the air: 
the floor was only laid sufficiently high to 
give it a proper degree of elasticity : at the 
lower end was raised a gallery for the band,
298                HOWARD CASTLE.

which consisted of a variety of instru-
ments; at the other was an open gallery,
for the company who chose to see the
dancers.  Near the pavilion were marquees,
for card-parties, wines, ices, fruits, and re-
freshments of every kind; all looked like
enchantment to Clementina, she had never
before seen any thing so gay or cheerful--
the immense assemblage of company who 
were collected astonished her.

  The count, who saw the carriages ap-
proaching, was ready to receive them; and,
in the most graceful manner, welcomed
them to his chateau.  The countess stood
to introduce them to some of her particu-
lar friends; the case, the politeness, with 
which they were greeted by all, charmed
both Mrs. Conway and her companion.
English was very generally spoken when
they addressed the strangers, as the French
nation never for a moment forget the ut-
most good breeding and attention.

  The dancing had not commenced.  The
count claimed the hand of Clementina,
who has to begin the ball with an English
country-dance; she saw lord Howard fol-
lowing, with the pleasing countess, who,              HOWARD CASTLE.       299
after arranging all, with the utmost order
and regularity, joined in her most favour-
ite amusement.
  
  Mrs. Conway declined quitting the pa-
vilion to play at cards; she wished to see
Clementina, and to hear her praises, which
she was convinced would be echoed round
her. Lord Howard and his partner were 
not near the top, so he had an opportunity
of watching the most graceful figure he
had ever seen; the lightness and elegance
of her motions--the beautiful and animated
expression of her countenance--were not
lost upon him, and charmed every one;
the exact time and precision with which
they managed the figure, which was a dif-
ficult one, gained great admiration, and it
was pronounced the most elegant English
dance they had ever seen. The count
had all the vivacity of his country, and
was a most agreeable partner; he had
spent many years in London, and con-
versed with Clementina, with the utmost
fluency, in her native tongue.

After one country-dance was finished,
the company walked about in parties, en-
joying the beauties of the place, the fine-
300     HOWARD CASTLE.

ness of the evening, and the soft tones of
the French-horns, which were exquisitely
played, and sounded beautiful in the open
air. Clementina stopped, delighted with
the sweet notes; they seemed almost to die
away with the light breeze, which at times
gently agitated the leaves--then swelled
into a fuller tone, and sunk again into the
sweetest cadences. It was with general
regret the duet was finished, and the harsh
sound of fiddles, tambourines, &c. playing a
waltz, assailed the ears of the company.

   Clementina withstood all solicitations,
and seated herself with the count and
countess, to watch the dancers. Lord
Howard continued to converse with the
latter: he leant against one of the pillars of
the pavilion ; and, had he ever betrayed
the least symptom of conceit, Clementina
would have supposed he had studied the
attitude he placed himself in--his figure
might have been a fine subject for an ar-
tist, and his countenance the very model of
manly beauty.

   Their attention was arrested by two of
the most lovely little cherubs, who entered
the pavilion, each carrying an osier basket                  HOWARD CASTLE.       301

twisted with flowers,and filled with grapes;
their ringlets of dark hair were tied up with
bunches of roses, and wreaths of rose-buds
were twisted among their hair.  The
eldest appeared about six years old- the
other a year younger; they walked up to
the countess, each presenting her little
basket.

 " You must not give all you have to
offer to your mamma, my little cherubs;"
fondly grasping a hand of each, at the
same time looking at lord Howard, with
eyes beaming with maternal delight; "Ja-
netta, offer this gentleman some of your
fruit."

  There was a bunch upon the top of Ja-
netta's basket, which was particularly 
large and fine: lord Howard was going to
take a few grapes off, when she, with an
eager face, cried- " That is the best bunch
- it is for papa."

  " And this," lisped Louisa, " is for my
mamma;" holding up the finest in her lit-
the collection.

  " No," said the countess, " you must 
love your papa and mamma, but not to
  
302              HOWARD CASTLE.

give them the best of every thing ; stran-
gers must have the best given to them."

  " Must I not give the best to those I
love best?" said Janetta, looking very
grave; " and this is my papa's birthday;
and Louis got this bunch—there are just
so many grapes as he is years old."

  " Oh! if that is the case," said lord How-
ard, " you must take care and not let one
be broken off; and if you will come and
let me count them, 1 shall know how old
your papa is."

  She looked at the count, who gave her a
nod of approbation, upon which they both
approached lord Howard, and looked up
in his face, with the most arch black eyes.

  " I will conduct you to a lady," said he,
taking a hand of each, " who will admire
you exceedingly." So saying, he led them
to Clementina—" Here are two little
Floras come to present their offering to
you."

  Janetta sprung forward, and was seated,
in an instant, upon her papa's knee; and
had the bunch of grapes ready—" Here is
the finest bunch," said she; " I have brought                   HOWARD CASTLE.          303

it on purpose for you-,my mamma wished
me to give it to that stranger, but I would
not; do pray take it-Louis cut it on pur-
pose for you; and my maid dressed me so
nicely, and allowed me to come that I
might give it to you."

The count pressed her to his bosom-
" I did not expect to see my little fairies
here," said he, as he kissed her cherry
lips, and took the offered gift-"They are
indeed fine ones, my Janetta, and will
offer a few of them to Miss Bouverie."

" She is taking some of Louisa's, but
they are not so fine as mine."

Louisa was lisping to Clementina, Who
was delighted with the little prattlers, and 
expressed the admiration she felt to the
count, who looked both proud and pleased
with her praises. He soon after left his
seat, which Lord Howard gladly occupied;
and raising Janetta upon his knee, asked
her if she had seen that lady dance? point-
ing to Clementina.

"Yes," she quickly answered, "and you 
too;" looking up in his face, "and I should
like to dance just the same as she does."

"Then," said he, "if you will go with
304          HOWARD CASTLE.

us to England, you shall learn to dance like
Miss Bouverie."

  "And shall we live with you ?" asked she.

  " And with you ?" said Louisa, who was
placed on Clementina's knee.

  " Yes," was her answer; " Janetta shall
be with lord Howard, and you, my little
love, shall be with me."

  " You live together, do not you," said
Janetta, " as papa and mamma do?"

  " No," replied Clementina, who hid her
blushing face on Louisa's neck, as she saw
lord Howard's eyes rivetted on her; " I
live alone, and should like, above all things,
to have such a nice companion as you."

  "live alone!" said Janetta; "why does
not this gentleman live with you ?"

  "Heaven bless you, mv little match-
maker," exclaimed lord Howard, pressing
the little girl to his heart; " I wish your
words could be verified."

  Janetta looked surprised with the vehe-
mence of his manner—"I will live with
the lady, and Louisa shall live with you."

            END OF VOL. III. 

Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London.
