                      OR,
    
           The Legend of Rosamond.

                  =======

                  A ROMANCE.


                   ======

                BY MRS. ISAACS.
Author of "Tales of To-Day." - "Wanderings of Fancy,"
                      &c. &c. &c.

                         _______


                   IN THREE VOLUMES.

                    VOL. III.- PART I.

                     =================

                         London.

    PUBLISHED BY C. CHAPPLE, ROYAL SUBSCRIPTION
     CIRCULATING LIBRARY, 66, PALL-MALL, AND
     SIMPKIN AND MARSHALL, STATIONERS COURT,
                  LUDGATE STREET.
                      ________   

                        1820.



     
                 OR, THE

         LEGEND  OF  ROSAMOND.

                 ====

                CHAP. I.

   " Old Men, and Baldams, in the streets
   Do prophecy upon it, dangerously."

                                     KING JOHN.

                         " Confin'd together
   In the same fashion as you gave in charge;
   Just as you left them sir."

                                  THE TEMPEST.

     =====================================


    WHILE the events related in the fore-
going chapter were passing, the hours of
Almina were spent in melancholy atten-
dance on Adeliza; who soon after Almina
discovered her abode beneath the same
roof, seemed at once to lose all traces of
the reason that had at times been visible
in her manner, and sunk into apparently
hopeless insanity.  Now, indeed, the
courage and fortitude of Almina were
   VOL.III.PART.I   B
                     EARL OSRIC;
                          
                       OR, THR
                  LEGEND OF ROSAMOND.
                         ===
                       CHAP. I.
                         ===
"Old Men, and Beldams, in the streets
Do prophecy upon it dangerously."
                             KING JOHN.
                     "Confin'd together
In the same fashion as you gave in charge;
Just as you left them, sir,."

                            THE TEMPEST.
  ================================
  WHILE the events related in the fore-
going chapter were passing, the hours of
Almina were spent in melancholy atten-
dance on Adeliza; who soon after Almina
discovered her abode beneath the same
roof, seemed at once to lose all traces of
the reason that had at times been visible
in her manner, and sunk into apparently
hopeless insanity.  Now, indeed, the
courage and fortitude of Almina were

   VOL.III.PART.I.  B2             EARL OSRIC.

severely tried. Condemned constantly to
witness the violent despair, or total apathy
of Adeliza, and to listen to the ceaseless
wailings of Mabel, she was compelled to
exertion, which often seemed beyond her
mental or corporeal strength. The long
nights were frequently passed in the cham-
ber of the poor maniac, for Mabel now
seldom dared remain alone with her: and
when her state was such, that Almina,
apprehensive of violence, was afraid to
indulge an inclination for sleep, she tried
to beguile the hours with conversation.-
One dismal night, when the loud blast
seemed to shake the rock to its base, and
Adeliza, in a sort of death-like stupor
gave her two attendants an interval of
quiet, if not of rest; Mabel, who had
been below with Ursula, returned with a
face full of intelligence, saying, that Mac-
leod, who had been absent, had brought
news to the Tower, that the Scots were
risen in arms to repel the English, and
assert their own rights; and that it was                EARL OSRIC.             3

said, a vast army of English were ad-
vancing over the mountains. " He says
too," added Mabel, " that the thinks they
are led by Sir Ethelred, and if so, that
he will soon be here. God keep him
from us, I say, and the saints defend us
from harm.--Though if the castle should
be attacked, which you know lady may
happen, as Sir Ethelred is fighting against
his own countrymen, why we might not
be worse off for that matter than we are
now.--Holy Virgin ! I declare on the
whole I should not care if they did come ;
and who knows but what the old Seer
foretold may be now coming to pass ?"--
" I understand not to what thou would'st
allude, Mabel," said Almina. " Didst
thou never, lady," said Mabel, "hear the
strange prophecy that hangs over the
House of Douglas ?" " Never," said Al-
mina, " nor do I know thy meaning."
" Holy Virgin," said Mabel, ' I thought
old Ursula could never keep from telling
it to any one, whose ill stars conducted

                     B 2                  EARL OSRIC.

them hither.-She has told it me so often,
that I have it by heart. Many a dreary
night, when we have sat together to listen
to the mournful ravings of my poor lady,
she has related the story, and she says
that the prophecy is written on vellum,
and concealed in a strong chest in the old
Turret library. It was pronounced by a
Seer Lady, a real seer, upon the top of
that cliff yonder to the left, as he stood
with his eyes fixed on this tower, the hit
of inspiration came over him, and in the
hearing of the old knight, Sir Ethelred's
father, and a whole company of goodly
Knights and Ladies, who had been hunting
with him, and were winding up the road
to the castle, he bade them all stop, and
pointing with a shadowy hand to these
towers, he cried out in a unearthly tone,

    You high pointed tower shall bow to the blast,
    And the fame of the Douglas for ever be pass'd.
    The turrets of Douglas shall sink in the main,
    And their glory shall fall sink in the main,
    When a Stranger shall perish beneath Glenmorue's
       dom's.            EARL OBRIC                      5

  And a Southron shall find in Glenmore a tomb.
  When you high pointed tower shall fall from its height
  Then the fame of the Douglas shall perish in night

After this fatal 'prophecy, it is said that
Sir Ethelred's father never again visited
the Tower, and nobody but old Ursula 
and her sons have lived here, and no 
Southron,as they call us,was ever suf-
fered to approach its gates in his life-time;
but Sir Ethelred laughs at the prophecy,
and has often been here to hunt in his
younger days. Oh, he is a strange wick-
ed man and yet even he has taken spe-
cial care that the old turret should main-
tain its station. See lady, there it is, you
can just perceive it from this window,"
and Almina descried, as she pointed it
out, the lofty spire of a small ancient
turret, which overhung the vast deep, and
seemed indeed ready to fall from its pre-
carious hold. "Is it not strange, Lady?"
asked Mabel, "that Sir Ethelred should
hold the saying of a Seer so light- I war
rant me, if had been a great person, an
6                   EARL OSRIC.

such things had been foretold of my cas-
tle, no Southron should have entered my
gates, for fear they should die there."--
"That part of the prophecy," thought
Almina, "is at least likely to be fulfilled,"
and as she cast her eyes on the pallid
form of Adeliza, sigh'd to herself "A
Southron will indeed die here," How, oh!
how shall I support the dreadful scene! but
the decay of Adeliza's bodily strength
was so gradual, that no sudden catastrophe
was to be apprehended, though the cer-
tainty appeared to be inevitable.-- Twelve
months had now marked Almina's resi-
dence in this insolated dwelling, and save
flying rumours, and unconnected details
of bloody engagements between the Eng-
lish army, and the Scotch insurgents, oc-
casionally brought by Macleod, who
seemed enraptured by the bravery of the
new Scotch leader, Wallace, all particulars
of the great public events which agitated
her native kingdom were unknown to
Almina, when one evening, she was has-                 EARL OSRIC.                      7

tily informed by Ursula,of Sir Ethelred's
sudden arrival. She was hurried to her
own apartment,Adeliza and Mabel locked
carefully into theirs,and the keys of all
taken into Ursula's possession. A mes-
sage late in the evening was brought to
Almina from the Knight,desiring to see
her. Convinced that a refusal would only
irritate,and intending to expostulate with
him on his unparellelled treachery,she
obeyed the summons,and was conducted
to the same saloon where she had for-
merly met him. Sir Ethelred had dis-
carded his mail,and in a loose gown was
reclining on a couch,rising on her en-
trance,he approached her;"Lovely Al-
mina,"said he,"how happy do I feel
to be once more restored to thy enchant-
ing soceity.--Ah! too fascinating Lady!
amidst all the scenes of warfare,which I
have unwillingly mixed in, during my
absence, thy image alone has been pre-
sent to my imagination,and to thee,in
secret,have my thoughts been constantly

                    B 4
 8                     EARL OSRIC.

devoted."--"I am sorry for it, Sir Knight,"
said she, coldly. "The possessor of the
Lady Elfrida's aflections, must be unwor-
thy indeed, if he can admit any other
object to his thoughts, save those dictated
by his duty as a Knight, and a Christian."
"Cold unfeeling maid," cried he "to
talk of Elfrida when thou knowest that I
detest her, and that my heart is thine
only. Relent, beloved Almina, I conjure
thee, and receive the vows of him who
lives but to adore.--Elfrida will trouble
me no more--she is devoted to a nunnery,
to which here levities have consigned her,
and leave me free to offer thee my name,
my rank, my all,"--he seized her trem-
bling hand as he spoke, and forcing her to
a seat, he constrained her to listed to his
passionate conversation. Sick at heart,
she waited for an interval, in which to
lead to a declaration of her knowledge of
Adeliza, but in vain. He spoke of the
tumultuous state of public affairs, said that
unable to get an hour's respite from his                EARL OSRIC.                  9

military duties before, he had now left the
army encamped many miles distant, and
flown to greet her.  He appeared to the
alarmed Almina flushed with wine, and
every moment his vehemence increased.
At length, distressed by the warmth and
boldness of his manners, she arose and
would have left him,  "No," exclaimed
he, "by heaven thou shalt not leave me,
and hear me haughty maid, while I swear,
by every power eternal and infernal, that
thou shalt not now escape me.  Long
enough have I endured thy cold averted
looks.-I will force thee to return my love,
and believe, that much as I adore thee,
the conquest will be doubly dear, because
I know thou fanciest thyself devoted to
the cold, stoical, unfeeling Osric."-"Ah
wretch!" cried Almina, thrown off her 
guard by indignation, "dare not prophane
his name with those unhallowed lips."-
"This is too much," said Sir Ethelred,
"now disdainful lady, learn how to brave
my power."  So saying, he rudely seized
10          EARL OSRIC.

her hand, she shrieked aloud ; a strange
sound reached them; Sir Ethelred started,
and let go her hand. A kind of hollow-
groan succeeded ; both stood aghast, the
door was burst open, and the faded fragile
form of Adeliza, wan with sickness, and
wild in settled delirium, presented itself.
Her long black drapery fell on the ground:
over it hung her veil, and her light ema-
ciated figure, as with quick and soundless
steps she advanced, wore the appearance
of a supernatural being. Wildly ap-
proaching Sir Ethelred, who, transfixed
by amazement, gazed at her in speechless
wonder, she sunk on her knees by him,
and in a voice hollow and faint, said—
" I come to offer a petition. Look not so
angrily, for, though now humbled beneath
the meanest reptile that crawls on the
earth, Adeliza was once good and inno-
cent, and still might she have been so,
had she not, in a moment replete with
horror, consented to a dreadful sacrifice,
and in one hour blasted the fair prospect                 EARL OSRIC.                     11

of excellence her early years had shewn.
But it is over," she added more wildly,
"and I am going where he can never
reach me. When I am gone, make him,
I pray ye, a present from me, for since I
have been alone and sad, I have woven
two chaplets, that for myself is made of
willow and cypress, and it shall be hung
on my tomb; but that for another person
is composed of the deadly night-shade.
Tell him to wear it for Adeliza's sake;
she means it as emblematical of the poison
that lurks within." Then pausing from
weakness, while her two auditors still re-
mained in speechless astonishment, she
turned to Almina, and in the same sup-
plicating attitude, "Oh, you," she paid,
"whoever you are, that look'st thus pi-
tiously on me, plead the cause of Ade-
liza Let her grave be decked with the
weeping willow, and the mournful cy-
press, and when faded replace them; but
above all, let her be laid in some lonely
spot, which the sounds of mirth and re-

                  B 612                   EARL OSRIC.

velry can neveer rench, which is only 
frequented by birds that shun the light, 
and where even the sod that covers her
poor remains, may not be overlooked by 
him. But never mention his name, a 
name that must poison the air in which 
it breathes, and contaminate the mouth
by which it is uttered." The poor ma-
niac arose, and Sir Ethelred, so confused
as scarcely to know his own meaning, 
approached her. A gleam of reason
seemed to dart through her disordered 
mind; she shrieked with vehemence, and 
exclaimed, "Ah! whom do I behold?
Great heaven! 'tis himself, and in a 
dread eternity alone can Adeliza hope for
peace,"-With the wildness of returning 
delirium, she burst from his hold, and 
rushing from the room, was followed by
Almina, but in the rage of madness, the 
poor unfortunate had flown down the
staircase. Trembling, she pursued her 
steps, calling vainly on Ursula and Ma-
bel, and with amazement heard her


              EARL OSRIC.                      13

unbar the great portal, from whence she 
attained the eastern entrance that opened
on the cliffs.  It was bright moonlight,
and as she reached the arched gateway,
she saw part of the black garment of
Adeliza, who was springing up a lofty
and rugged rock.  With unutterable
agony she rushed after her.  The fleeting
sylphlike form just met her view, with
incredible rapidity mounting the airy
heights of the promontary ; her thin robe
waved to the breeze, that blew cold
around, and her long dark hair, unbound,
was blown dishevelled over her shoulders.
The black veil she generally wore on her
head, was now wrapt round her, and 
with agitated steps, and wild disordered
mien, she climbed the mountainous
steeps in her way, overcoming all diffi-
culties, with a velocity that communi-
cated for a time to Almina's terrified
imagination, a portion of the insanity
that actuated her hapless friend. She
saw her bent on self-destruction, and to
44      EARL OSRIC.

reach in time to save her, was the im-
pulse and the resolulion of an instant.
Now she beheld her light figure spring
with electric force over a high perpen-
dicular rock, and now, overcome with
fatigue, weakness, and exertion, she sank
back, and for a minute, reclined against
a projection of the cliff. Now seemed
the favourable moment—Almina sprang
onwards, in the hope to overtake her,
but Adeliza eluded her speed, and reviv-
ing, commenced with, renewed violence
her laborious task. Now, indeed, the
spirit of her weak pursuer failed, and a
groan of anguish rent her bosom.

The bright planet of night, and an
innumerable host of stars, guided her
way, and enabled her still to discern the
fair phantom, that seemed to flit before
her. Soon had Adeliza gained one of
the airy heights of the topmost cliffs.—
With a brain almost turned by excess of
horror, Almina saw her prostrate herself
on the ground, as if in prayer, and then                   EARL OSRIC.                   15 

starting up, with one leap she would
have plunged forward into the mighty
expanse of the ocean; but at this awful
instant, Almina darted forward; a super-
natural strength seemed lent her, she
overtook, she seized the light robe waved
towards her by the night breeze, stayed
her sinking form, and grasping her with
wild terror, lost at once all power of
sense feet down the precipice.   16                 EARL OSRIC.

                     CHAP. II.
                     ---------

  "As if that name
shat from the deadly level of a gun
Did murder her."
                        ROMEO AND JULIET. 

  "Tremble, thou wretch
That hast within thee undivulged climes
Unwhipp'd of justice,"
                        KING LEAR.

  "With fairest flowers,
While Summer lasts, and I live here, Fidele,
I'll Sweeten thy sad grave."
                               CYMBELINE.

                --------------

  WHEN returning sense restored to
Almina a recollection of all that occured,
she gazed around, and saw herself again
in her own apartment, attended by Ur-
sula and Mabel; by her side laid the
pallid form of Adeliza, senseless and
motionless. Macleod, and the attendant

                    EARL OSRIC.                   17

of Sir Ethelred,had rescued them from
the dangers of the precipice; but the 
suffering spirit of Adeliza seemed on the
verge of forsaking its frail tenement ; and 
though Almina, whose affright had de-
prived her of reason, at the moment when
she had reached and saved her friend
from a violent death, had revived on be-
ing borne into the mansion, and restora-
tives administered, the poor Adeliza, for
whom she had risked her existence, was
still in a state of total insensibility, form
which she was with infinite difficulty re-
covered ; but the violent exertion, and
the fatigue she had sustained, seemed to
have exhausted her small remains of
strength. Her dim and glazed eyes were
fixed on vacancy, and no sound issued
from her colourless lips. She took the
sustenance offered her, but no traces of
her former violence or resistance remain-
ed, and death appered to be making
rapid strides over her emaciated frame.
Sir Ethelred, hardened as he was in vice,               18   EARL OSRIC.

seemed as if he could not endure a sight
so deplorable, and hastened from the
Tower, saying he was compelled to return
to the army. Much relieved by his ab-
sence, Almina, now recovered from the
injury she had sustained by her fall from
the precipice, a mossy projection having
received and saved them from instant de-
struction, with only some slight bruises,
was able to devote her time again to the
sad task of watching her expiring friend,
but life still lingered, though every ray
of sense seemed fied for ever. Once Al-
mina had hoped, that some interposition
of Providence would have enabled her to
escape from the Tower; but how had she
the power to effect it, she felt, tha unless
Adeliza could be the partner of her flight,
she would reject it; and to heaven she
committed her cause, not for one moment
losing the pious confidence that supported
her through her innumerable trials. Many
days of melancholy watching elapsed,
when as Mabel and she sat on each side



            EARL OSRIC         19

the couch of Arteliza, as usual, marking
her faint mid difficult respiration, Ursula
abruptly entered, and began a dismal
waiting and lamentation, which was at
first perfectly unintelligible to both, till
at length, by repeated questions, they
gathered that her son, the savage Macleod,
had forsaken her, and disappeared from
the Tower. " A well a day," said she,
" that I should live to see this hour.—
What am 1 to say to our Lord when he
comes to know the truth ?" " And what
then is the truth ?" asked Almina. lf Ah,
Lady," she answered, " no doubt he has
joined the rebel bands that are encamped
in the mountains yonder and then should
he fall into Sir Etheldred's hands, he
would be sacrificed to his vengeancc.—
Ah, miserahle mother that I am! What
is to become of me ? Macleod was ever a
surly tempered youth, and our master re-
proving him for some neglect of duty,
when he was last here, doubtless urged
him on to go quite away." " But you20                   EARL OSRIC

have others here in the Tower to guard
you," said Almina. " Yes, lady, yes,
Macleod had too many of them in his
band for that matter, and what I am to
do now he is not here to manage them,
I cannot tell." Almina remembered that
she had heard Mabel mention, having
seen several guant, ill-looking figures at
times ascending and descending the cliffs.

  Have you no other children that Mac-
leod" asked Almina, " Yes, lady," she
answered, " I have my good boy, Valen-
tine, Sir Ethelred's own servant--he is
now with the army Would that his
master would send him to us, instead of
the graceless varlet we have lost." Almina
recollected, that Valentine was one of
those who had conducted her to the
Tower, and that she had then reruarked
the openness of his countenance, and the
gentleness of his mannerw, and a gleam
of hope seemed to dart across her mind at
the suggestion, that he might be sent to
the Tower; but as her eye glaced on the

EARL OSRIC. 21


pallid form that lay by_her,, she sighed
at her own inability to avail herself of any
assistance to escape. Concealing her feel-
ings from Ursula, and panting for intel-
ligence froth that world, whence she was
banished, she enquired why she thought
Macleod had joined the rebels?


"Because Lady," answered Ursula,
"he was ever and anon praising this Sir
William Wallace, who seems to have
turned all their heads, more's the pity,
saying he was a brave man, and a true
Scot, and that, if they would all follow
him, they would be free, and often wish-
ing he was fighting under his banners ;
for you must know, Lady, Macleod has
long been discontented with the life he
led here, and threatening to leave me, but
I thought no ill, believing, that the same
reason that binds me to Sir Ethelred's
service, would keep him from failing in his
duty."


"And What reason is that?" asked. Al-
mina. "That Lady I cannot indeed tell,"
22            EARL OSRIC.

said Ursula, "no, wicked and ungrateful
as Macleod is, I must not do that."
   A deep groan fro  Adeliza, the first
indication of pain or feeling she had be-
trayed, since the night of her fall, here interrupted her. Gradually she seemed
reviving from her lethargy. but the hue 
of her complexion became more deadly,
and Almina was convinced that a very
short period would terminate her life and
her sorrow.
   She understood the disaffection of Mac-
leod had been already made known to Sir
Ethelred, Ursula having at daybreak sent
off one of those she called his band, to the
English camp, with the intelligence; and 
Mabel, grown bold from the certainty of 
Macleods being gone, whose ruffian like 
figure had terrified her into submission;
could not be restrained from accompany-
ing Ursula below, and even hinted to Al-
mina that now was the the time for escape.
   The day was closing in, the heavens, 
gave signs of an approaching tempest,                       EARL OSRIC.

and the fiery gleams of the setting sun,
cast a lurid glance on the fast sailing
clouds, that, through the painted glass
windows, threw a more ghastly hue over
the expiring Adeliza. Mabel had left them
to range about the Tower, now no longer
apprehensive of meeting Macleod, and
Almina, sad and reflecting, sat by the
couch of her friend, when suddenly the
latter raised her head, and Almina, for
the first time, saw her eyes were fixed on
her with a look of intelligence. A very
faint sound seemed to issue from her lips,
and leaning forward, the words "dear,
inestimable Almina" reached her. The
wan hand she extended was pressed
with fervour, and instant was the convic-
tion that reason once more illumined her
benighted mind. Mabel's joy on her re-
entrance was rapturous to find her lady
at length knew her; but Almina silenced
her extacy, by suggesting, in a low voice,
the immediate danger which this sudden
restoration of sense probably threatened;
  24           EARL ORSIC

and too soon her atmost were realized.

  At times convulsed and distorted, the countenance of the poor invalid betokened near approaching death. Still she knew Almina retained her hand, and gazed on her with silent gratitude. At length, after many efforts to speak, she attained faintly the power utterance. "I go, dear friend, "said she "to the only place of true rest. Pray that my sufferings may in some degree have explained my offences. -Then, raising the crucifix that hung on her bosom to her lips, she added, pointing to it, "Here, there is hope; the hope of a christian, Almina, he died for me, for all."-"Assuredly there is, "she answered: "true penitence like this, my Adeliza, will be accepted by the Saviour of mankind." - "Would that the rites of the church were once more mine, "said the dying suffer: "but thou Almina, wilt pray for me: thou wilt plead my cause with my cause with my earthly my heavenly
              EARL OSRIC.                        25 

parents, and the blessings of both will             
rest on thee, for an angel of succour hast          
thou been to the poor Adeliza."                     

  Almina would not suffer her to exhaust                
her little remaining strength by speaking,               
but kneeling by her, she offered up the                
prayers of a spotless heart to the throne of            
merey. Much tranquilized, a soft slum.              
ber stole over the poor patient.  The                        
dead calm seemed like the precursor of                    
death ; and while she watched the torpid                 
doze into which Adeliza had fallen, she                       
saw the storm gather heavily around.                     
Fearfully she predicted that this would be              
a night of horror and of trials, for the life          
of the sufferer seemed now suspended on                 
such an attenuated thread, that scarcely                
could she wish its prolongation ; and yet              
the weakness of human nature shuddered                    
at the thought of witnessing its final ex-                      
tinction.                                                   

  Darkness covered the earth, but soon the                
tempest direfully increased, and the hol-               
low blast mourned around the walls.  The                       

      VOL. III                   C26               EARL OSRIC.

thunders roar;  the lightning's glare
aroused even the torpid faculties of the
dying Adeliza; she opened her eyes,
seemed to shrink from the appalling
scene, and again closed them.  Mabel
crept close to the couch, and Ursula,who
seemed not to like her companions below,
in the absence of Macleod, sought refuge
from the terrors of the storm in the cham-
ber of death.  The wind blew in such
gusts, that the Tower was shaken with
every fresh blast, and the noise to Almi-
na's ear sounded more terrific than she
had ever yet heard.  The contending
elements, the dashing of the furious waves, and the consciousness of the impending
catastrophe, threw an awe so vast over
her harassed mind, that only by a strong
effort she seemed to retain any command
over herself; and seated on the couch,
she presented to the eye an object little
less pallid or woeful than the form ex-
tended by her.

     It was on the eve of a skirmish that                EARL OSRIC               27

Sir Etherlred, retired for the night within
his tent, received intelligence of Mac-
leod's disappearance from the tower..
Curses on the Villain burst from his lips,
and the escape of ALmina, and a disco-
very of all his plans, seemed at once to 
open on his appalled view; for on this
man and his fidelity,ensured by know-
ing it to be in Sir Etherlred's power to
consign him to an ignominious end, he
relied. Ileading a band, who had long 
infested the Highlands, Macleod was a
desperate character,whom interest only
could have rendered faithful; but sir
Etherlred was in possession of means to
make him so; and keeping some of his
horde constantly with him at the tower,
which was made the receptacle for their
plunder, he had undertaken to guard ef-
fectually the persons of those confined
there.

    Old ursula knew not the daring re-
sources of her unprinciples son, but she
too well knew the tie that bound him to

                c2
28          EARL OSRIC.

Sir Ethelred, and though she liked not
his companions, she imagined them also
to be employed by the Knight, and pro-
vided their food and lodging without
making any inquiries, which their fero-
city forbade.

  Aware that his presence for a day or
two might be dispensed with, Sir Ethel-
rod, on receiving information of Mac-
leod's desertion, ordered his fleetest
courser, and followed by Valentine, rest-
ed not till he had reached the Tower:
but ere they attained the foot of the
cliffs, the roaring wind and gathering
clouds portended a storm, which, break-
ing on them as they wound up the rocky
paths, greatly impeded their procedure.
The thunder was loud and aweful, and the
vivid lightning, as it gleamed over his
path, showed him the mutilated walls of
Glenmorne, and with a sickly beam
wavered over the mouldering turrets,
whose fall had been predicted as the
forerunner of that of the race of Douglas.
          EARL OSRIC.            29

  For an instant he felt dismayed, but quick-
ly resuming his wonted courage, he spurred
his steed, and amidst the conflict of ele-
ments, drenched by the torrents of rain
that fell around, wearied by vexation and
want of rest, he reached the portal of the
Tower; but Macleod's absence was here
apparent:—his knocks were unanswered 
his vociferated appeals for admittance un-
attended to. One only of Macleod's band
remained, and he" stretched before the
Are in the hall, was only awakened from
his sleep by the loud barking of the watch
dog.

  Enraged and impatient, when the surly
fellow appeared with a light to unbar the
great gate, Sir Ethelred's anger could no
longer be restrained; and he rushed past
the man, calling aloud for Ursula and her
son. " Ursula," the man said, " was
above, for by what he heard, somebody
there was dying." Almina alone was
present to the distracted mind of Sir Ethel-
red, and lie darted up the stairs to her

               C 330                                    EARL OSRIC.

apartment. The doors were all open, though she was not there, for Ursula, not conceiving his quick arrival probable, and knowing the situation of her charges, thought it now needless to fasten them. The private communication with Adeliza's chamber was unclosed, and indistinct sounds drew him that way. A dismal peal of thunder roared over his head, and a glaring flash of lightning illumined the long and gloomy passage. The wind was encreased tenfold, but his voice calling on Ursula, resounded even to the couch of the dying Adeliza:—she started up, shrieked with frantic violence, and while the name of Sir Ethelred, repeated by Ursula, reached her ear, her eye caught his countenance: for a moment it glanced wildly on him: a lengthened groan betrayed her recognition, and sinking into Almina's arms, her spirit fled for ever.

   The terrific hurricane that blew without was now unheard, for Almina, exhausted by long watching, and overcome by the shock, only heard a tremendous
             EARL OSRIC.          31

sound, as if the whole mass ot buildings
was at one Mow crushed by a thunder-
bolt, and fell senseless on the pale re-
mains of Adeliza. All stood aghast: Sir
Ethelred retreated, and frantic shouts from
below drew him thither, while Ursula and
Mabel disengaged Almina from the corse
of her friend, and conveyed her between
them to another apartment.

  On reaching the hall, in the horror of
mind caused by unintentionally witness-
ing the aweful departure of Adeliza, her
destroyer was rushing from the Tower,
mindless of the raging tempest, when he
was stopped from proceeding by the loud
cries of Valentine and several of Mac-
leod's band, who had just arrived, and had
all quitted their stations round the fire,
appalled by the tremendous crash, which
bespoke the destruction of some part of
the building, and on reaching the portal,
saw the fated turret descend with pon-'
derous sound, from the topmost cliff, till
it plunged into the sea below.

                C 4
32           EARL OSRIC.

  Sir Ethelred beheld not its fall, but the
horrid noise yet resounded in his ear, and
soon he understood the event. Casting his
eyes upwards, he viewed the dismantled
wall, and saw the massy fragments fall-
ing in all directions. His secret crimes
seemed at that dire moment to rise to his
mental view, aind involuntarily he ex-
claimed,. in all the agony of an upbraid-
ing conscience, " It is fulfilled, the tur-
ret falls, and a Southron dies beneath
Gienmornes dome." Even his daring
spirit could not withstand the dismay it
occasioned; for be it remembered, that
from the superstitions of the age, no rank
was exempt: and though he had hitherto
scoffed at the prophesy, its fulfillment at
such an hour, when the victim of his own
villainy perished beneath his roof, was
calculated to intimidate a mind, weak-
ened by conscious guilt, and by nature
and education filled with the superstitious
bigotry of monkish credulity.
  
  Retiring at length to his chamber, he
sought to regain his courage in solitude.EARL OSRIC.    33

The storm began to abate, but the solemn
silence that reigned around, rather in-
creased the peturbation of his thoughts,
and in every sound that broke it, he fan-
cied he heard the dying groans of Ade-
liza. Unable to endure the torments that
assailed him, he gave orders for his steed
to be ready at break of day, to return to
the camp; but he left Valentine at the
tower, to supply the place of Macleod,
with a strict injunction never to leave it,
and to keep watch over Ursula, that she
guarded the Lady Almina vigilantly, as
she valued his favours, or the life of her
recreant son. He also gave directions for
the interment of Adeliza in an obscure 
spot, that had once been the burying
ground of the inhabitants of the tower,
and departed with the haste and rapidity
of one, who seeks to fly from himself,
but it will not be--

"Guilt is the secure of sorrow; 'tis the feud,
Th' avenging fiend, that follows us behind34                EARL OSRIC.

With whips and stings; the bless'd know none of this,
But reat in exerlusting peace of mind,
And find the height of all their heav'n is goodness."

This bliss was at least in the possession
of the otherwise destitute Almina, but her
health had received a shock so severe, that
she fancied she should not long survive
Adeliza, Her once elastic spirits were
cruelly depressed, yet she persisted in
visiting the poor remains of her friend,
and praying for her that repose her soul
could never enjoy on earth. Her death
had certainly been accelerated by the ex-
ertion, made in the violent paroxysm
caused by the sight of Sir Ethelred, on the
night of his arrival at the Tower. It had
been a subject of wonder to Almina, how
the poor insane had escaped from her
chamber; but from Ursula she under-
stood, that having gone to the apartment
of Adeliza, the latter, with the art com-
mon in insanity, had availed herself of a
momentary conversation with Mubel, to      EARL OSRIC.        35

glide behind her, and escape from the
room, and locking the door on them, had
probably pursued her way as chance di-
rected, till attracted by the loud voice of
Sir Ethelred, she had gained the room
where he and Almina were. This ac-
counted to the latter, for her reiterated
calls on Ursula and Mabel being unan-
swered, as she pursued her friend to the
cliffs, They had been instantly followed
by Sir Ethelred, with Macleod and his
comrades, who were carousing in the inner
hall, and rescue them from the dan-
gers that threatened them. The first sub-
ject that aroused Almina from the deep
melancholy that had seized her, from the
time of Adeliza's death, was the Intel-
gence brought by Mabel of the fallen
Tower. "There, Lady," said the d msel,
"you see the old Seer was right; and if
it had but taken Sir Ethelred and Macleod;
and all their vile band with it, I'm sure it
would have been a blessed thing for us-
                      e6
36         EARL OSRIC.

for if you'll believe me, Lady, there are
four or five worse looking ruffians than
Macleod himself, round the hearth in the
hall at this minute, with wolf dogs, and
their great dubs and fire-arms. I am
sure my heart jumped up into my mouth
at sight of them, as I peeped at them
from the great gallery window.—Holy
Virgin! I have done nothing but cross
myself, and tell my beads all the way I
came since. Ursula desired me to say
too, that my poor Lady is to be buried to-
morrow, in an old dismal place, halfway
down the cliffs, and that a monk has been
ordered to attend from the Franciscan
monastery, in some of the isles yonder.
I warrant me it is some creature of his
own ; but he has scared poor old Ursula
out of her wits, by threatening to find
Macleod, and deliver him up to justice,
for some crime he was guilty of a great
while ago, if she does not obey him in every
thing ; and she is so fond of her wicked
«oh, that if he was to desire her to murder                                      EARL OSRIC.                                   37

us both, I suppose she would not scruple to do it to save that ruffian," The idea of the monk who was to perform the ceremony of interment, seemed to present a gleam of hope, and Almina eagerly begged Mabel to discover whether they were not permitted to attend the corpse to the grave. Such a request had however been foreseen and provided against; and they were informed that the descent to the burying-ground down the steepest part of the cliff, was dangerous for a female, and that only Valentine, the Priest, and the bearers would attend. "Valentine," cried Almina, "is he here?" "Yes, Lady," said Mabel, "that is a piece of good news I have to tell thee, Valentine is here instead of that wretch Macleod, and in my mind a very proper young man he is, for when he spoke to me just now for the first time," he said, "I am sorry to refuse thy Lady's request, damsel, but such are my master's orders, and I dare not disobey;" and then he turned to Ursula, and said, 
38                EARL OSRIC.

  "Good mother, I hope thou payest every
proper attention to thy noble charge; the
account thou givest of her grief truly af-
flicts me. Damsel,"he added, "com-
mend me to thy Lady, and say, that if there
be aught in the power of Valentine to add
to her comfort, as far as is consistent with
his duty, she may tax his services."--
  
  "Oh, he has a courtly manner with him,
and didst thou mark Lady his comely
countenance?"

  Almina was too much engrossed by the
melancholy thought, that Adeliza's corse
was not to be attended to its final resting
place, by one real friend, to notice Ma-
bel's admiration. She sighed deeply, and
from one of the gallery windows viewed
the procession, headed by the monk, wind
down the rocks from the Tower.

  Returning to her chamber, she tried to
draw consolation from the message sent
her by Valentine, it seemed to proclaim
a heart not wholly divested of humanity,
and such a being she had not believed                 EARL OSRIC               39

could have been found in the service of
the unprincipled Sir Ethelred.


   The funeral of Adeliza over, the system
of confinement was again adopted, and
Ursula, more vigilant than ever, would
now never suffer Mabel to go beyond the
gallery, a mortification which the damsel
took much to heart, since she had seen
and conversed with Valentine.  Sir Ethel-
red, meantime in a state of mind not
very enviable, reached the camp; here
news awaited him of the entire defeat of
Lord de Warren, at Stirling, and his re-
treat to Berwick; which, pursued by 
Wallace, he had been compelled to aban-
don, and was now returned to communi-
cate his ill success to the King, whose
arrival from the Continent was daily ex-
pected. With him, he knew Earl Osric
would be once more restored to his coun-
try, but not as heretofore would the laurel
of victory deck his brows, for the conti-
nental expedition had been singularly
unfortunate, and he knew too well the


40 EARL OSRIC.

principles of the Earl, to believe that he
would ever take up arms against the Scots,
whom, in some degree, he considered his
countrymen. On the ancient ground of
the King's displeasure, against Osric, he
rested for the completion of his own plans,
whenever the power should be in his
hands. Once returned from Flanders, he
had no doubt the vengeance of Edward
would fall on the Scottish nation, and that
the whole force of the kingdom would be
sent against them. For himself, attracted
as he was by inclination to Glenmorne, he
was compelled by his military duties to
absent himself; but he relied on the fears
of Ursula for the safety of her son, the
fidelity of Valentine, and the obedience
of the daring remains of Macleod's band,
who guarded the Tower, to prevent the
escape of Almina, till he should be enabled
to return, and complete the villainous
purposes which he had ventured so much
to accomplish.
     CHAP. III.

          -----

              "Let's away,
 Devise the fittest time, and safest way,
 To hide us from pursuit, that will be made
 After my flight."

                                AS YOU LIKE IT.

               "A brave vessel,
Who had, no doubt, some noble creatures in her,
Dash'd all to pieces; O the cry did knock
Against my very heart; Poor souls; They  perish'd."

                                THE TENANT

      ---------------------------------

   It was one morning much later than
usual, and Ursula appeared not with their 
breakfast, Almina had been long arisen,
and having now no Adeliza to whom her
tender cares were acceptable, was obliged
to have recourse to her hoarded treasure
of old books, or her own sad thought;
she was indulging the latter as she paced42        EARL OSRIC.

the gallery, when she was roused by the
loud murmurs of Mabel at Ursula's neg-
lect.  "Why, what does that old woman
mean, that we are to be shut up here and
be starved, I wonder."  Said she, "I
pray ye Lady, let us call at the gallery door.
Who knows but she may have run away
after Macleod, and then we may die of 
hunger, while she is running about the
mountains to look for her son."  "If thou
canst make her hear," said Almina, "I
have no objection, for in truth the sun is
so high, that I think it must be much
later than she is wont to attend."  The
loud shouts and cries of Mabel were for 
some time unheard.  "As sure as fate
Lady she is gone, and we are left in a fine
plight," said Mabel in a crying tone; but
as she spoke, steps, unlike those of Ur-
sula, were heard, and the door soon after
unlocked by Valentine.  His mother, he
said, had been seized with sudden illness,
and unable to rise from her bed, had
waited his return from the peasants, of       EARL OSRIC.         43

whom he had been to purchase provisions,
to depute him in her stead.

  If Almina, in her journey to the Tower, 
had been struck with the fine open coun-
tenance of Valentine, she was now much
more so, and humanely expressed her re-
gret for the illness of Ursula: she request-
ed to have breakfast brought in immedi-
ately, adding that, if she or Mabel could
be of service to his mother, they would
readily visit her. Much emotion evident-
ly appeared in the manner of Valentine,
as he expressed his thanks for her conde-
scension, and she was directed by him to 
the chamber of the old woman, whose in-
disposition seemed to have originated from
her terror for the fate of her worthless som
He had first become known to Sir Ethel-
red, by the latter detecting him in some
practices for which his life would have
been forfeited, but for the Knight's inter-
position; and finding him a character
suited to his purposes, he had been em-
ployed in the execution of many of those 44                                   EARL OSRIC.

plans, which could not meet the eye of day: but Macleod was daring and adventrous, and having taken a disgust to his employer, from some reproof he had received, he resolved to free himself from his controul, and enter the bands of the Scottish leader.

   Knowing the life of her son to be in Sir Ethelred's power, it had been easy to terrify Ursula, by the fear of that power being exerted, and thus attach her to his interest. It was in vain that Valentine had represented the certainty of his brothers being now beyond his reach; she fretted till she had added sickness to age and infirmity, and was now unable to rise. Endeavouring to appease her, by joining her assurances to those of Valentine, that Macleod had finally escaped, and was safe beneath the banners of the victorious Wallace, Almina, when she saw her quieted by their united efforts, had leisure to reflect on the advantage that might be derived to herself from Ursula's inability to                  EARL OSRIC.                   45
watch and attedn them, and resolved to
seinze an immediate opportunity of addre.s-
ing Valentine, to discover wheather he were
indeed the tool of Sir Ethelred, or capable
of an exertion of humanity that would
resuce her from her present enthralinent.
Soon it occured. Ursula grew worse,
and Valentine was their only attendant ;
but Mable had informed her, that the ill-
looking men of Macleod's band, still
guarded the Tower,for as she accompanied
Valentine to and from their apartment,
she had seen at different times either
seated round the fire in the hall, or walk-
ing on the ramparts, that looked to the
sea. Almina had made up her mind to
address Valentine; in the evening of the
second day, having, during the interme-
diate time, particularly noticed his coun-
tenance and demenaour. Every observa-
tion was in his favour, the former was
open and manly, the latter, bumble and
respectful, without being obsequions.--
She would have entered with caution on46                   EARL OSRIC.

the subject, but the time seemed to admit
of no delay, and the opportunity of Ur-
sula's illness once lost might be never re-
gained. He listened in profound silence
to her expostulations, and then looking
cautiously around, he said, "Lady, I
am not unprepared for this address, but I
have infinite difficulties to encounter.--
You at present know me only as the ser-
vant and vassal of Sir Ethelred Douglas;
it is true, I have been reared by his
bounty, but I trust I have a just abhor-
rence of his vices. From the first mo-
ment I beheld you, Lady, I meditated
your liberation, and often since has it
employed my thoughts, but powerless to
accomplish it, what could I do? Provi-
dence has now put it in my power, but
my mother must not be left to feel alone,
all the vengeance of Sir Ethelred. If,
therefore, I can evade the guards below,
I would convey her at night to a cottage,
a  league from hence, where resides a
peasant, who, for a small sum, would                   EARL OSRIC                     47

take charge of her till I have placed you,
Lady, in safety." This ready acquiescence
was almost beyond even Almina's hopes,
and gratefully she acceded to the plan he
now proposed, that she should hold her-
self readiness for the next night, and
he departed to prepare Ursula for her
removal. her naturally weak intellect,
reduced by grief, fear, and sickness to per-
feet imbecility, she could not resist his
reasoning and persuasions; and after giv-
ing the band reason to believe he had re-
tired to bed, he prevailed on his mother
to rise, and supported by him, she reached
through the private avenues, the outer
buildings. Here she rested, while he 
prepared the steed, which had brought
him there, and placing her carefully on it,
they descended the cliffs. Bred amidst
the mountains, and inured to hardships,
Valentine, though during his attendance
on Sir Ethelred he had acquired more
courtly manners, had not forgotten early
habits ; and with a natural spirit for ad-48     EARL OSRIC.

venture, he had all the hardihood and
courage of a Knight.

  E're morning's dawn, the indefatigable
young man had placed his aged parent in
safety, and was returned, allowing him-
self no rest till once more within the walls
of the Tower, lest the ruffian inhabitants
should by some evil chance suspect his
absence. With her breakfast, after a
night of great anxiety, Almina with de-
light held Valentine. He assured her
that all succeeded to his wish, and that
he had provided for her departure. "But
whither," said Almina, "wilt thou con-
duct us?" "A hut five leagues from
hence, Lady," said he, "will for the pre-
sent shelter you, inhabited by an old
man and woman whom I well know, there
you had better secrete yourselves, till
you can venture to travel with safety. --
For my own part, I am tired of being the
agent of villainy, and shall away to Eng-
land. Sir Ethelred Douglas knows the
secrets in my possesion, and dares not
                  EARL OSRIC.                     49

molest me, if once I enter the army,
which I will do, as soon as I can." He
now directed them to quit their chamber,
the door of which he would leave un-
barred, as soon as the great clock had
chimed midnight, to meet him in a re-
mote part of the building, the way to 
which he described. This being agreed
to, he left them; and now Almina, with
thankfulness, reflected with unbeliev-
ung delight on her approaching escape.-
With a palpitaing heart, she saw the
hour approach, and aided Mabel in the few necessary preparations.

   Invigorated by the hope of freedom,
she felt quite equal to the undertaking,
and at the appointed time, after invoking
the blessing of heaven on their enterprize,
they softly stole into the gallery. No
sound reached them, and learning on
Mabel, she proceeded to the place of
appointment, where they found Valentine
waiting for them. He had provided two
fleet horses, which, he said, were waiting
   VOL III.    D

50         EARL OSRIC.

at the foot of the rocks, and now Almina
was to undertake the descent of this im-
mense promontory, she felt the weakness,
which misery and confinement had pro-
duced; but she had able supporters, and
between them, she proceeded as expedi-
tiously as the rough and craggy path would
allow. Long and tedious was their
march, but the attention of Valentine was
incessant, and Mabel, happy in recovered
liberty, chattered without ceasing. They
had seen the horses fastened to a part of
the rock, long before they reached them,
and Valentine, seating Almina on one,
and taking Mabel behind him on the
other, they proceeded on their way.

  Dark clouds soon overshadowed the
face of the moon, and all around was
gloomy and cheerless; but the heart of
Almina was light, at the thoughts of
having escaped from the power of Sir
Ethelred. Some hours elapsed, before
they could find any place to stop at; and
at length, soon after sun-rise, they rested             EARL OSRIC.                51
 
  at a shepherd's cottage, where they ob- 
  tained some milk and oaten bread, and
  then hastened onwards. The shades of 
  night were nearly spread over the earth,
  when they arrived at the place of their
  destination.It was situated in an obscure
  dell, remote from any road, and hidden 
  from observation by the thick trees that
  grew around it. The party was received
  with a hospitable welcome by the two
  ancient inmates of the cottage, who agreed
  to receive Almina and her attendant as
  their guests for the present, having one
  small inner room, which they consented
  they should have for their entire use.-
  The strength of Almina was quite ex-
  hausted,by the exertion she had used,
  and she was obliged to retire to the hum-
  ble bed prepared for her, from which she
  was for many days unable to rise.
       Valentine, now in despair, believed all
  his efforts had been unavailing, his hope
  of evading pursuit rested on soon reaching
  England, but Almina's illness forbade all
                   
                    D2 52             EARL OSRIC.

attempts to travel at present, Her mind,
debilitated by her late trials, seemed for
some days to partake the body's weak-
ness; but in this interval, Valentine
learned, that they had nothing to fear
immediately from Sir Ethelred, the Eng-
lish army having quitted those parts, and
the Knight, not, of course, having had
time to visit the Tower, was still ignorant
of the events that had occurred there.-
The state of the country was, however,
dangerous in the extreme. Every where
the Scots were in arms, and the only fea-
sible plan he could devise, was to gain
Almina's consent to get a passage in some
vessel, which would land them on the
English coast. Besides being more ex-
peditious, this scheme promised far greater
safety, than a journey through a country
desolated by war, and a prey to the plun-
der and ravages of the soldiery. The
reasoning of Valentine was indeed so
plausible, that Almina thought this plan
the best she could adopt. She longed for
          EARL OSRIC.         53

safety and repose—her strength was now
recruited—and her health daily improved!
To Valentine she committed the care of
providing for the little voyage. The
money and few ornaments she possessed,
with what Mabel and Valentine could
command, the latter assured her would
be sufficient, and once in England, she
resolved to reward her deliverer amply.

  After a residence of some weeks in the
obscure fishing hut on the coast, they at
length procured a passage, on board a
trading vessel, which agreed to land them
on the shore of England, and joyfully was
the day hailed, that witnessed their depar-
ture from the cottage. It was the first
time in her life, that Almina had ven-
tured on the stormy element, which for
months past, she had viewed from her
window ; but the calmness of the wea-
ther, the favourable wind that swelled the
sails, the serenity of the water, and more
than all, the hopes of soon reaching her

                   D 354         EARL OSRIC.

native kingdom, and rejoining her friends,
contributed to repress all fear, and cheer
her long depressed spirits. The Priory of 
St. Margaret was so much nearer thee spot 
where they were to land, than St. Albert,
that there she first determined to seek an
asylum, and from thence to dispatch a 
messenger to the Castle, with intelligence
of her safety. What would be the feel-
ings of St. Albert, when he heard of her
restoration !-What, when he knew from
whose power she had escaped !-She 
longed, yet dreaded to hear the events
that might have occurred in her absence,
and she shuddered at reflecting t her's
would be the task to relate the sad tale
of Adeliza. At first their little voyage
wore the appearance of being safe and
expeditious, but the second night had not
closed in, when adverse winds arose;the
heavens were obscured, and a tremendous
storm seemed approaching. Apprehen-
sions sat on every countenance, and too                EARL OSRIC.          55

soon it appeared well founded; a violent
hurricane ensued, the sea ran mountains
high, the forked lightning darted over
the foaming billows, and all became hor-
ror and confusion on board. Driven out 
of its course, the vessel, tossed about in
all directions, seemed to threaten imme-
diate death to its unfortunate inmates.--
Almina, in an agony of terror, held by
Mabel, who, clinging to her lady, cla-
morously regretted having ever ventured
on the sea: the loud lamenting of her 
poor damsel seemed to restore Almina's
presence of mind, she entreated her to
be more composed, and await the event
with resignation; but while recommend-
ing the fortitude she could not feel, the
noise suddenly increased, groans and
shrieks resounded in their ears.--Valen-
tine rusted into the cabin, and seized
them both,--a dreadful crash was heard, 
and Almina, thrown by the sudden
motion of the vessel from his support,56        EARL OSRIC

fell with violence,-the world of waters
seemed to receive her sinking form, and
amidst innumerable horrors, sense and
feeling were lost.       CHAP. IV.

        -------

" The silence often of pure innocence
Persuades, when speaking fails."

               " Come on poor Babe,
Wolves and bears, they say, 
Casting their savageness aside, have done
Like offices of pity."

                              WINTER'S TALE.

   ----------------------

   While Almina had been concealed
in the obscurity of the fisherman's hut,
Sir Ethelred Douglas had learned her 
escape by one of Macleod's comrades,
left at the Tower ; who, in hope of reward
for his diligence, bore to him the intelli-
gence, at a time when, harrassed by the 
rebel troops, it was impossible to make 
personal exertions towards discovering

                       D 558      EARL OSRIC.


her. Mad with rage and vexation he
offiered unlimited recompence,to the
remant of the band, if they would pur-
sue and recover her, but while venting his
passion in impotent curses and repininggs
it suddenly struck him that she had sought
refuge at Osric Ca tle , to which though
far distant from the Tower, Valentine,
who well knew the mountainous country
through which they must pass would be
able to guide her. It was possible that
Osric himself might now be there, he had 
doubtless returned with the troops from
Flanders and would assuredly fiy to his
family who had been provented qaitng 
Scotland by the turbulent state of the
kingdom and had he knew ,rewaind shut
up in the Castle which had been fortifed
and guarded in case of attack. The  were
now proceeding in that direction ; the
desire of revenge, and hope of more

getting Almin in his power goaded him
on. Excuses to assail the place, in time
like those, could not be wanting Ru              EARL OSRIC.                      59   

mours had reached him, that more than one of the Scotch leaders, after unsuccessful skirmishes with the English, had sought an asylum at Osric, and had been humanely received and sheltered by the Countess. With his wonted art he circulated every report he heard, with the exaggerations his own malignity suggested, and the disaffection of Earl Osric and his treachery to the English cause became a common theme among the soldiery. To attack his Castle, and teach him the punishment due to duplicity, and disloyalty, was resoled on. Well and bravely as it was defended, it had little chance of withstanding the desperate assault, made on its decaying walls, and the terrified Eleanora beheld it, in the absence of her lord, whose return she had fondly and hourly anticipated, surrounded with armed troops, and incapable of long resistance. The Baron Fitz Oswald was dangerously ill, and his Lady occupied by attending him, could give little assis-60           EARL OSRIC.

tance to her heroic daughter, who, cheer-
ing and animating her vassals, set an ex-
ample of courage and firmness, which
astonished all who beheld the fragile deli-
cacy of her form. Happily possessing,
as she believed, the means of placing her
infant in safety, she awaited, with despe-
rate fortitude, the events of a night,
which beheld the proud towers of Osric
almost demolished, and the mornings
dawn gleamed over a scene of pityful
devastation. Darkness alike had covered
the designs and the actions of the perpe-
trator. The sick Baron and his Lady
had, with difficulty, been rescued from
the flames kindled by the plunderers, but
the Countess had disappeared, and silence
and horror reigned thoughout the late
flourishing domain.

  Almina recovered to a consciousness
of her lat terrors, as she felt herself car-
ried along in the arms of some rude figures
in uncouth habits, they bore her to a
range of huts on the shore, in one of which

            EARL OSRIC          61

she was received and surrounded by a fe-
male, who, though apparently wild and
uncivilized treated her with humanity; but
her limbs were stiff with cold, and a shi-
vering still ran through her frame. Some
fishermen had rescued her from the waves,
and brought her in their boat to land, but
it was at a considerable distance from the
rocks, on which the vessel had split, and
it was believed the whole crew had perish-
ed. That she was still in Scotland she
was convinced, but the dialect and the
wild appearance of the inhabitants led
her to believe it was a part of the coast
far more remote than she had before visi-
ted. Profoundly ignorant she could scarce-
ly make this almost savage people com-
prehend her, and their language was so
unintelligible, that with difficulty she could
understand their answers—She was laid
on a bed of heather, and skins, and such
coarse accomodations as they could be-
stow, were hospitibly afforded ; but the
dreadful picture of the wreck was con-62 EARL OSRIC.

stantly present to her imagination, and
the irreparable loss of her two humble
friends, who had been victims to the de-
vouring element, incessantly preyed on
her mind. To reach some place, where,
by making herself known, she could ob-
tain shelte; and protection' was her first
wish, and she learned with joy, that
there was a Convent not many miles dis-
tant. Thither, as soon as her strength would
permit, she determined to bend her steps,
and await her restoration to health. Such
a resting place seemed a blessed haven of
peace, to her long suffering mind and ex-
hausted frame, but for many days she was
unable to attempt reaching it. Nor would
she perhaps ever have ventured, had she
known the precise state of the country,
but her rude hosts could give her little
information: they seemed to know nothing
beyond the sea shore, and the town at
which they disposed of their fish, which
was in a different direction from the con-
vent. She fancied however that she could               EARL OSRIC.                   63

find the way from the imperfect descrip-
tions they gave of the road, leading to it,
and having, by the exchange of a ring which
she constantly wore, procured from the town
to which the fishermen regularly went,
some decent attire, and rewarded the poor
people, as well as her slender means al-
lowed she entered on her expedition. The
wild and mountainous region, through
which she travelled, seemed to have been
depopulated by war, she had provided her-
self with some coarse provisions, and ere
sunset she hoped to reach the monastery.
Often she seated herself on some mountain
cragg to rest, but the fear of being over-
taken by night, impelled her forward.
Some scattered huts were all the signs
she beheld of inhabitants, and at one of
these she inquired the distance to the
Convent, and with inexpressible dismay
she heard that it was yet some miles dis-
tant, and as entreme weariness forbad all
hope of reaching it, she was compelled to
solicit shelter for the night; it was gran-64              EARL OSRIC.  

ted and again she reposed beneath the
roof of poverty.  Here she learned that
the country around had been ravaged by
the soldiery, and that in the very direc-
tion she intended to pursue the English
and Scotch troops had been recently en-
gaged; but could she once attain the monas-
tery, she should be safe, and the instruct-
tions now given her, appeared so plain
that with revived hope she once again en-
tered on her mountain path.  Long ere
she could reach any habitable spot, it
branched off in so many different direc-
tions, that she became completely bewil-
dered, but afraid to stop, she pursued the
first that offered, and found it soon opened
to a more level country; but how was she
alarmed when loud sounds met her ear,
and she beheld a vast body of the mili-
tary, their arms glittering in the sun in
the distant prospect.  Hastily she turned
from them, and plunging amidst some
closely entwined thickets, took a different
path; but, though she had avoided en-
countering soldiers, their traces were              EARL OSRIC             65

too visible.  Ruin and desolatin marked
the way her bapless footsteps had chosen,
Each step she took. loud peals rent the
air.  Now she could have fancied she
heard the triumphant shout of victory,
and now the doleful cry of the vanquished
seemed to moan around her: she beheld
at a distance the remains of more than one
village, laid waste by fire and devasta-
tion; and famine seemed to have seized
on the few remaing inhabitants.  Twi-
light overtook her, and in a deep cave,
dug in an obcure part of a vost forest,
she sought shelter from the storm that
roared over her head, and made the dark-
ness of night more terrific.  The inside
was well lined with moss, and here she
determined to rest her weary limbs till
morning.

   The voices of men several times assail-
ed her ear, and she saw straggling par-
ties of soldiery pass within a few paces of
the retreat she had chosen; she however
passed unnoticed, and her asylum undis-66                   EARL OSRIC.

covered. The dawn no sooner appeared, 
than she arose to pursue her way through
the pathless wild, and had advanced a con-
siderable distance, when, through the so-
litude and loneliness of the forest, a bell
struck on her ear, and convinced her she 
was not far from some human habitation.

  This might be the convent; scarcely
has the hope arisen in her perturbed mind, 
ere she descried, through the overtopping
branches of the forest trees, the high and
gloomy turrets of a lofty building. She
directed her steps towards it, and soon
came within view of an ancient and vast
fabric ; but no sooner had she cast her
eyes on it, than she became convinced it 
had been recently attacked, The bridges
were broken, the walls half pulled down,
and the vast moat partly filled with the
fragments of the building, She shudder-
ed, and fancied she discerned the ground
in many places marked with blood.

   Pieccs of scattered and broken fire arms
were strewed about, and all too plainly
                 EARL OBRIC.

betokened that here fell war and all its
fury had recently reged.

  In a conviction that this was not the
convent, but the half demolished Castle of
some chieftain, and that here she could
not with safety ask assistance; she pro-
ceeded on her weary way, and had gone
neat a mile farther, before she came to a
wild and solitary glen, which, in the cen-
tre of three vast stupondous mountains,
appeared by nature guarded from every
hostile foe.

  In one part of this dell, nearly conceal-
ed by some thick trees, stoo a small hut;
that, from its appearance, seemed inha-
bited. Hope whispered that this obuscre
spot promised the rest and refreshment
she so greatly neede, and with a faltering
step she hastened towards it, and rapped 
at the humble door. It was unclosed by
an ancient female, who, survyeying her
with looks of wonder, inquired her busi-
ness. The voice of the shrivelled matron
sounded like that of an angel on the ear 
68          EARL OSRIC.

of the desolate Almina, who, grasping her
withered hand, looked earnestly in her
face, and with a sensation of joy, to which
her heart had long been a stranger, recog-
nised old Maud, her early nurse, the care-
ful attendant of her infant years at the
Castle of Osric. The rapture of the an-
cient dame, when she discovered herself,
was beyond description, and she hastened
to place before her unexpected gue^t the
little she could bestow: it consisted of
milk and oaten bread, but faint with hun-
ger, and parched by thirst, it was a luxu-
rious meal to the poor wanderer, who,
while she partook of it, eagerly question-
ed Maud as to the situation of her little
residence, and inquired to whom the Cas-
tle she had passed in the forest belonged.

  The dame gazed at her in wonder.
"Ah lady!" said she, "hast thou then
forgotten Osric Castle? and canst thou
be ignorant that a week since it was at-
tacked by the King's troops, headed by
the desperate Sir Ethelred Douglas ? TheEARL OSRIC. 69

Castle itself is almost destroyed , the lands
laid waste, and the good Counters has not
since been heard of. The ravages com-
mitted by the soldiery are dreadful. My
poor hut is luckily so well concealed, that
they have not yet found it out, or perhaps
it is too small and miserable to tempt
them; but there is not a dwelling for
many miles round that they have not rob-
bed, and then burned to the ground."


  Trembling at the name of Sir Ethelred,
and with numerous sensations, too many
and various to be defined, at learning that
she was even now in the vieinity of Osric
Castle, where she had passed her child-
hood, she grew pale and faint; but by
the attention of Maud, she was soon reco-
vered, and able to listen to a more con-
nected recital of the facts she detailed.

  She related as much of her own tale as
was necessary to interest the good dame,
and she shuddered when she recollected,
that the party of military she had so near-
ly encountered the day before, had pro-70             EARL OSRIC.

bably consisted of Sir Ethelred's soildiers,
and might even be commanded by himself.

  Conscious that here she would not be 
in safety, she consluted Maud on the pos-
sibility of reaching the monastry, but the
dame was unwilling to part from her so
soon. she represented, in strong terms,
the danger of her venturing unprotected
through the forest, which she must of ne-
cessity pass. "No, dear Lady," she said,
"thou must abide a day or two with me.
When I left the Castle, after thy de-
parture, and the death of my poor hus-
band had left me desolate, I retired to this
hut, on the bounty of my Lord the Earl.
Little then did I dare to hope I should
ever again behold thee. Nay, sweet
Lady, look not so sorrowful, thou wilt in-
deed be safe here. Frightened enough
should I be, if I thought thou wert not;
for poor as my cottage may appear, in con-
tains that which I would not lose for a
crown of gold." Seeing Almina look sur-
prised, she added," I may trust thee Lady;
           EARL OSRIC.             71

I will therefore show thee all the treasure
this sad war has left me." So saying, she
arose, and Alinina followed her into an
inner division of the cot. A small low
door admitted them to a darkened room,
partially lighted by some crevices in the
roof. An old piece of dark drapery was
fastened up to the wall, as a substitute for
a curtain. Removed within a recess, on
a small pallet, Almina with indescribable
amazement discovered a sleeping infant.
"There" said the dame, " Say not that I
am quite bereft, since Providence has sent
me this little treasure. Look at him,
Lady, didst thou ever see such an angel ?"
She took the babe in her arms, and un-
closing its eves, it fixed them on Almina,
and extended its arms towards her. She
received him from his nurse, and as the
light discovered his features, she anxious-
ly and rapidly examined them. The
countenance, blooming in infantine beau-
ty, seemed familiar to her eye. Every72            EARL OSRIC.

lineament was the same,and habit and
appesarance denoted it to be of rank.
"Maud," said she "tell me, I conjure
thee, who are the parents of this child?"
 "AhLady, I see thou dost alreaady guess",
said the dame, "and perhaps were he dis-
covered, my life might answer for con-
cealing him: but no matter. it would be
lost in a good cause. I rereved this dear
boy, lady, from the gracious Countess of
Osric the cery day before the attack on
the Castle. In one of her rides she dis-
covered my cottage,and I found she
knew of thy residence, Lady, at the Cas-
tle: for my Lord told her I had nursed
and reared thee,and aftewards she often
visited me, and last, when the wcather
was cold and wintry, she me almost
constantly at the Castl, to assist in nurs-
ing the little Hector. Ah. he is a brave
boy  and Oh hadst thou seen his mo-
ther when, she put him into my arms in
        EARL OSRIC.        73

the midst of all the confusion of prepairing
to defend the castle."

  "To your care, Maud," said she, "I
commit my darling Hector, till the dan-
ger which threatens us is past. In the in-
ner recess of thy cot he will be safe; hour-
ly I hope to behold my Lord, who will
eagerly fly to visit him."

  Alas! poor Lady! that night she dis-
 appeared. From some of the dispersed
vassals I heard all the particulars, though
not even they know the young heir is here.
For several days and nights, every step I
heard, I fancied was that of soldiers; but
come when they will, I will lose my life
sooner than part from my baby.

  "And where", asked the trembling 
voice of Almina, " Where, amidst all
this dreadful devastation, is the Earl?"
"Ah ! lady", said Maud, "that is more
than any of us, know. He was gone
than any of us, know. He was gone 
abroad with the army when we last heard
of him, but the Countness, poor Lady! de-
luded herself to  the last with expecting

  VOL.III               E               


74              EARL OSRIC.

he would return in time to save the Castle."

The careful dame now observing the 
pallid and fatigues look of her noble
guest, advised her to retire early to rest,
and Almina gladly consented to share the
pallet of the little Hector. Alone with
the sweet infant, she clasped him fondly
to her bosom, and while her tears fell on 
his innocent cheek, she exclaimed, "Gra-
cious Heaven! can this be the offspring
of Earl Osric? and am I allowed for once
to cherish the representative of a form so
beloved."

Humbly on her knees she imported a 
merciful Providence to shield him from 
the evils that threatened his noble house;
then by his side tried to procure some re
-pose, but long it fled from her eyes, for
continually they rested on the features of
Osric, so faithfully, by the hand if Na-
ture, delineated in those of his son, and
bitterly she mourned over the domestic
woes, which must throw the shade of pri-
vate sorrow over the glory of his public





                    EARL OSRIC.               75

character. The fate of the hapless Elea-
nora too, if given up to the mercy of Sir
Ethelred, she could deeply commiserate,
for well she knew his malignity to the
Earl.



                     E2







                                         CHAP. V.
                     -------

  "What is that noise?
  Sey.--It is the cry of women, my good Lord.
  Macb.--I have almost forgot the taste of fears:
The time has been my senses would have cool'd
To hear a night-shriek."
                                        MACBETH.

"There is a monastery two miles off,
And there we will abide, I do desire you
Not to deny this imposition;
The which, my love, and some necessity,
Now lays upon you."
                               MERCHANT OF VENICE.
             ------------------------

  A long and profound sleep at length
steeped the harrassed senses of Almina in
oblivion, and she awoke, refreshed, to the
delightful task of nursing her little
charge, while dame Maud provided their
morning repast. "A lack a day, sweet
Lady," said the good woman, "That thou,
             

                 EARL OSRIC      77

whom so often I have wished once more to behold,should'st be a guest in my poor cot! Would that Earl Osric could behold thee now! Often have I seen him hold thee in his arms,even as now thou holdest his own babe.Ah,little dreams he that ye are both beneath the roof of old Maud."

  The simple remarks of her nurse drew tears her young guest;yet the comparative happiness she felt,in clasping the son of Osric even in this humble cottage,in peace and liberty to her heart,drew from her a silent ejaculation of thankfulness.The day was occupied by attention to the infant.Often did loud shouts reach the secluded glen,but they approached not nearer than the high mountain that guarded them to the north,and then died away in faint and distant murmurs.Almina retired at these times into the inner room with the child,lest any for the sake of plunder,or to procure78          EARL OSRIC.

refreshment; but its situation was so ob-
scure, and its appearence so Wretched,
that it had hitherto escaped observation.
Night again came on, the little Hector
sunk to sleep in the arms of his new nurse,
and having deposited him on his pallet,
Almina, seated by the cottage fire, was
listening to Maud, who, to amuse her
young guest, was reciting some ancient
traditionary legends relating to the family
of Osric, when suddenly a murmur of 
coices reached them. They sounded near
at hand; Almina started in terror from
her seat, and Maud looked aghast; but
ere either could speak, the door was burst
open, and several soldiers, holding lighted
fire-brands,rushed in. In an instant the
cottage was in a flame; Almina's brain
was on fire;she saw poor Maud,feeble
and helpless, fall to the ground.One
only idea seemed to possess her mind,that
of saving Osric's child. The room that
seperated her from him was in a blaze,
and the hut surrounded by soldiers; but           EARL OSRIC      79

she paused not to reflect. With incredi-
ble resolution she darted through the
flames ; the cried of her infant directed
her to him. She sprang forward, she
seized him in her arms, and made her
way back unhurt.

Running she knew not whither, and 
hiding the babe as well as she could be-
neath her robe and veil, she escaped, she
knew not how, from the hands of some
soldiers who had seized her, insensible of
her own violence, in extricating herself
from their hold. She rushed from them,
fled with the rapidity of lightning through 
the glen, and gained the entrance of the
forest. Here, exhausted and overcome,
she sunk on the earth, clasping closer to
her breast the crying babe, whose piercing
shrieks seemed first to recall her scattered
senses.--With memory came tears, and 
she felt the distraction of her brain abate.
She had saved the life of Osric in his son,
and that idea alone seemed to repay her 
for all her past sufferings. But how

             E 4
80           EARL OSRIC


should she preserve him? she wropped
her veil around him. Awakened from
his sleep,and carried into the air,he
screamed from fear and cild,but gradually
she hushed his cries, which she dreaded
should direct ther pursuers.
   Through the trees she could at times
discren the red glare, which the blaz-
ing cottage threw on the surronding
shades. Of the fate of poor Maud she
trembled to think ; she recolleccted to
have seen the soldiers drag her from the
flames, but her preecipitate flight with the
child had taken her instantiy from the spot.
   Pressing him to her beating hert, he
at length sunk to sleep un her bosom,
just as the daylight dawned,she descried
throgh the think branvhher of the forest
trees, what appeared to be the entrance of
a cave and thankful for the prospect of
any shelter,she hastened towards the
opening and found it spacious,and well
lind with oss. By taking off part of
her own attire, she made a bed for the in-EARL OSRIC. 81

fant, and contrived, with gathering some
moss, to secure it tolerably from the cold,
in a remote part of the cavern, hoping,
that should poor Maud have escaped the
murderous hands of the plunderers, she
might search for them in the forest.

If no help speedily approached, vain
would have been all her exertions ; the
want of food must soon terminate the woes
which seemed to have ushered the infant
heir of Osric into existence. Trembling
lest every breeze that met her ear should
bear to it the voices of men; yet dread-
ing that she should not be able to quiet
the poor little Hector's cries of hunger till
it was too gate, she watched the progress
of day in misery the most extreme. The
sun rose high, neither friends or foes ap-
peared, and the profound silence induced
her to venture out to reconnoitre the ad-
jacent parts of the fores.

Having laid the infant on its bed, and seen
it from mere weariness fall into a slumber,
she issued from the cave. All around was

E 582                      EARL OSRIC

serene. A soft wind at intervals moved 
the leaves, but no object appeared through 
them.The Castle of Osric could not be
far distant; could she procure any
sustenance for the babe, she hoped to pre-
serve its life, at least till she could reach
some place of safety, and while mediating
on what plan to adopt, a sudden murmur
of voices was heard.She threw a fearful
glance forward, and more distinctly they
came on the breeze; they sounded near-
er, and the military habit in a moment
met her eye. At the sight she fled back
towards the cave, but not unobserved, and 
when she reached the entrance, she heard
her pursuers close at hand. Painting and
breathless, she sunk down on the pebbly
floor; the soldiers overtook and seized her.
  "Thou wast right by the mass, An-
thony," said one of them, "this must be
the damsel. Come maiden confess, where
thou hast secreted the child, Earl Osric's
son." Resolute not to deliver him up to
his enemies, and incapable of utterance,
            EARL. OSRIC.          83

she was mute; but the same man added,
"Thou hadst better declare, for thee it
was who bore him from the smoaking
ruins of the cottage, and at the hazard of
thine own life, snatched him from the
flames. Marry! thou are a bold lass! few
would have had courage for it."

 " Pry'thee damsel." said another sol-
dier, " deliver up the child, or we must
proceed to search the cave, where doubt-
less thou hast hidden him."-"No", said
Almina, throwing herself before en-
trance. " Unless ye murder me, ye shall
not enter here."_The words were uttered
in despair, but scare had they escaped
her lips, when a second party of soldiers,
headed by the Knight, in armour, appeared
in view.-The men still held Almina,
while one went forward and addressed the 
Knight, She heard him say, "So please
ye, Sir Knight, the damsel is found, but
refuses to declare where the young Lord
Hector is concealed."  "Oh!" cried Al-
mina, rendered frantic by the idca of be-
            
             E6

84            EARL OSRIC.

ing compelled to yield up the son of Os-
ric to his foes, and throwing herself on
her knees before the stranger, " Oh, who-
ever thou art' have pity on me. At the
risque of my own existence did I preserve
his. Take him not from me, I be-
seech thee, for at the same hazard will I
guard him."

  The stranger Knight remained in silent
gaze on the extraordinary object present-
ed to his view ; the fine form of Almina,
almost prostrate before him, was unveil-
ed for she had wrapped that part of her
dress round her sleeping charge. Her
luxurient hair, unbound, hung over her
shoulders, and dividing on her forehead,
disclosed her countenance, which, though
pallied and emaciated, was still interest-
ing ; her eyes flashed with unnatural bril-
liancy, and the tattered condition of her
garments ill accorded with her words and
manner. Turning to the soldiers, in a
loud and authoratative tone, the Knight
ordered them to retreat to the outskirts of
              EARL OSRIC.                      85

the wood. They obeyed, and in the same
attitude of kneeling supplication, Almina
was left alone with the Knight, but she
was insensible to fear on any subject, but
the one that engrossed every faculty, the
overwhelming apprehension of losing the
little object of her care, and delivering
him up a victim to those who had de-
spoiled the domain of his father.
      
       The stranger extended his hand, as if
to raise her, but she shrunk from his
touch, till the words "Almina! my long
lost Almina!" in the well remembered ac-
cents of Earl Osric himself, met her ear.
Her eyes, wild with recent emotion, were
now fixed in ardent gaze on his face; the
vizor was removed, and it was indeed the
features of Osric she behold. A conval-
sive sob, and a violent burst of tears re-
lieved her fullheart: he raised her ten-
derly, exclaiming, "Sweet preserver of
my child!--Now indeed am I rewarded.
Heroic Almina, the eternal gratitude of
Osric is thine."
86                                   EARL OSRIC.

   Amidst the overwhelming delight of recognising such a moment of terror, the friend of her earliest years, instead of an enemy; still Almina's memory was faithful to her charge, and she exclaimed, ''Waste not an instant, I conjure thee, my Lord. The little Hector may e'en now be dying from hunger. Since yesternight he has not tasted food.'' Saying this, she flew into the cave, followed by Osric, whose amazement yet allowed him scarcely the power of speech.

   At the extremity of the cavern, in a nook, formed by a natural projection of the rock, laid the little object of her care. A sweet slumber sealed its eyes, and Almina taking it in her arms, presented him to the enraptured Osric. ''There, my Lord,'' said she, ''is thy son. Never but to thyself would Almina have resigned him. Oh! how greatly is she overpaid for all her sorrows, by thus preserving the child of her earliest benefactor.'' Fondly the Earl caressed his recovered treasure,                 EARL OSRIC.                   87

but his looks never fixed on her, and his
manner was hurrying and confused, By
a strong effort he seemed to overcome the
secret feelings of his heart, and returning
the child to her arms, he said, "All
power of utterance would be weak, to ex-
press what I feel, Almina, but the imme-
diate exigency must now occupy our
thoughts.-At a short distance beyond
that grove of forest trees, there is an-
cient monastery. It were well to procure 
admittance there for thee and my Hector,
at least for to-night. The Castle of my
ancestors is in part destroyed, and scarce-
ly will its ruins afford me a shelter; but
for the present, I have no more to fear.
The enemy have withdrawn their troops.

   "Oh!" he exclaimed, while every fea-
ture spoke his horror at the idea, "That I
should live thus to term the soldiers of
Edward! But the will of Heaven be
done. Yet will my wrongs be re-
dressed, for to the foot of the throne shall
they be carried, and the base Douglas88                                EARL OSRIC.

shall find retribution. But, Ah! who will restore my Eleanora? for is she not lost to me and to her child? Oh! rather may Heaven, in its mercy, call her pure spirit to itself, than she should endure unmerited sufferings.''

   He paused, the ready tears of Almina glistened on her cheeks. ''We must hasten, my Lord,'' said she, ''the child is faint: exhausted nature requires immediate refreshment.'' ''True,'' said he, ''let us then away to the convent;'' and he led her forward, relating as they went his sad arrival at Osric Castle, to find its walls dismantled, his faithful vassals killed and dispersed, and his Lady borne, amidst the confusion, far from her home. The Baron and Baroness FitzOswald, by the vigorous exertions of the ancient Seneschal, had been conveyed, through private passages and subterranean ways, to an adjacent church, where they had remained till the danger was past; but the alarm, together with the loss of his daughter, had so              EARL OSRIC.        89

greatly encreased the progress of disease
on the worn out frame of the Baron, that
there remained small hope of his recovery.

   "Thou, my best Almina," said the
Earl, "shall still retain my son beneath
thy protecting care. From what I have
been able to learn, he was the mark par-
ticularly aimed at, and most providential
was the foresight of his hapless mother in
sending him from the Castle. To secure
his safety, he must, for the present, re-
main in obscurity. I will therefore de-
posit him with thee, in the monastery,
and give this night to deliberation, as to
the future disposal of him. From thee
too, Albina, I must have much to hear;
but 'tis a theme I dare not venture on to-
night."

   They now drew near the massy gates of
the convent, and Almina was relieved 
from the dreaded task of disclosing all the 
cruelty and perfidy of Sir Ethelred till
she had in some degree recovered her late 
terrors. A meagre friar attended at90            EARL OSRIC.

the gate, and on the Earl's request to see
the Abbess, hesitated till Osric gave his
name, when the half-closed portal admit-
ted them. The superior received them
with courtesy, and viewed Almina with
stately curiosity, but she could not refuse
the rites of hospitality, and agreed to af-
ford them a present shelter. The Earl,
recommending her and the child to her 
maternal care, departed, promising on the
following morning to enter on an expla-
antion of his situation and intenctions.

  The little Hector shared the bed of Al-
mina, to whom a comfortable chamber
was a luxury, which she had not known
since her departure from Glenmorne,.
Yet was it not, she asked herself, all an
illusion? Was it not one of those delu-
sive dreams which had often place her 
in imagination again under the protection
of Earl Osric? Had she really beheld
him? Had his arm actually supported
her thither? And Oh! blessed recollec-
tion! had she indeed saved the life of his                 EARL OSRIC.        91

child? Sweet was the conviction, that 
her. She liked not the cold, formal-cu-
rious looks of the Abbess; but did it be-
come her to be fastidious, who had been
compelled to seck shelter with poverty
and wretchedness? No, thankful to Hea-
ven for the ine.timable mercies she had
received, 'ere she retired, she preformed,
with her wonted fervour, those devout ex-
ercises, which, even amidst confinement,
danger, and terrors innumerable, had ever
possessed the power, to quite every tumult
of the mind, and waft her soul from earth 
to heaven. 
                     CHAP. VI.

"The band that hath made you fair hath made you good."
                              MEASURE 70R MEASURE.

            "None better knows than you,
    How I have ever lov'd the life remov'd,
    And held in idle price to haunt assemblies,
    Where youth and cost and witless bravery keeps."
                                             ISID.

    THE morning sun shone brightly on
the slumbers of Almina. The happy as-
surance of present safety, rendered them
sweet and refreshing, and she arose in re-
vived health and hope. Her little charge,
restored by rest and refreshment, smiled 
cheerfully on his nurse, and she repaired
with him to the apartment of the Abbess,
where she partook of the morning's re-
past.
    
     The arrival of Earl Osric was soon af-
                    EARL OSRIC.       93

terwards announced, and now had she an
opportunity of observing the alteration in
his appearance, which disappointment and
anxiety had produced. He looked pale, 
and dejected, and though the firmness and
courage of the hero, still beamed from his
eyes; to the watchfulness of affection, it
was evident, that he labored under con
siderable mental disquietude.

    After fondly caressing the child, he 
said, " Almina I have devoted the night
to reflection and deliberation, and I am
convinced this is no safe asylum either for
thee or my son.

    The superior of this convent, though
bigoted and superstitious, is penurious to
excess, and I have much cause to fear
from her known character, that my son
will not be safe from his enemies here, 
should they think proper to make use of 
pecuniary means to get him into their 
power. I therefore have determined on 
a plan, which, if it meet your approba-
tion, shall be immediately put in practice.
94         EARL OSRIC.

In right of my maternal uncle, I inherit
an ancient, and now ruinous Castle in the
northern part of England, situated so re-
motely, as to be almost insolated from the
rest of the world, and till this state of
warfare, in which I am at present involv-
ed by the infamy of Sir Ethelred Douglas,
be over, it is necessary, if I wish to pre-
serve my son, that he should be placed in
obscurity. With you my Almina he
would be safe, his unhappy mother, alas!
has it not in her power to protect him.
Taken prisoner by Sir Ethelred, she may
even now, be exposed to insult and dis-
grace. Will you then my dear Almina 
fly with my son of Osiric, to this secluded
spot, will you a second time preserve his 
infant life, and merit the eternal gratitude
and admiration of his father. "Ah my 
Lord," said Almina, "you little know
the heart of Almina, if you are not alrea-
dy assured of her ever ready compliance.
For me solitude has no horrors, and so-
ciety no few charms. In my court life, I
                 EARL OSRIC.             95

learned to despise the vain pleasures of
the world, and in a safe retirement with
such an object of interest, as you my Lord
have given me in your son, I have no
doubt of finding tranquility."
     
     Osric now, as if not daring to trust
himself longer with the subject, revert-
ed to her own history, and entreated
her to relate all that had happened. This
she complied with, but his utter amaze-
ment to learn the injury she had sustain-
ed from the villainy of Sir Ethelred was
unbounded.

     When she had concluded, "It is more
than ever necessary my Almina," said he
"that you should be placed in some safe
asylum, Sir Orlando de Mowbrey is at pre-
sent as you know, with his amiable Con-
stance, abroad,and the Priory ofSt.Marga-
rets is at too great a distance for you to un-
dertake the journey with safety, and the
same objections arise to your going to St.
Albert; though there alas your presence
now would be of now avail. The un-
96                                    EARL OSRIC.

happy Eloisa, incensed at the treatment Elfreda has met from Sir Ethelred, has once more received her at St. Albert, but the task of assuaging the woes of her child, together with your loss, has again alienated her reason, and weeks and months pass by unheeded by the unhappy Lady St. Albert; she seems to be sunk in utter despondence, and is attended by the good Lady de Mornay, and the unfortunate Lady Douglas. St. Albert himself is still with the king's forces on the continent.

   When we unite all these circumstances therefore, I cannot think there is any asylum so eligible for you at present, as the ancient Abbey de Warville. It has been uninhabited, since the death of my uncle, from whom it devolved to me, but I will send my faithful Osbert forward to prepare it for your reception, and he shall return and conduct you with a chosen guard to the Abbey.

   To avoid all suspicion, I shall not my-                                          EARL OSRIC.                                      97

self attend you, and I shall give it out here, that you are gone to 
your friends in England, and I have taken my son under my own protection. Osbert shall set forward to day, and endeavour to render some part at least of the Abbey habitable, and in three more you shall depart.'' Almina readily agreed to this plan, it exactly coincided with her wish, in her present situation, to be secluded from the world, and to be the means of preserving the little Hector was such gratification to her heart, that she could not have resolved to decline, even if it had been attended with danger to herself, instead of contributing to her safety.  ''I have also reflected said the Earl,'' that you will want some attendant in your solitude, as well for yourself as to assist you in the care of your charge, and for this purpose I will engage poor old Maud to accompany you. The catastrophe; which, but for your coUrage my dear Almina, would have been fa-

     VOL. III.                               F98               EARL OSRIC.

tal to my child, has deprived her of her
humble home. An asylum with you, there-
fore, will shelter her, and she will not, I 
think, be an unacceptable addition to your
party." This considerate arrangement
gave infinite satisfaction to Almina, she 
now deeply regretted the loss of poor Ma-
bel, who, in the solitude she was new to 
seek, would have been a real acquisition.

  The Earl took his leave, and Almina
having no preparations to make awaited
with anxiety the return of Osbert. In
three days she received from the Earl a
request that she would be ready on the 
following morning, when horses, provided 
for the purpose, would be there to convey
her, the infant Hector, and their old at-
tendant to the place of their destina-
tion.

   Almina's preparations were soon made,
and the next morning she took leave of
the inhabitants of the convent, whom she
could not regret parting with, for unlike
the amiable Nuns of St. Margaret, they


          EARL OSRIC.           99

had none of those qualities, which eonci-
linte the esteem, and win the heart, they
were most of them like their stately su-
perior reserved, and suspicious in their
deportment, and seemed to regard Almina
with eyes of eager curiosity.

   She "was not therefore sorry to quit
them at the appointed hour, and repair
to the part of the wood, whither Osric had
directed her. There she found the Earl
himself, with a band of armed soldiers,
and horses ready prepared for the journey,
on one of which, with the little Hector,
she was instantly seated. Old Maud was
there waiting her arrival. Osric fondly
embraced his boy, and as he gave him
into the arms of Almina, in a voice ren-
dered almost inarticulate by emotion, he
said," To your care my Almina, I commit
my precious boy, perhaps he may never
again be destined to receive from his fa-
ther the paternal embrace, but in your
care, I shall rely on his safety. Your
own I trust will be ensured by your rethe-

                   F 2                   EARL OSRIC
ment to De Warville, and now adieu to both, when fortune smiles on Osric and he is enabled to release his two lovely prisoners, with what joy will he not fly to them at the Abbey.
  He now pressed the hand he held, and the signed being given, the party moved forward.  Soon they los t sight of him, amid the thick foliage of the forest.  Al-mina caressed the little Hector, and reflected with delight that she now had it in her power to manifest the gratitude that glowed in her heart ot his noble father.
  Old Maud perceived her inclination to thoughfulness, and forbore to interrrupt her, and the long journey was perfomed in almost total silence.  They took provisions with them, so that as little delay might arise as possible, and their route, the Earl was aware, lay in an opposite direction to that Sir Ethelred's army, had taken.
  On the eveing of the second day, after               EARL OSRIC              101

a fati guing long journey, they came with-
in sight of the ruined Towers of De War-
ville.

   From the Earl's description, Almina
had formed an idea of an ancient but no-
ble building, but she had not the most re-
mote conception of the mighty mass of
ruins that now met her eye.  The high
walls were nearly levelled with the ground,
only shattered remains of them being
now left standing.  The moat was quite
dry, and one draw bridge on the north
side of the Abbey had fallen into it.  That
onthe western, was still entire, and ad-
mitted them to a pair of folding gates,
that opened into a court, which led to the
west front of the edifice.  Here they
alighted, Almina looked up at the vast pile
of buildings before her, and shuddered.
It was a gloomy ancient fabric, and what-
ever marks of grandeur it might once
have exhibited, they were now totally de-
faced.  Pieces of fallen columns with
bricks, and part of the broken walls
                 F  3
102      EARL OSRIC.
strewed the court, every thing around
seemed to betoken ruin and desolation.

  She followed Osbert the confidential
servant of the Earl, through a ruined por-
tico, which had once been the great hall,
or banqueting room. The lofty seat and
canopy at the upper end, were still re-
maining, but the walls once gay with the
rich varied tapestry, and glittering with
the gilded cornice, were now covered with
dust and damp, and the hangings depend-
ing in fragments from the walls.

  It struck chill and cold, Osbert who
had gone forward and been arrived some
hours, had prepared one room, rather
more habitable than the rest, for their
immediate abode, but even this was cold
and almost devoid of comfort. Almina's
heart sunk. Osbert placed a chair next
the fire for her, and she seated herself with
the little Hector in her lap, who now
never willingly left her. Supper was
brought her, but she felt an unaccount-
able dread of sleeping alone in this dreary
          EARL OSRIC.          103

mansion. On surveying the chamber des-
tined for her to inhabit, she found it vast
and dreary, and separated by a passage
of considerable length from that where
Maud slept.

  There was no other near her in repair
enough for any one to sleep in. She
however felt such excessive repugnance to
being left alone with the child, in her pre-
sent state of mind, that she was on the
point of desiring Maud to move her bed
into her chamber, when recollecting that
there could be no real foundation for fear,
and that chimerical terrors it did not be*
come her to indulge, who had been exposed
to so many real dangers, she resolved to
summons all her courage to her aid, and
partake with her little bedfellow the
dreary chamber allotted to her. It was
long after she retired, ere sleep visited her
pillow.

  Once again in a place of safety, and
relieved from the immediate terror and
anxiety, which had embittered the last

               F 4104

year of her life, the events of that life
passed in review before her mental sight.
Happy was it for her peace, that no self
reproach rendered the retrospectin pain-
ful.

   To be once more under the protecting
care of Earl Osric, was soothing to her
heart, and she dwelt with fond delight on
that greatness of character, which amidst
unmerited misfortunes, still shone conspi-
cuous, and raised him immeasureably
above his persecutors.

   In dreams, the same subject pursued
her, and Earl Osric, exposted to the fury
of his merciless assailants, unarmed or un-
defended, now amidst the tumults of bat-
tle, now wandering through the ruins of
his paternal castle, and then with quick
transition in the court of Edward, were
the visions that haunted her imagination.
The sun which penetrated her gloomy
apartment, and illumined the gothic walls
with his cheering beams, awoke her from
these ideal scenes to real calamity.
           EARL OSRIC.        105

  The little Hector was ill, the fatigue
of being carried such a long journey,
proved too much tor his infant frame, and
for several days the terrified Almina fear-
ed his life was in danger. Her anguish,
her extreme anxiety would fallow her no
repose, from her attendance on him. She
never for a moment left him, and her
prayers were unceasingly offered up to
heaven for his recovery. Her fervent
petitions were accepted, and the sweet
boy at length restored to his wonted bloom,
but the painful and fatiguing task of con-
stantly supporting him, for he would goto
no one but Almina, had so weakened her
frame and depressed her spirits, that once
more her health forsook her, and her
countenance no longer was blooming and
animated as formerly.

   The ancient and decayed state of the
old structure she inhabited, together with
the gloom of the weather, contributed to
produce a despondency, from which only
the playful animation of the little Hector

                   F 5106          EARL OSRIC.

seemed to possess power to rouse her.
Such was the dilapidated appearance of
the mansion, that three weeks of her re-
sidence within its walls had elapsed, and
not yed had she explored any other apart-
ment, than those inhabited by herself,
but old Maud was continually repeating
the most alarming description, of the
ruins and desolation in which its moul-
dering turrent had fallen.CHAP. VII.

Happy is your grace,
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
Into so quiet and so sweet a style.

AS YOU LIKE IT.

Oh! though didst then ne'er love heartily;
If thou remember'st not the slightest folly
That ever love did make thee run into,
Thou hast not lov'd; 
Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
Wearying thy bearer in thy mistress' praise,
Thou hast not lov'd.
IBID.

THE ancient Abbey of de Warville
was the maternal inheritance of Earl 
Osric. It had been the feudal and baro-
nial residence of a long line of ancestors,
and had withstood many formidable sieges
in ages long past. Its fortifications, of
immense strength, were still entire, and                     EARL OSRIC.


the spacious chapel, with its hig altar, through dispoiled of its massy ornaments,  still retained vestiges of the piety of its possessors. Firm in their joyalty to the reigning sovereign, the family of de Warville had maintained it unshaken, from the time that William of Normandy landed with his conquering host, till Henry the Third, in whose reign, (by the death of Alfred, the last male heir, who was killed in palestine,) the title became extinct; and the abbey, with the lands adjoining and a small estate annexed, passed to his sister, the mother of Earl Osric.

  It was on clear morning, that, illumined by a winter's sun, Almina first began to explore the yet, unseen apartments of this vast fabric. The weather was so cold, and the country around so unknown to her, that she had never ventured farther than the chapel, where her daily orisons had been offered, whenever the effects of her recent indispostion
                  EARL OSRIC.                 109

would permit her to quit her chamber.
Attended by Maud, and carrying Hector
in her arms, she began her prejected sur-
vey.-- Every where the faded remains of
Baronial magnificence met her eye, but
the plunder to which the long minority
of the present owner of the edifice, and
his protracted absence from England, had
subjected this neglected building, had left
but little of its valuable furniture, that
was in any state of preservation. The
state rooms appeared t have been fitted
up with even princely grandeur. The ta-
pestry was beautiful, and the colours stil
in many parts brilliant. In one of them,
the figure of a warrior, mounted on a fiery
charger, particularly drew her attention.
His from was majestic, and his air fierce
and warlike. The little Hector, at sight
of the horse, put out his arms, and be-
trayed such delight, that Almina, who
sighed as she traced in her infant charge
not only the lineaments but the martial
spirit of his father, stood for some time110               EARL OSRIC.

to contemplate it. From this room, a long and wide passage led to another wing of the fabric. Here they agian beheld a portrait of the same warrior, evidently taken at a later period: his figure divested of armour, and the whole countenance being visible, the strong resemblance it bore to Osric, convinced her it was some near relative, perhaps the uncle from whom he inherited the Abbey. In an ancient cabinet adjoining, they descried a few old worm-eaten books; the sight was gladly hailed by Almina, and she examined them with avidity. They were some monkish legends and traditionary tales; and the name of Alfred de Warville, in some of them, convinced her they had been indeed the property of the last possessor of the Abbey.

She remembered to have heard the Earl say, that his uncle was early designed for the sacred function, but devoted to arms, enthusiastic in temper, and highly romantic in disposition, he had eagerly joined                 EARL OSRIC         111

the crusade under Henry,in which he fell.She recollected too,that the Earl had alluded to some secret sorrows,that had ruined the peace of his uncle,and undermined his health.

  On comparing the little she had heard with the intersecting figure of the youthful warrior,she became anxious to learn more relating to him,and the total dearth of all amusement,independent of herself,and her own resources,rendered it subject of interest,that tended not disagreeably to occupy her mind;and it became her custom to take Hector to the state apartments for exercise.Here he first learned to step alone,and here she frequently walked for hours,while old Maud was engaged in domestic avocations.

  In the delightful yet melancholy occupation of watching the progress her infant charge made in growth and strength,the solitary days of Almina glided on.The cold and dreary month of November set in,and a long continued fall of rain pre-
112         EARL OSRIC.

vented her even from crossing the paved
courts to the chapel, or procuring there
the reviving fresh air.

  The state apartments were now con-
stantly resorted to; here Hector, holding
by her hand, would exercise his feet, and
never did they pass the young warrior's
portrait, without stopping to contemplate
it. The fine plumage on the helmet
seemed particularly to delight the child,
and to please him and amuse herself, Al-
mina had formed a small one, and adorn-
ed it with some old feathers she had found
in a chest, amongst some lumber. When
decorated with his martial insignia,' the
infant warrior surveyed his little form in a
mirror, and exultingly pointing to his own
figure, tried to lisp out his delight. The
long glass which reflected him at whole
length, the only one that remained un-
broken in the mansion, was placed in the
anti-room to there apartments, which,
from many circumstances, Almina had
reason to believe was formerly occupied               EARL OSRIC.              113

by the original of the interesting portrait.
Hither then it was the will of Hector al-
most daily to repair, and here Almina,
ever pleased to gratify him, regularly ac-
companied him. He had one day brought
thither several of his playthings, which
he had scattered about the florr, and was 
seated in the midst of them, and Almina,
more than usually thoughtful, had retired
to a window, where the numerous reflec-
tions that were ever ready to crowd on
her mind, banished from it for the mo-
ment her immediate situation, and insen-
sibly she wandered from the anti-room to
the cabinet adjoining.  She pushed open
the door incautiously; it was ancient and
heavy, and falling from her hand, it fell to 
with such violence, that a part of the
shelves, formerly put up for the books,
shaken by the jar, fell from their feeble
support, and came with a rumbling noise
to the floor.  Alarmed at the confusion
she had made, she advanced to that side
of the apartment, and, amidst the heap of114                                  EARL OSRIC.

fallen lumber, perceived a loose drawer, containing a number of scattered papers. She had perused the few half-mouldered books she had found. These papers seemed therefore to present a new employment for those hours in which her young charge was consigned to repose. She gathered them up, and hearing Hector's voice calling aloud for her, she returned to him, and accompanied him back to old Maud. In the evening, when sleep, with its poppy wand, had, in innocent slumbers, sealed the infant eyes of the lovely boy, Almina drew forth her late discovered treasure, and seating herself by the blaze, which Maud rekindled, she read in the first paper the following words:—

                           The Chronicles of De Warville.

   The history of my life is a legend of sorrow. Shall I avail myself of my knowledge of that rare art, which enables the mind of man to perpetuate its sentiments?                 EARL  OSRIC.         115
and leave,as a legacy to my successors,a
written transcript of my feelings,my woes,
and my wrongs? Reared in monastic se-
clusion,and prepared by education for be-
coming a member of the church, I was
encouraged to persevere in those studies,
which tend to endear retirement,and are
best pursued at a distance from the world;
but the library of St.Francis was exten-
sive, and contained a variety of works ex-
clusive of those on divine subjects.  The
works of the bards, the romances of the 
round table,the feats of Arthur,were all
read with avidity,and filled my bosom
with romantic ardour : I too longed to sig-
nalize myself.

   Like Paladin or Amadis,I would travel
over the wide world to succour the distress-
ed, and to be enabled to lay my laurels at
the feet of some being, whom my warm
fancy pourtrayed,and decorated with
every mental and personal charm that
nature could bestow.  Such a being it
was my destiny to meet, but fate ordained 116                EARL OSRIC.

not that happiness was to be mine. Torn
from me by the harsh decree of unrelent-
ing relatives, and enclosed within a living
tomb, what now has the wretched Alfred
to do with life? since she, who alone ren-
dered it valuable, is lost to him.

   Violently torn from all the delights of
this lovely world, and from the heart to
which her own was bound by the tie of
the purest attachment, she is dragged to
the altar, by the stern mandate of an un-
feeling brother, who covets too greatly
the wealth of his ancestors, to suffer him
to reverse the severe decision. From that
journey, in which I first beheld thee,
sweetest Alicia! how exultingly did I re-
turn!--At the ball, the tilt, and the tour-
nament, I saw thee amidst thy friends,
the beauty unconcealed, save by the re-
tiring modesty which distinguishes thee
above thy young compeers; and by thy
female guardian and protectress, I was
bidden to look forward with hope.--Alas!
she could not foresee the opposition that
          EARL OSRIC.                            117
   
   Would be made, nor the cruel barrier that
   would be raised between the two beings 
   she so kindly encouraged, and the attain-
   ment of happiness.   *       *
   *     *      *      *     *      *
    
     Suddenly and unexpectedly emancipated 
   from control: raised to rank and wealth,
   and unfettered from the ties which had
   nearly bound me to the obligation of em-
   bracing a conventual life, by the deaths
   of two near relatives, I was enabled to
   distinguish myself in arms; but, alas!
   where was the recompence of my toils,
   the desired meed of glory? Now that 
   my will was free, I no longer panted to 
   signalize myself.- Hope had fled for ever,
   and the selfish policy of a brother had
   consigned alicia to the gloom of cloistral
   seclusion.  The world, I am told, is in 
   arms, the crusade offers me employment,
   and in camps, and far distant regions,
   will I try if my griefs can be hushed.    *
      *       *    *    *    *    *     *
      A chasm in the manuscript here pre-118                     EARL OSRIC.

vented Almina's continuance, and she was 
obliged to look over and arrange the re-
mainder of the sheets, before she could
proceed in the perusal; but she felt
strongly interested for the unhappy Alfred,
and the name of Alicia more than once
mentioned, suggested an idea which add-
ed to her anxiety to read the whole. But
the lenght of time they had been written,
had subjected them to the effect of damp
and dust,till many of the pieces were
wholly illegible, and the rest, half worm-
eaten and decayed, were with diffculty
decyphered.

   She felt, however,assured that, in these
worn-eaten remains, she has discovered
the clue to the tale of mystery, which had 
enveloped her favorite sister Alicia at the
Convent of St.Margaret, and that Sir
Alfred de Warville was the favored lover,
from whom a brother's avarico had sepa-
rated her.

   Rude efforts at poetry and unfinished
fragments containing reflexations of the most
                 EARL OSRIC.                 119
             
melancholy nature were the chief contents 
of the parchment sheets she successively 
unrolled.-The writer had evidently be-
gan, with an intention of beguiling his
sorrows by a breif memoir of his life, but
hurried on by his feelings, he had com-
pleted little more than an unconnected
narrative of his griefs and disappoint-
ments, and the bitter waillings of a mind
weakened by calamity.

  After some trouble in arranging the
sheets, she with difficulty proceeded as
follows.

        Continuation of the Manuscript.

   The weight of woe is accomplished.
The awful fiat has gone forth, and hope
is for ever vanished.-Where now is that
form, equally dear to this heart, whether
decked with the insignia of royalty, or
habited in the rags of a mendicant, with
whom, in poverty or wealth, in the poor-


         
120            EARL OSRIC.

est hut on yon mountain's craggy side, or
in the most splendid palace the universe
can lioast, my lot must have been felicity?
Ala ! beho'd yon high altar. By the
glare of n sepulchral lamp, view yon pal-
lid form. Not een the sable veil that
shades it, can conceal the woe-worn coun-
tenance, the livid hue of despair, that has
succeeded the gladsome smiles of youth,
the sweet vivacity of innocence and peace.
Where, Oh reason', thou great vicege-
rent of the most high, where are those
beams of intellectual light, which philoso-
phers tell us dissipate the gloom of the
mind, and make all peaceful within?
Must I search after this happy calm, ere
thou wilt deign to resist this saul ?—Yes,
the monitor thou hast implanted in my
breast, tells me that even now I am re-
belling against thy laws, and allowing the
delirium of woe to take possession of my
bosom.                  EARL OSRIC.                121

I am returned from a solitary ramble in
the gloomy depths of yon vast forest. The
dark melancholy trees, whose clustering
branches formed a profound shade, waved
solemnly their stupendous heads to the
breeze, and as the northern blast rushed
through them, seemed to forbode only fu-
ture evil, only eternal despair. They
have sent hither Edgar, the son of my
sister the Countess of Osric, to amuse me.
Sweet youth, how does thy graceful form
as I contemplate it, recall my own woes
with redoubled sorrow to my mind.

Brave as noble, though yet in years a
child, he seeks to obtain renown, and has
obtained his parents sanction to attend
Prince Edward to Palestine. Heir to
my wealth and honors, fain would I ac-
company him in his perilous expedition,
and why should I hesitate?--My break-
ing heart admits no gleam of pleasure,
and the efforts of friendship arc all vain
and futile. in the dead of night I arise
from the pillow, where no sleep visits
these aching eyelids, and wander through
the desolate apartments, which i once, in122 EARL OSRIC.

the happy enthusiasm of youth, fancied
would be inhabited by the being destined
to form my earthly felicity, and prepare
me for that of heaven, and though for
ever lost to me, her rememberance remains
buried in the deepest caverns of this sad
heart.

  I have been contemplting the image 
of her who was once I fancied destined
to reign mistress of the proud towers of
Dc Warville, that picture which triumph-
antly she presented to me, as the fore-
runner of my felicity. Each soft feature
seems dreadfully altered, and a ghastly
hue overspreads the delicate tint of the
complexion. Ah, Alicia! sweetest arbi-
tress of my fate, no thus were thou wont
to regard the once happy Alfred. But no
more shall thy mild eye beam with plea-
sure and radiance on his form. In the
dreary solitude of a cloister art thou des-
tined to linger out thy days, by the inhu-
manity of him who ought to have protected
thy innocence, and provided for thy hap-
piness. 
         EARL OSRIC.        123

What Anguish is inflicted on the heart of
feeling by the conviction of unrequited
friendship! I gave mine to the youthful
brother of her I loved, in full confidence
of his worth. Though considerably my
junior, his sense and talents rendered him
interesting and apparently amiable; but
on more minute investigation, and with
the watchfulness instigated by love, I dis-
covered too certain proofs of innate depra-
vity. Yes, too sure I am, that the inno-
cence, the welfare of Alicia will find no
firm guardian in Ethelred, who, or great-
ly am I mistaken, will blacken and de-
grade the once fair and honorable name
of Douglas.

  The manuscript suddenly dropped from
Almina's hand, and instant conviction
rushed on her mind that Sir Ethelred
Douglas, the base Sir Ethelred, was the
treacherous friend of De Warville, the in-
human brother of her favorite Alicia. In
every character, the turpitude of his con-
duct had been equal.

  As brother, friend, and guardian, in all
alike, had the selfishness and malignity124            EARL OSRIC.

of his heart been manifest; yet so deep 
had been his duplicity, and so successful 
had his arts proved, that to the world he 
had worn the appearance of a courteous
and brave Knight. "Oh! how could the
good Earl St. Albert be so decieved?" was
the spontaneous expression of her thoughts,
and now a thousand well remembered cir-
cumstances contributed to convince her of
the identity of the Alicia, and the Ethel-
red, mentioned in the manuscript. What
manifold crimes were heaped on the head on the miscreant, who, to crown his guilt,
had subverted the domestic happiness of 
the good Earl Osric, and received the peace
of the family of St. Albert. She could 
read no further, but putting aside the
fragments, sought by exercise to dissipate
the uneasy reflexions they had raised.

   It was in the gloomy hour of sober
twilight, that she wandered through the
long aisles of an ancient chapel adjoining
one side of the Castle. The sorrows of
De Warville, and the knowledgeof his un-
timely fate, has impressed her mind with
more than its wonted melancholy, and
her steps became slower and more mea-
sured, as her thouts dwelt on the tale
of sorrow, which had lately engrossed so
much of her reflexions.  From deep and
awful contemplation she was suddently
aroused, by the faint and indistinct view
of a distant shadow reflected on the
ground by the bright beams of the moon, 
whose lustre suddently appeared, unveiled
by the cloud which had overshadowed it.
Almina started, and a rushing noise was
heared, as she discerned a gliding figure,
with almost soundless steps, dart past her
and disappear.  Struck with a terror she
could not repress, she turned with a hasty
pace from the chapel, and reached the
apartment where the hours of herself and
Maud had hitherto been chicfiy spent un-
marked by incident, except such as the
newly-formed accents of the lisping Hec-
tor gave birth to.  She was unwilling to
alarm the timid and superstitious mind of
her old companion, by a relation of what
had terrified her, and therefore forbore
to notice it; but after this circumstance
126          EARL OSRIC.

she could not, with any degree of comfort,
wander in the chapel of an evening. She
therefore for some days confined herself
wholly to the Castle.

  Twice since their residence at De War-
ville had they been visited by Osbert,
who was sent by the Earl to know if there
were aught wanted, which he could pro-
cure or bestow, that would add to their
comforts. He told Almina that the con-
quering Wallace was still engaged in suc-
cessful warfare, and that the place of the
Countess of Osric's imprisonment was as
yet undiscovered. Her Lord, restless and
wretched, had been indefatigable in his
researches, till subdued by mental and
bodily fatigue, his strength had failed, and
he had been confined by an alarming at-
tack of illness, at the Castle of Fitz Os-
wald, where, under the care of the Ba-
roness, who, with her Lord, had returned
thither, he still lingered, reduced to ex-
treme weakness, and meditating an appli-
cation to Edward, for his own justifica-
tion, and the redress of his wrongs.         CLLAP. VILL
 
    "Therefore devise with me, how we man by.
     Whither to go, and What to bear witt us."


    "Alas what danger will it be to us,
     Muils as we are, to travel forth so far?
     Beauty provoketh thieves soner than gold"
                                   As Yot Ligt lt.
   


  WHEN night and silence again sue-
ceeded to the daily employment of nurs-
ing and amusing Hector,Almina sought
to finish the fragments of De Warville:
but she found nothing more intresting,
than unconnected scraps of poetry, and
bitter wailings at the seraity of his des-
tiny. Feelings keen and suseceptible, with
a mind of strength insuffcient to curb
                 
                       G4
128                                 EARL OSRIC.

them, appeared throughout. She pitied the evident sufferings of De Warville, but she reprobated the weakness of thus yielding to calamity, and reflected how different would have been the conduct of the heroic Osric under similar circumstances. Alone, solitary, and compelled to seek in her own mind for resources that might assist to beguile the long hours of seclusion, the wild taste for poetical composition, which she had more than once before indulged, returned, and as she paced the gallery that overlooked what had once been the banqueting hall of the Castle, and surveyed, from its different windows, in various points of view, the mementos of fallen grandeur around her.

   A few days after her perusal of the unfinished narrative of Alfred de Warville, her sentiments were expressed in some irregular stanzas, which served to amuse the evening by looking over and correcting them.
              EARL OSRIC. 129
                  I.
Thy towers De Warville desrt now,
O'er look the barren mountain's brow,
where once in helm and armour bright,
Assemhled many a gallant Knight,
Led forth by leader stern and bold,
Whose name, on glory's list enroll'd,
Stands formost 'mid the embattled host,
That seeks yon far-fam'd distant coast,
Where mosque and minaret display
Th' invading infidel's proud sway,
O'er lands that christian valour won,
E'er war the dreadful deeds had done,
That struct at christian power the blow,
And laid the christian banners low.
    
                 II.
But yet again shall christian hands
Redeem from infidels the lands
Where erst their great forefathers bled,
And Europe's nobiest blood was shed.
De Warville, on that glorious morn,
Thou sawest the christian standard borne
  Aloft in conscious pride;
Wide spread aong you verdant plain,
Thy chieftain join'd the warlike train,
Led by a royal guide.

                III.
Since that sad day thy natal bails,
Thy ruin'd towers, thy tott'ring walls,
Sadly the mournful tale relate,
And tell the youthful hero's fate,

                   G5 130          EARL OSRIC.

      While still to honor true;
   Bravely in Palestine he fought,
   And many an infidel he taught,
       The christian arm to rue.
   Since such hard fates resistless doom,
   Since destined to a living tomb,
   Thy Castle walls in ruin stand,
   And tell how war's destructive hand,
        And time's unyielding power,
   Levell'd the honors of thy race,
   With scarce a mark thy course to trace,
        Save one fast falling tower.

                   IV.
     
    Where now the night owl's dismal cry,
    From ivied tower or turret high,
        Breaks on the list'ning ear;
    There erst came sounds of wassail gay,
    The scene of dance, and sport, and play,
         And hospitable cheer.
    When evening brought the festal throng,
    And war gave place to mirth and song,
          And beauty's winning smile;
    The minstrel's harp prolong'd the strain,
    It told of love that sigh'd in vain,
          Or artful lover's wile.
    Then breathing forth a warlike tone,
    It told of deeds of valour done,
        By many a Knight of old;
      By memory inspir'd the bard,
    With mute attention all regard,
        Till all the tale is told.
             
EARL OSRIC.   131

Thus far had she proceeded, when she
was interrupted by the indistinct sound
of a closing door, and imagining Maud
had sought her as she often did, when
Hector's impatience would not allow of a
longer separation from his young nurse,
she advanced to meet them, but as they
did not appear, she concluded she had
been mistaken, and returned up the gal-
lery.

The poetical inspiration was over, she
leaned over the railing of the balcony,
where once the minstrel was wont to attune
his lyre; and the fate of poor DeWarville
still pursuing her, she fancifully pourtray-
ed him in that very apartment, haranguing
his assembled followers, and declaring his-
resolution to take the cross.

She pictured to herself his saddened
countenance, and the grief of disappoint-
ment, that dwelt on his manly form.
Then, as she continued to gaze on the si-
lence and desolation that now reigned
through this once magnificent abode, and

132         EARL OSRIC.

remembered that Alfred, his sorrows and
weakness were no more, and the thought
recurred that yet a few years, and the
present scenes acting in the world would
be alike consigned to oblivion; in the en-
thusiasm of the moment, she exclaimed,
" Yea Osric," even thou wilt ere long be
shrouded by the same impenetrable veil,
but thy greatness, thy glory, thy heroism,
will never be forgotten. They will for
ever live in the hearts of the brave and
good, and thy virtues, and thy deeds, will
form for thee an imperishable monument.
Slowly as the words escaped her lips, she
turned from the balcony, and beheld
through the dim light emitted by the high
gallery windows, a tall figure standing be-
fore her.

  Starting with alarm, and feeling unwil-
ling to have had her thought less soliloquy
overheard, she stood motionless. ' Aimi-
na," said a voice she well knew. She
made no answer, for she was too greatly
embarrassed for speech. " Almina," re-EARL OSRIC.  133

peated the voice, "Do you not know me?"
speak I conjure you, and say I have not
by causing this surprise quite deprived
you of the powers of articulation. She
saw it was Osric. "Oh my Lord,' was
all she could utter.

Whatever were her secret feelings, she
made a strong effort to regain her self-pos-
session, and after a few minutes, was able to
express her surprise at seeing him as they
proceeded along the gallery to the room
she usually sat in. In the manner of the
Earl, not the smallest appearance betray-
ed his having heard the words she had
uttered, and she observed that he attri-
buted the emotion she had manifested,
wholly to his so suddenly appearing be-
fore her. He looked pale, but declared
he was recovered from his recent illness.
He visited the little sleeping Hector, and
before Maud, talked on indifferent sub-
jects, but when the old domestic had
withdrawn, after a short pause, the Earl
said "I wonder not that you are amazed134            EARL OSRIC.

at seeing me here, Almina, and your won-
der will be rather augmented when I tell 
you I am the harbinger of your removal 
from hence immediately.

  Various causes combine to oblige 
me to pursue this measure, and you 
must immediately prepare to depart."
And whither then my Lord," asked Al-
mina shall we now fly to" "Ah Almina,"
replied Osric mournfully. "Of yourself
only you must speak for tis you only who
must fly." Almina stood aghast, she re-
peated the words of Osric wildly, and 
shuddered.

  "Oh dearest Hector! sweet little ob-
ject of my care," said she, "I cannot, in-
deed I cannot leave ye." It is the will 
of fate Almina," said the Earl gravely, 
"and we must submit." "And where 
now then my Lord, am I to seek an asy-
lum? asked she dejectedly." "A cloister
I trust will afford you one," said Osric.
"The only place where you can remain
in security till my affairs assume a differ-
ent aspect.  Some eight or nine leagues
from this place, I understand there is an
ancient Priory of Nuns, whose characters
are such as my Almina, I think will like
to associate with.

Thither I purpose you shall bend your
way, and till more prosperous times, I
hope will find there a shelter from
the storms of the world.  Thus stern ne-
cessity commands, and to its laws we all
must submit.

Osbert shall guard you on your jour-
ney, and will I hope bring me an account 
of your safety; ever one of the subjects 
most dear to the heart of Osric.  He
ceased, and both were for a few moments 
silent.  The Earl, then desiring her to
hasten the necessary preparations for her
departure, said he would again visit his
child, and she must be ready within an
hour to set out with Osbert.
 
He then left the room, and Almina in
a kind of stupor, put together some few 
necessaries, which old Maud, who had
136         EARL OSRIC.

been told by. the Earl that Almina was to
leave them, assisted her in packing.

  When Osric returned, he requested she
would take some refreshment, before she
commenced her expedition, and while in
compliance with his entreaties, she tried
to swallow some bread and wine he briefly
related the present perturbed state of
public affairs, evidently with a view to
avoid more private and interesting sub-
jects.

  He said.he had no doubt of being able
finally to bring conviction to the ingenu-
ous mind of Edward, of the injustice done
to himself, and ultimately of the baseness
and disloyalty of Sir Ethelred Douglas,
who, under a show of devotion to the King,
he had secret reasons to think was actually
leagued with his enemies, and in his
whole proceedings had been merely actu-
ated by a love of plunder, and a selfish
regard, to his own interest

  At present the state of public affairs
was such, as to, preclude the hope of ob-
                     EARL OSRIC.                137

taining the King's attention to matters of
a private nature. He was preparing to
march with the immense army against the
hitherto victorious Wallace, with a firm re-
solution to conquer by numbers, and there
could be little doubt, Osric added, that
his purpose would be accomplished.

  Disabled himself by the effects of all
he had lately endured, from taking an ac-
tive part in the enterprize, he had been
confined to his couch by illness, during
the arrangements for the expedition, but
bound by ties of gratitude and obligation
to Edward, and highly disapproving the
late measures of the Scots, he was ready
to give his services as heretofore to his
majesty, and should await the call of duty
when called on by his sovereign, and anx-
iously wishing for an opportunity to con-
vince the King, of the baseness practised
to lower him in the opinion of his bene-
factor.

  Maud soon after entered, and informed
Almina that Osbert waited for her with-138    EARL OSRIC.  

out. With a heart almost bursting with
grief, she directed her steps to the cham-
ber of the arms, bade him a reluctant
farewell. Osric followed her, he took 
her hand in silence, and led her from the
room through the gallery, (where old
Maud stood to take her leave,) and to the
outer court. Here he placed her behind 
Obsert on one one of his own horses. In the  
act of assisting her to mount her steed,
he paused.

  "I grieve Almina," said he "to let you
depart without informing you my motives,
for your removal, but agonizing, distract-
ing to me as it is, the cause I cannot re-
veal. For the sake of more than myself,
it must be hidden within my own breast."
" To me my Lord," faintly replied Al-
mina, "no action of yours can ever need
an excuse, because I am assured your
motives are ever such as, if known, must
be approved." "I rejoice your confidence
is so unshaken" said Osric, "so much




                
                 EARL OSRIC.          139

what it ever was," at Osric Castle,he
would have said,but the words died on
his lips, and his whole frame seemed agi-
tated, as if by the remembrance.

     Almina's eyes was filled with tears.
'Twas the sweet recollection of early days,
which thus softened her heart,she turned
away  her head  to  conceal her  emotion,
and Osric lifting her on the horse, said,
 "adieu  Almina, inform me with your own
hand, by Obert, of your  welfare."  They
rode off,'and the noble form of Osric was 
soon lost to the straining eyes of Almina,
in the windings  of  the  wood.  The high
and ivied towers faded in darkness and dis-
tance, and the Castle of De Warville was 
lost in the gloom.
                       CHAP. IX. 
                       ---------

  "You faint with wandering in the wood,
And to speak troth, I have forgot our way."
                       MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM.

"This castle hath a pleasant seat; the air
Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
Unto our gentle senses."

  "Fair and noble hostess,
We are your guests to-night.:
                                   MACBETH.
                   -----------

IN silence and thought Almina jour-
nied on. Her ideas were confused by sor-
row, and the abruptness of her departure
from De Warville seemed to have involved
her mind in gloom and doubt. The early
dawn of morning first drew her from the
deep abstraction into which seh had fallen,

            EARL OSRIC.         141

and soon after the bright beams of the
rising sun attracted her attention as they
travelled down a steep declivity, the sides
of which were richly clothed with wood.
For the first time exerting her voice, she
asked Osbert if they were yet far from the
place of their destination. " Yes Lady,"
he answered, "some leagues: we shall
not arrive there at soonest before sun-set."
Almina felt surprised; she had formed an
idea that the distance she was to be cast
from De Warville was much less. Again
she sunk into musing silence, which for
several hours continued uninterrupted.

  Osbert had received a supply of provi-
sions from Maud, which he spread on the
grass under the shade of some lofty trees,
and spite of the perturbed state of her
mind, Almina felt so faint and exhausted,
that she eagerly partook of them, in the
hope of reviving her foiling strength. Af-
ter a short and hasty repast, they re-
mounted, and proceeded on their way,
through a narrow unfrequented road, bor-
142         EARL OSRIC.

dered on each side by a woody enclosure,
the trees of which were yet rich in leaf.
The road wound on for many miles in
the same truck, often, through breaks in
the thick foliage, disclosing fine views of
the surrounding country.

  Almina was an enthusiast in fine sce-
nery, and her spirits revived by the lovely
appearance of nature, she had began to
feel some return of cheerfulness, when
clouds suddenly lowered around, and the
big rain drops began to fall.
  
  "I hope," said Osbert, " we are not far
from the convent; methinks it ought
now to be near at hand, My Lord de-
scribed it as ,being exactly in this direc-
tion, and the horses begin to be sadly
tired " ;Too plainly had the lagging-pace
of Almina's steed for some time told its
inability to proceed much farther, but
willing to hope the best, though feeling
rather alarmed. She said, " If you have
a clear direction from the Earl, you need
not fear reaching it shortly." "Indeed                 EARL OSRIC.                    143

Lady," said Osbert, " I begin to be appre-
hensive I may have mistaken my Lord's
directions. The virgin guide us aright;
but methinks my mind sadly misgives me,
for sure I though there now we shoule have
come in sight of the hill that shelters the
monsatery on one side. The saints pro-
tect us, Lady. My Lord Will never for-
give me, if I lead you wrong." "Not if 
the mischance be owing to mistake, will
his anger be excited," said Alimina. "The
Earl, good Osbert, is too just ever to re-
sent wrongfully."

   The rain increased as she spoke, and
the hail began to beat against them. the
clsoeness of the road was greater than be-
fore, and in a great measure sheltered them
till arriving at a sudden opening, the shrill
sound of a horn struck on their ears, and
in an instant two men, whose habits and
appearance declared them to be robbers,
rushed from the wood, and seized the 
bridle of each of the steeds.

   Osbert was preparing in silent despairI44 EARL OSRIC.


to accede to their clamorous demands,
for the property he bore about him, when
a loud shout from the wood was heard,
and the plunderers became impatient for
their booty, but they were prevented in
the seizure of it, for the noise becoming
louder, they were obliged to quit their
prey, which they did not do till they had
struck Osbert to the ground, with an in-
tention hastily to secure the valuables he
might possess.


Almina saw no more. In the first
start of terror the reins dropped from her
nerveless hand, and she had fallen mo-
tionless on the grass,--her tired steed re-
maining quietly beside her. The party,
whose shouts had alarmed the robbers,
now came up, and perceiving the horses,
and the extended, senseless figures on the
ground, approached to view them. Im-
pulsed by active compassion, they raised
Almina, and perceived that, though in a
death-like swoon, she still breathed. A
Knight, foremost in giving his aid, re-
                     EARL OSRIC.             145
moved her veil, and discovered features so attractive, a form so superior, that all seem-
ed transfixed by amazement. Though 
pale and inanimate, the countenance
seemd to interest every beholder; one
particularly, the only female present, who
addressing the knight, " Good sir Regi-
nald,"said she, "place this poor damsel,
I pray Ye, on my palfrey, and let us con-
duct her on the instant to the Castle."
"In truth Lady," answered the Knight,
she should be conveyed to some place
where restoratives may be administered;
but can admission think you be procured
for her at the Castle?" "Fear it not," She
replied. "Know ye not that i have an ex-
clusive privilege there? ad little are ye
acquainted with my heart, if ye think I 
would not hazard some resentment in such
a cause."

So saying, she resigned her steed, on which 
the fainting form of ALmina was placed,
the Knight himself supporting her,while
Osbert was consigned to the numerous train
VOL III. 146        EARL OSRIC.

of attendants that followed their young
and lovely mistress, and the party moved 
forward.  The motion restored the scat-
tered senses of Almina, and with no small
surprise she beheld herself thus attended.
The graceful figure of the young stranger
first met her view.  Clad in the habit of
a huntress, with a high waving plumage
in her cap, long ringlets of fair hair waved
over a countenance exhibiting the most
perfect picture of innocence and content.
Her laughing eyes, and the cheerful smile
diffused over her youthful features, pro-
claimed a mind at peace.
  When she observed that returning ani-
mation had enlivened the wan cheek of Al-
mina, she joyfully ordered the train to 
halt, and the fair object of her benevolent
attention was soon restored to life, though
faint and trembling.
  Poor Osbert was still insensible.  The 
blow which had levelled him with the ground.
ground, had totally bereft him of sense
and motion, and a violent contusion on
           EARL OSRIC.        147

the head, from the weapon with which fie
had been struck, gave them cause to be-
lieve that he was dangerously hurt.—A
short space of time brought them to a
large and noble structure, which proved
the placc of their destination; and from
the discourse of the young female and the
Knight, Almina discovered that it was the
residence of the former. She raised her
eyes as they entered a vast and ancient
portal, and as they passed beneath the
huge portcullis, she beheld a pile of build-
ing, not less extensive, but far more mag-
nificent, than Osric Castle or St. Albert.

  Several vassals came from the mansion,
and the young stranger having issued her
orders to assist Almina in alighting, and
to take every necessary care of Osbert, of-
fered her arm to the former, and led her
into the Castle, the interior of which an-
swered well to the external. A lofty and
grand apartment received them. A couch
stood near a cheerful fire, on which the
young stranger placed Almina, saying,

               H 2148     EARL OSRIC.

"In this part of the mansion, which I
may exclusively call my own, may you,
dear Lady, recruit your exhausted strength
and spirits, and I pray ye fear not for
your unfortunate attendant, he shall have
every assistance that can be administered.
We have skilful leech in the Castle, who
will give his ready aid. Nor need you,
from the general character report gives of
this family, apprehend the inhospitality
for which I well know it is too justly ce-
lebrated. You shall find that, though 
these ancient walls seldom resound with
the mirth of revelry, humanity at least is
not banished from the Castle of Rosa-
mond."
 
   A name so well remembered, so inte-
resting to every feeling of Almina's heart, 
caused a sudden and violent emotion. She
gasped for breath, as in accents almost 
inarticulate she faintly repeated, "The
Castle of Rosamond! Lady, did you say?
did I hear aright? for this part of the 
country I am an intire stranger."
      EARL OSRIC.        149
  "Yes truly," answered her new friend.
"You are now in the Castle of the famed
Earl Rosamond, my grandsire, who is,
alas! borne down with age and infirmity,
and seldom quits his own apartments."
"Good heavens!" cried Almina, "and he
is my grandfather also," she could have
added, but the words died on her lips, as
the remembrance of her mother, of Fitz-
Oscar, of Eloisa, and all the scenes which
had passed in the very spot where Provi-
dence had so miraculously thrown her, all
recurred to her memory.

   The interesting young stranger endea-
voured, with the most tender and affec-
tionate assiduity, to sooth and compose
her. "Truly I perceive," said she, " that
you, Lady, are no stranger to the name
of the Earl. Few indeed, I believe, there
are who have not heard it, and fewer still
can boast a nobler lineage. But what
now avails his boasted name, and the re-
nown attached to it? Alas! it can afford
but little consolation to the mind darken-

                H 3150               EARL OSRIC

ed by misery and imbecility." Then, af-
ter a moment's pause, she added," You
have doubtless heard too of his grand-
daughter, the Lady Laura of Rosamond,
whom fame reports to be secluded from
all society, and immured in solitude.
Yet you see it has not had a very bad ef-
fect on her health and spirits, for never
was any being in possession of a better
portion of either.  I am a stranger to me-
lancholy, as well as to the world, and
know as little of low spirits, as I do of its
inhabitants."


   Almina was every moment more charm-
ed with the animated Lady Laura.  Her
little elegant form seemed familiar to her
eye, and the whole turn of her counte-
nance, she felt sure, was not unknown to
her. Memory could not at once trace the 
resemblance, till the door unclosing a fe-
male entered, who appeared many years
the senior of Lady Laura, and instantly
drought to the recollection of Almina, the
two strangers whom she had seen in the     EARLY OSRIC.     151

wood, on her journey to the Tower of
Glenmorne.

  She well remembered the enlivening
notes of the sprightly guitar, attuned by
the hand of the more sprightly Laura.
The latter, springing towards the person
who now entered the apartment, "Ah,
dear good dame," said she, "you are pre-
cisely the being I was wishing for.  You
have heard our tale, I suppose, and are
come to see whom I have had the teme-
rity to introduce at Castle Rosamond; but
I fear you not, for it is not from yourself
I have imbibed that feeling, which will
not suffer me to see any one in need of
assistance, without lending them all in my
power?--And now do not frown, I pray
ye, at my presumption, but look at the 
cause, and then be wrath if you can."

  The dame Janetta advanced towards
Almina as Lady Laura spoke, and cau-
tiously and curiously contemplated her,
but in an instant the expression of her
countenance changed to a look of admira-
            H4152       EARL OSRIC.

tion and surprise, and the eyes of Almina
were encountered by a pair so mild, yet
so sensible, that her veneration was irre-
sistibly attracted to the interesting matron.
Her complexion wore the pallid hue of
sorrow, and the bloom which might once
have enlivened it, was now quite banish-
ed. She heaved a deep sigh, and turning
to Lady Laura, "It were better, dear
Lady," said she, "that the vassals should
be cautioned not to suffer this adventure
to reach the western apartments. I am
surprised and bewildered, but the admis-
sion of this young stranger must not in-
deed be known to the Earl. Laura, my
child," she added, pressing in strong agi-
tation the hand she held, "that form,
those features," pointing to Almina,
"must not meet the eye of any of the an-
cient retainers of the house of Rosamond."
Then in the same impressive tone and
manner she addressed Almina. "I have,"
said she, "reasons of strong import for
asking you, fair stranger, to disclose your
                EARL OSRIC.            153
name and family." "My name, venerable dame," she answered, "is Almina. I am a ward of the great Earl Osric, and at an early period, far too early for my recollection, lest both my parents, the bosom friends of the Earl, who, in compliance with the dying injunction of my father, reared me with the same care he would have testified to a daughter of his own.  For the first fifteen years of my life, i resided at Osric Castle. I was now on my journey to a convent some miles from this place, when fate ordained that the good Osbert, my guide and conductor, the confidential servant of Earl Osric, should be rendered incapable of proceeding. My short but rather eventful life has been marked by more singular incidents than it often falls to the lot of a youthful female to experience, and all will I candidly relate, whenever an opportunity meet for the disclosure shall offer."
   Dame Janetta earnestly contemplated15.4       EARL OSRIC

her as he spoke. "You bear the name of your parents lady?" said she hesitatingly."
   "I do," answered Almina, but she paused to consider on announcing her affinity to the family of Rosamond with the least abruptness.Dame Janetta eagerly exclaimed,"fear no to utter it.Already has the voice of fame informed us of the public appearance of Earl Osric's ward.Your countenance,Lady,proclaims your decent,and the moment my eye met it,my heart suggested thy name and lineage.Good heaven! how little did I imagine that  I was ever destined to behold a descendant of Fitz Oscar,-a resemblance so faithful of the ill-fated Rosalinda beneath a roof,from which both were for ever exiled!-Ah,sweet Almina!in me you behold one who was an eye witness of those transactions,which perhaps have been only imperfectly related to you.I saw the parting anguish of Rosalinda; I 
            EARL OSRIC.                 155
witnessed the subsequent agonies of Eloi-
sa; I was the friend and confident of
both, though far younger than either.
For the gentle, the aniable Eloisa, I bore
the firmest friendship; but for the ani-
mated, the interesting Rosalinda, I had
the fond regard of a sister." She ceased,
and the tears of friendly remembrance
strayed down her pale cheek.
  
    They now consulted on what would be
best with regard to Almina, and it was
determined she should remain where she
was, till an opportunity offered of letting
Earl Osric know her situation.
    
    She could not conceive that her acci-
dental introduction at Rosamond Castle
would be regretted by the Earl, because
often had he lamented  the obstacles which
deproved her of her grandfather's protec-
rion; and frequently had he alluded to
have it in his power, to present the daugh-
ter of Rosalinda to her offended Sire, and
         H6   156           EARL OSRIC.

in the person of the child, lead him to
pardon and forget the errors of her mother.
Losing reflexion in fatigue, Almina slept
peacefully on the first night of her resi-
dence in Rosamond Castle.                  CHAP. X.

             " Whar are these,
So wither'd and so wild in their nttire;
That look not like the inhabitants o'th'earth,
And yet are on't?-Live you, or are you aught
That man may question?

   "Say from whence
You owe this range intelligence."


"What e're thou art, for thy good caution,
Thanks."

                                MACBETH.

   The departure of Almina from De War-
ville, preceded that of Earl Osric only a
few hours.  Committing his child to the
sole care of Maud, and leaving Osbert as
their protector, he again quitted the Ab-
bey, nor rested till he reached Fitz Os-
wald, where with the Baron and his Lady158         EARL OSRIC.

he had taken up his abode during the
his late illness, and had been driven
form thence, for the purpose of removing 
Almina, by a malignant insinuating of the 
Baroness, whose pride, unsubdued by ad-
versity was bitterly mortified by late events.
That Earl Osric should have lost the fa-
vour and confidence of the King, was an unceasing theme of regret,  nor could the
weak mind and principles of the Baroness,
find (as he did) a recompence for the sa-
crifice in the consciousness of rectitude.
She often hinted, that far from opposing his
opinions to those of the King, he ought to
have temporized, and concealed his dis-
approbation of his majesty's measures, ra-
ther that subject himself to the unworthy
suspicions which had banished him from 
the high place he had held in the royal
estimation. But the soul of Osric, supe-
rior to all dissimulation, spurned the base
idea. "That I deeply deplore the loss
King Edward's confidence," Lady, said 
he," I freely acknowledge, but could it
EARL OSRIC.     159

be instantly regained, with all the added
honours in his power to bestow, at the
price of self esteem, I would reject it un-
hesitatingly." "But why, my Lord, not
make immediate complaint of your inju-
ries? why hesitate to accuse the base
catiff Douglas of the treachery he has
practised, and let him be consigned to
the public ignominy he merits? "sure
Lady," answered the Earl. "Thou must
know that I am only waiting the pro-
per time and opportunity. My duty
will call me to join the vast army
now raising, and then I will seize a fa-
vorable moment to relate to Edward, my
whole unvarnished tail." "And in the
mean time retorted the Baroness," your
wife, the Countess of Osric, the heiress of
the noble house of Fitz Oswald, is to be
left in imprisonment, perhaps in darkness,
misery.

  Yes, too well I guess, my Eleanora the
darling of her ancient family, is to be
sacrificed to the safety of others. Osric160                 EARL OSRIC.

stood aghast at this speech, though con-
scious of his own integrity, he was pain-
fully tenacious on all that related to Al-
mina; but disdaining any subterfuge, he
intreated to know the meaning of the Ba-
roness. "It is easily understood my
Lord "said she haughtily," and should
my suspicions prove just, the seclusion of
an ancient Abbey will be found insufficient
to shield those it harbours, from the scorn
and contempt of the world."

  With these words sarcastically uttered,
she left him without pausing to hear his
reply. Almina's retirement at De War-
ville was then known, and her reputation
as well as his own, might be sacrificed to
the hasty resolution he had adopted, of
placing her there. A few minutes consi-
deration sufficed to determine him to re-
move her, and then to propose some plan
of conveying little Hector to the Castle of
his grandfather. The tulmultous state of
affairs in the north, made him too appre-
hensive of the dangers, the infant might                  EARL OSRIC.                  161

incur, to suffer him to travel with no bet-
ter protector than old Maud and a guide,
and he at length concluded, on allowing
the young heir to remain, at present, un-
der the care of his nurse, in the seclusion
of De Warville.

He was perfectly aware, that from the
mysterious disappearance of Almina, her
fair fame must have suffered, in the eye
of a censorious world, and he was
anxious that she should not emerge
from obscurity, till it could be pub-
licly cleared, but as this could not be
effected, but by the complete exposure of
Sir Ethelred, and his nefar ous plans, he
was willing that the whole should be de-
layed, till full and perfect proof could be satisfactorily adduced of the injuries, he
him e f, as well as his ward had experi-
ence from the traitor, who under the
semblance of loyalty, he had good cause
to believe, was even now treacherous to
his king and country.

It was in one those solitary walks,162   EARL OSRIC.

which the perturbed state of his mind
rendered more soothing to his feelings,
than the society of the Baroness, that he
was encountered in one of the woods, on
the domain of Fitz Oswald, by a figure
so wild, yet so striking, that it irresistibly
attracted his notice. The garb resembled
in some respect that of a female, and a
close hood enveloped the head, and nearly
obscured the countenance. The form was
tall, meagre, and spectral, and a pair of
long emaciated hands, were the only part
of the person exposed to view. This sin-
gular object passed Osric, who, though
prompted to observe it by its uncouth
garb and unsightly gait, soon forgot the
appearance in the overpowering interest
of his own, obsorbing reflections, and was
again recalled to recollection, by a sha-
dow on the ground, and instantly he dis-
cerned the same extraordinary being at
his side, and walking close to him in the
same direction.

Alarmed by this bold advance, he paus-            EARL OSRIC.    163
ed, and eyeing the figure narrowly, he said
"who art thou who thus intrudest on my
privacy? the figure through a close mask
that hid every part of the face, except the
eyes, seemed to view him with equal at-
tention.
   "I am one who knoweth thee well Earl
Osric," it answered, and bold as was the 
nature of the Earl, even he, who feared
no human power stood appalled at the wild 
unearthly tones that met his ear. "And
why dost thou seek me?" asked the Earl.
"To warn thee," it answered. "To tell
thee of thy enemy, of thy wife, and of her
thou lovest. The first, in vain seeketh
thy destruction. There is one greater than
he, who will subvert the arts of the wicked,
but time must be allowed him to entan-
gle himself in his own web, and sure as
the doom of the foolish insect who flutters
in the vortex of danger, till he falls the
victim of his own temerity, so certain is
the fall of thy foe, by the very means on
which he would build thy ruin, thy wife


          EARL OSRIC.

is in his power, but she will be extricated one, very dear to thy secret heart, will brave his arm, and rescue a sufferer, and the same hand shall crown the days with peace. Wonderous are the ways of providence, and marvellous to short sighted man its dispensations, but in mercy are the ordained."

  "And whence," asked the Earl, "thy intelligence?and why art thou thus mysterious in the communication if thy intents be friendly towards me?" "I am the friend of no one," answered the voice.

  I wage war with mankind, and alike detest them ail, but justice I love, and though actuated by no kindly feelings towards a fellow creature, I would rescue thee, and thine from the fangs of the miscreant, who pursues thee with unrelenting vengeance. vengeance! that sooner or later will fall on hi own head, and repay him tenfold, all the pangs he has caused."

"How knowest thou this? again asked Osric. " Art thou one of those presump-        EARL OSRIC.

tuous oncs, who dealest in forbidden pur-
suits, and in the dark study of the
oceult sciences scekest to obtain pro-
hibited knowledhe? how else canst thou
know ought of me or my destiny." "The 
book of nature is open to all," nwered
the voice, "and no occaltt stdy is requir-
ed to rcad the heart of man, that soil fer-
tile in vice, productive of every  noxious
weed that empoisons the peace and bo-
nour of his fellow worm." "And what is
thy purpose in thus seeking me out?"
said Osric, "Is it merely to display the 
secrets in thy possessin and to produce
no beneficial effect?" " It is to advise thee
of thy wifes salety, and of her future res-
toratin" was the answer."Thy own
virtues will lead the way to her deliver-
ance, for by one arm nerved by gratitude.
to thee, will be lifted for her rescue.
Seek the king- trust him with thy 
arrive, and fear not. In the book of fate
166             EARL OSRIC.

thy name is inscribed, attached to honors,
wealth, and fame yet to come, and in thee
shall virtue and bravery find their meed."

  with a motion rapid as lightning, 
the speaker disappeared, as the last words 
were uttered, and Osric was left alone
to meditate on what he had heard.
He knew that the study of occult sci-
ences, though pursued in secret, and hi-
den from public scrutiny, was yet private-
ly cultivated; and though his more en-
lightened mind rejected with contempt 
the possibility of supernatural influence,
he knew, that much might be learned by
abstruse studies to which the nature of
such pursuits led.

     Astrology and calculation of nativities,
though forbidden by the laws, and the
practices discouraged publicly, was pri-
vately, often in an age so unelighted,
pursued with avidity, by minds heated by
superstition, and inclined to search into
the hidden mysteries of nature; and he
doubled not that it was some such fanatic

              EARL OSRIC.                  167

he had encountered, whose warm imagi-
nation had pourtrayed unreal images, and
fixed on him, as one whom the voice of
fame had signalized, to warm and to ad-
vice
  That Eleanora was in the power of Sir
Ethelred he had never doubted, but of 
her safety, not even the assurances of his
mysterious monitor could convince him.
Yet candid and enlightened as was the 
understanding of Osrie, it could not
wholly escape a faint shade of those dark
superstitions, encouraged by the age, and
imbibed from monastic bigotry, in those
years when the mind receives its first and
most indeliable impressions.

   His late interview, therefore was not for-
gotten, and spite of reason he could not
help indulging the hope of Elcanora's
safety and escape. The visions of the 
imagination, however illusive, are sooth-
ing and delightful, to those who indulge
them, and though strength of mind formed
a principal feature in the character of
168                 EARL OSRIC.

Osric, the chivalrous spirit of the times pro-
duced a species of romance, from which
few, however exalted, were exempt, and the
peculiar, had given a tone to his feelings,
which fitted him for the indulgence of 
those romantic sentiments, that in the 
days of chivalry contributed to form the 
hero.

  A rumour now prevailed, that the King
was once more preparing to enter the
nuptual state. The Earl had no doubt
of its truth. His Majesty's marriage with
the young and lovely Margaret of France,
had been decreed by the Pope, when the 
articles of peace had been adjusted. The 
Earl had been resident at the Frenchcourt,
for some time, and knew the Princess
well. He admired her youth, her artless-
ness, and the innocent gaiety of her man-
ners, and he hoped, that beneath her aus-
pices, Almina would again find protec-
ton from the court, though he was aware
the character of the excellent Eleanor bore
                  EARL OSRIC.    169
a greater attitude to that of his ward,
than the light and volutile Margarets is, yet
he knew the prudence of Almina, and
felt assured he might  trust the dictates of
her natural good sense, which would lead
her to seek the countenance and favor of
the new Queen, and re-establish her fame 
in the great world.
  Imagining her still in the seclusion of 
the convent to which he had sent her, he
wondered that Osbert had not arrived, to 
announce her retreat, and awaited with
considerable anxiety the expected intelli-
gence.  Meantime the nuptials of the
King were notified, and the Earl's atten-
dance at court became necessary.  The 
young Queen had shown him particular
favor and attention, when he had known
her on the continent, and he flattered him-
self it might be favorable to his views of 
restoration to the friendship of Edward,
if the youthful Queen asserted his cause.
To deseend to unworthy arts, to regain
it, was alike unnatural and repugnant

    VOL.III.170             EARL OSRIC.

to the character of Osric, and if the tale
of truth, and the represensation of his
wrongs failed to bring conviction to the
mind of Edward, he resolved in a personal
conflict, to compel Sir Ethelred to ac-
knowledge his own baseness, and disclose
the fate of Eleanora ; but this was to be a
last resource.

   Douglas had proved himself an unwor-
thy competitor in deeds of chivalry, and
Osric would if possible, avoid considering
him on an equality, by a challenge to
combat; more worthy of his actions, would
be his punishment, by the laws he had
offended.

    The vile arts and insiduous calumnies
of this bitter foe to the Earl's peace seem-
ed completely to have alienated him from
the regard of the St. Albert family. The
disappearance of Almina, had severely
rankled in the breast of Arthur, and the
suspicions that Osric was accessary to her
flight and concealment, had been so art-
fully infused into his mind, that they had           EARL OSRIC                171 

   never been wholly eradicated. Fortunately
   it had happened, that the duties of war had
   effectually prevented him from encounter-
   ing the Earl, and had kept him employed
   in active service, but still his attachment 
   to Almina was unabated, and grief and in-
   dignation for her loss, were still the predo-
   minant sentiments of his bosom, and when
   he viewed the vacant listless gaze of his
   unhappy mother, and saw the faded form
   of his sister, and the silent through repres-
   sed dejection of Lady de Mornay, and be-
   held the deserted halls of his native Castle,
   his gallant spirit sunk within him, and
   the bravery of the hero was lost in the 
   natural feeling of the man.




                    12        CHAP.XI.

           "Pray do not mock me;
  I am a very foolish fond old man,
  Fourscore and upwards; and to deal plainly,
  I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
  Methinks I should know you,
  yet I am doubtful."

            Do not laugh at me;
  for, as I am a man, I think this Lady
  To be my child Cordelia."

                               KING LEAR.


      ROSAMOND Castle was a fortress of
immense strength. Its lofty bastions and
clustering towers seemed to the eye in-
vincible to human force. Strongly guard-
ed and fortified, it had withstood many
desperate assaults, and the same care was
taken to preserve its entrenchments per-
fect and to guard against insecurity, as when

             EARL OSRIC.         173

the civil wars and the discontented Ba-
rons had compelled every chieftain, fa-
vorable to the royal cause, to act on the
defensive.

  Many were the years that had now
rolled away, and beheld the proud towers
of Rosamond, free from danger or attack;
but still was the feudal greatness of the
establishment retained, and every minute
form observed with the most scrupulous
exactness. The vassals and retainers, the
attendant Knights, and personal domes-
tics, had all grown grey in the service,
and though the unhappy Earl was no
longer capable of enforcing an observance
of the ancient rules of the Castle, they
were strictly adhered to by the Knights
and vassals in attendance ; and the
hospitable board was as regularly spread
in the great hall, and almost as numer-
ously attended, as when the Earl himself
presided. The confessor of the house-
hold, and the old steward and seneschal,
managed the affairs of the family, since

               I 3
174           EARL OSRIC.

the period of the Earl's retirement from
the world.

  Living wholly secluded, and seen only
by two or three confidential domestics,
and his spiritual director, it was not ge-
nerally known that a mental derangement
had long since incapacitated him for sup-
porting his part in his family. From the
hour of Rosalinda's flight, a fearful gloom
had taken possession of his faculties.
The birth of his son, fin event joyful and
unexpected, restored him in some degree
to peace of mind; but his Lady's death,
succeeded immediately by that of this
dearly beloved son, in the bloom of youth,
again sunk him in a torpid melancholy,
from which he had never revived.

  The infant Laura was left to the care
Of her grandfather; her birth had caused
the death of her mother, and she was con-
signed to the charge of the domestics, of
Castle Rosamond, while yet too young to
be sensible of her own irreparable losses.
Fortunately for her, the admirable Dame            EARL OSRIC.                   175

Janetta yet formed a part of the house-
hold: she had attended the Countess of 
Roasamond till her dissolution, and she
preferred passing the remnant of her
days in those apartments, where she had
long resided, to the gloom of a monastic
seclusion. She had therefore accepted
the Earl's permission to remain a resident
there, and had gladly received to her ma-
ternal care the young Lady Laura, on the 
decease of her parents. Nor were her at-
tentions unacceptable to the poor insane 
Earl himself.

  Often, by her mild remonstrances, had
she soothed the wild rayings of delirium,
and with unremitting watchfulness, she 
superintended those who administered to
his unhappy disease, at times he knew
her, and sometimes his grand-daughter
was suffered to approach him; but her 
dread of him was too great to allow her to
visit him unattached. His looks were
terrific.

 Often in fearful accents of horror had

                     14
176           EARL OSRIC.

he been heard to utter the name of Rosa-
linda, and even that of Fitz Oscar had
more than once issued from his lips; but
the convulsive shuddering of his frame,
and the wild and horrid expression of his
features at the time, had declared how
deeply those names affected him.

  The monastery to which Osbert was
conducting Almina, at the time of their
providential encounter with Lady Laura
was situated within a league of Castle
Rosamond. There Lady Laura had re-
ceived much of her education. The con
fessor of the Earl was one of the fathers
belonging to the convent, and since the
confirmed insanity of its noble owner, had
almost governed the Castle. Nothing
was done by the household without con-
sulting father Luke; but over the mind
of the youthful heiress he had never been
able to acquire that sway, which he had
obtained over the bigotted Earl.
  
  Liberal in disposition, and candid in
manners, Lady Laura, under the guidance              EARL OSRIC.          177

of the excellent Janetta, had learned to
think for herself, and though she paid all
due deference to monastic institutions, and
their conductors, she positively resisted
the restraints of bigotry, and even when
the Lady Abbess recommended stricter
abstinence, and more rigid confinement,
she dared answer. "Indeed my
dear mother, not all your exhortations
can make me believe this lovely world,
and the beautiful scenes it contains, was
not made to be enjoyed. When I feel
the delight conveyed by the bounteous
gifts of Providence, can I fail to wor-
ship, to adore the glorious author of
so much good, but I feel-Oh! reverend
mother, pardon me- I feel, that were I
condemned to seclusion, and to look only
on high walls and grave faces, I should
forget all, in mourning over the de-
privation of the inestimable privilege
of loving God in his works.: "I
fear, my sweet child," the Abbess would
answer, " that thou art too volatile,


178         EARL OSRIC.

and that I am reprehensible in allowing
such converse. Yet, dear maid, am I
unwilling to check thy joyous spirits of
youthful gaiety, which, well I know, re-
sult from the innocence of thy heart.
Soon enough will it be moderated by the
treatment of that world, which thou, in,
thy inexperience, thinkest all good and
amiable as thyself."

  But not all the admonitions of father
Luke, could quell that buoyant spirit of
determined happiness which yet rendered
life a scene of peace and delight to the
artless Laura. Her satisfaction seemed
complete, since she had acquired the so-
ciety and friendship of Almina. She
gazed on, and listened to her, till she
thought her more than mortal. Her ma-
turer beauty, the exquisite perfection of
her form, with the irresistible fascination
of her manners, rendered her, in the eyes
of the enthusiastic Laura, a perfect being.

  The mind of Almina had lately been
much occupied by wishes and plans, to                 EARL OSRIC.                    179

inform her friends at St.Albert and St.
Margaret's of her safety and present resi-
dence; but Osbert continued to languish
on the bed of sickness, and the distance
to either place was immense.

  No facility of communication then ex-
isted, by which written intelligence could
with speed by conveyed, and she was com-
pelled to await the recovery of Osbert;
but to the Earl, at Fitz Oswald, a messen-
ger was dispatched bearing a relation of
what had befallen her, and soliciting his
advice as to her continuation at Rosamond
Castle. Till the answer could reach her,
Almina remained in peace and safety in
her maternal Castle.

  The Earl had lately shown partial
symptoms of returning reason, when con-
versing with his grand-daughter, in whom
his small remains of comfort seemed cen-
tred, but to every other person his de-
portment and converse were those of con-
firmed insanity. Many Knights of rank,
relatives of the ancient friends of the Earl,

                   I6180                EARL OSRIC.

frequented the Castle, and amongst them
Sir Reginald de Morgrave, who had at-
tended Lady Laura on the day of her
meeting with Almina, was one of those,
to whom it contained an irresistible at-
traction. The charms of Lady Laura
had long since made him her devoted
Knight.

   The splendid trophies of victory in bat-
tle, had been laid at her feet, and her 
name and her beauty had been celebrated
by this her devoted champion, but the
heart of Laura was yet untouched. She
felt towards Sir Reginald the most cor-
dial friendship, but it was no  more, and
she often repeated her belief, that she was
not formed to feel the passion of which
she had heard so much. Sir Reginald was
a Knight of good family, and though young
he had already signalised himself in arms,
and to Almina, he particularly recom-
mended himself by this warm encomiums 
of Earl Osric, under who he had served.
Sometimes,attended by Sir Reginald, Lady

       EARL OSRIC.       181

Laura had been suffered to partake the di-
version of hunting, and as it was one of
the few amusements which her secluded
mode of life allowed, that offered more
liberty than the others, to which she was
limited, she devoted as much of her time
to it, as she dared give.  Almina gladly join-
ed in it, and often they returned after a long
days sport, completely fatigued; but the
air and exercise thus obtained, were salu-
tary to the weakened frame Almina, and 
she rapidly regained her health and bloom
It was after a day passed in their wonted
occupations and amusements, that Almina
retiring to the seclusion of her own apart-
ment, sought to divert her attention from
corroding reflections by the sweet strains 
of her lute.

  The lofty windows of the gallery adjoin-
ing, commanded a view of the Black
Tower, a spot of deep and peculiar interest
to her, and in the indented seat, near one
of the casements, she often placed her-
self to contemplate the scene so eventful182        EARL OSRIC

to her parents, so destructive of the peace
of the hapless Eloisa. Thither were
her steps now directed, it was the sober
hour of twilight, Lady Laura, sanc-
tioned by the presence of Dame Ja-
nette, was in converse with Sir Reginald,
but the mind of Almina was more inclin-
ed to solitude, than society, and she land
quitted her more lively friend to indulge,
alone, in the Luxury of uninterrupted me-
ditation. Often before, had the reflections
that now filled her mind occurred to her
in the same place.

The Black Tower, its ponderous walls,
and messy fastenings, maintained the
same gloomy terrific aspects, as in former
days; and except that it was still more
blackened by time, its appearance was ex-
actly what it was, when its rugged walls had
echoed to the songs of Florio, or vibrated
to the loud lament of Fitz Oscar. In full
view was the narrow grated window, be-
neath which Eloisa first heard the sounds,
that lured her to misery, and there was.                   EARL OSRIC.        183
 

still the small postern gate, by which the
unwary Arno admitted the unfortunate
enthusiast. "Yes," sighed Almina, "years
have rolled over imperceptibly, and the
chief actors, in that eventful scene, are now
no more seen, and scarcely remembered;
yet are its effects bitterly felt by their
descendants. Eloisa still lives a victim
to the most direful of human inflictions,
and the child of Rosalinda continues es-
tranged from the parent, whose reason fell
a sacrifice to her errors," desirous to
divert her thoughts from subjects so
painful, she had recourse to her lute, and
in its melody sought to tranquilize her per-
turbed bosom. The dim shadows of twi-
light were diffused around, ere she had
concluded an evening address to the holy
virgin, and the last strain hovered on her
lips, when a sound, as if of human aspira-
tion, tremulously, but feelingly uttered,
startled and interrupted her.
  
  There seemed to be no living being in184                EARL 

thegallery save herself,but even the super-
stiton,so prevaelent amid all runks in that 
age, had failed in clouding the judgment,
or misleading the natural good sense of
Almind, and she looked cautiosly around
her, just in time to behold a figure emerge
from behind a pillar, that supported one
side of the gallery, which at once asto-
nished and alarmed her. It was a tall,
majestic from slightly enveloped in a lose
mantle. The head was that of an old 
man, long grey hair fell around an emaci-
ated visage, and the eyes wild and hol-
low,seemed to beam with superatural
brilliancy, as in mournful eager gaze, they
rested on her conntenance. In an atti-
tude of surprize and terror, Almina await-
ed the slow approach of this singular ap-
pearance, in whom, a moments reflection
convineed her,she beheld the insane Earl
her hrandfather.
   The certainty incressed her terror, and
 scarceely could her utmost courage suffice

          EARL OSRIC.         185

to support her, when he drew near, and
as he wildly surveyed her, uttered in a
voice of shuddering horror, the name of
Rosalinda! "  st thou burst the tomb poor
child," said he in low and mournful ac-
cents, " to seek thy cruel parent ? art thou
come to soothe him with heavenly har-
mony ? but do not bring Fitz Oscar with
thee, no, he robbed me of my child, he
provoked me to utter a malediction, which
heaven has realized and punished—But
it has fallen on my own head, sorrow
has hovered over me, and the form of
Rosalinda pursues me through the
long day and lingering night, not
frowning, severe, and grief worn, but
young, fair, and blooming, as now;"
and again, his haggard gaze seemed to
survey her person with eager scrutiny, ft
was evident that the resemblance Almina
bore to her mother, had seized on the
imagination of the poor maniac, and that
he believed it was the spectre of his186             EARL OSRIC.


daughter he beheld, but had she felt it
possible to undeceive him, the extreme
terror of Almina, would have rendered her
powerless. A human bes g deprived of
reason, a sight that never but once before,
it had been her lot to behold, and then in
the wild melancholy of Adeliza, she had
beheld none of that phrensied and terrific
air of horror, which appeared in every look
of the object before her; clinging to the
window frame for support, she suffered
her robe to be grasped in madness by the
Earl, who, apparently too weak to stand
long unsupported, had sunk on the floor,
where he continued to address her as the
desembodied spirit of Rosalinda.

      At this moment of alarm, steps were
heard approaching, and with a sensation
of relief, greater than she had ever expe-
rienced, Almina beheld Dame Janetta ap-
pear with a light. Her amazement may
be conceived, at beholding the Earl, whom
the accidental inattention of this nurses,
          EARL OSRIC.          187

had suffered to escape from his apartment,
an wander to the gallery.

  She instantly beheld in the pallid
countenance of Almina her extreme ter-
ror, and, summoning the Earl's attendants,
she gently but firmly rescued her from his
hold, and persuaded him to allow himself
to be led back to his chamber ; this, with
some difficulty, she effected ; his strained
eyes still dwelt on the form, he fancied
was his daughter, and he continued cal-
ling on her name, conjuring her once
more to let him listen to the magic sound
of her voice, while Almina hastened, once
at liberty, to escape back to her chamber;
but here the figure of her grandfather pur-
sued her, nor could she during the night,
lose the impression which the awful wild-
uess of his looks and mariner had left on
her mind, nor cease to remember, that, in
him she beheld another victim to the er-
rors of her ill fated parents.          CHAP. XII.

   "Alack tis he !  Why he was met even now
    As mad as the vex'd sea, singing aloud,"
  

    "What can man's wisdom do,
    In the restoring his bereaved sense?
      Phy.-There is means, madam;
    Our foster nurse of nature is repose,
    The which he lacks; that to provoke in him,
    Are many simples operative, whose power
    Will close th eye of antiguish."

                                   KING LEAN.

    EARLY on the following morning. Al-
mina was visited BY Dame Janette, who
came to inform her how the Earl had
passed the night. The paroxysm of the
preceding evening had produced a very
unusual effect. On his return to hid 
chamber, he had appeared suddenly                   EARL OSRIC.                  189

moody and silent, and for a long time re-
mained in an apparent sort of stupor.
Towards the middle of the night he seem-
ed to be roused from it, and addressing
Dame Janetta, (who, from apprehension
of the consequences of his meeting with
Almina, had not quitted his bed-side,) he
asked her whether he had ever quitted his
apartment, or whether the vision of Ro-
salinda, which he believed he had seen,
was only a dream? His words and man-
ner were far more than commonly ra-
tional, and he continued to dwell on the
subject, and to urge the Dame to fetch Ro-
salinda to him, as if convinced she were
actually in existence, and he had really
seen her.

  Gradually he seemed to have returning
gleams of reason, and to regain the powers
of memory. That he retained a distinct
recollection of the interview of the pre-
ceding evening was evident, and that he
remembered it with an anxious desire to
behold the form of his daughter again190                EARL OSRIC.

was plain. After a consultation with the
confessor, the Dame had decided on the
propriety of re-admitting Almina to the
presence of her grandsire, and now came
to conduct her to his chamber. She had,
with care and caution, prepared the Earl
to see her, and told the tale of his
grand-daughter, and her long concealment
by Earl Osric, with all the circumspection
her prudence suggested, and she had the
satisfaction of seeing, that it produced
the happiest effects on the Earl.

At first his wandering mind seemed in-
capable of conceiving and combining the
circumstances she related, but by degrees
he began to comprehend the narrative, and
to listen with even intense earnestness,
often asking for a repetition of the parts,
most interesting to his feelings; and when
she had concluded, he so pathetically en-
treated to behold his grandchild, that fa-
ther Luke and the Dame had deemed it
most prudent to acquiesce.

Reclined on a couch, pale and emaci-


          EARL OSRIC.      191

ated, Almina found the once haughty
Earl Rosamond. His eyes were eagerly
directed towards the door as she entered,
and rested on her form and face the mo-
ment she met his view with the same
anxiety, but less of wildness than the
preceding evening.

  His thin hand was extended, and " my
poor child! my Rosalinda! faintingly es-
caped his lips." "Not Rosalinda, but
Almina, your grand-daughter is called,"
said Dame Janetta. "The name was given
her by her early protector, the good Earl
Osric." " Did Earl Osric protect thee,
poor child ?" cried the Earl. Yes, for
thou hadst no natural friends. No, no,
Fitz Oscar took care of that. Mark hie,"
he added, with suddenly renewed wild-
ness, "the robber, the base plunderer,
deprived her family of Rosalinda, her sis-
ter of reason, and her father of peace for
ever. Yet was he thy parent, and thou
must not curse him."

  " Oh no, my Lord," said Almina, in a192                    EARL OSRIC.

voice of strong emotion, "I will pray for
him; pray that his errors may he forgiven,
for well I know my unhappy father was a
penitent, and he died imploring pardon
from on high."

  A wild stare of unsettled meaning was
the only answer, but her hand was grasp-
ed fervently by the poor insanc Earl, and
after a long pause, "who then art thou?"
said he, "if not Rosalinda?" "Her
child," cried Almina, "the child of your
once favored daughter, who implores the
forgiveness of her mother's direful fault."
"True, Ah true," said he; "but my head
is bad, and my mind incapable of-----.
No matter, no matter, 'twill soon be over,
and I shall then be laid by Rosalinda,
and poor Eloisa will weep over the grave
of both."

  Dame Janetta saw that the reason of
the Earl was becoming again estranged,
and she advised that he should take some
repose; but he would not suffer Almina
to leave him, and continued to hold her
hand, and gaze on her face.EARL OSRIC. 193

Father Luke, who was also skilful in
medicine, and administered to the corpo-
real as well as mental disease of his patron,
now persuaded him to partake of a com-
posing medicine, and advised that he
should seek rest. It operated as he wish-
ed, and while the Earl still retained his
new-found grand -daughter by his couch, he
sunk unconsciously into a slumber; and
Almina, with noiseless step, quitted the
apartment, and joined Lady Laura, who
impatiently awaited her report of the in-
terview. In about an hour, hearing that
he still slept, they both repaired to his
apartment, and watched by his couch.
Long and salutary were his slumbers, and
he awoke calm and collected. Almina
withdrew from his sight, and the Earl
perceiving Lady Laura and the Dame, af-
ter gazing at each by turns, said, "I
have then been dreaming ; would I
could sleep and dream thus again."
"What delightful vision has made you
sleep thus pleasant, good my Lord?"

VOL. III. K194               EARL OSRIC.

asked Lady Laura. " I thought, my
child,"he answered,"that i had found a
sister for thee; one who shared with thee
my affection, Methought she knelt to
me, suffered me to grasp her hand, and
told me she was the child of Rosalinda.
The long estranged name sounded sweet-
ly on mine ear. A form,young,fair,and
blooming as thine,my Laura,bent over
my couch;her hand was clasped in mine,
and I felt assured that she was another
grand-daughter;one whom the crimes and
weakness of her parents have hitherto
made an alien from my arms,and I re-
posed in sweet security,till I awoke and
found but thee and our good Dame."

Lady Laura and her faithful burse were
charmed to hear him speak thus ration-
ally,and to find that his memory so te-
naciously retained a recollection of his
interview with Almina. The task of con-
vincing him,that what he fancied a vision
of the sleeping imagination was reality,
was undertaken by Dame Janetta.

          EARL OSRIC.         195

  At first his clouded intellect was slow
and confused in his attempts to under-
stand her meaning, and he appeared be-
wildered as much by excess of feeling, as
from weakness of mind ; but the judicious
method adopted by the prudent Dame,and
her cautious endeavours to avoid alarming
him completely succeeded. Many times
he made her repeat the tale, and seamed
to try to convince himself of the reality.
Again at length was Almina admitted,
and fondly embraced by her grandfather.
" In thee my child, in thy society, he
cried with strong emotion. May the sor-
rows, the dire misfortunes that ushered
thee into existence be forgotten, and may
Rosalinda look down from the abodes of
the blessed, and behold her child received
to the bosom of her parent."

  From this hour the disordered faculties
of the Earl seemed gradually to recover
from the lethargy into which long indulged
grief and misanthrophy had plunged them,
and he became by degrees restored to rea-

                K 2196                EARL OSRIC.

son, and to the enjoyment of domestic
comforts. He insisted that Almina should
remain under his protection, and share his
wealth with her cousin Lady Laura, and
claimed as much of their time and atten-
tion as was not devoted to their daily ex-
cursions for air and exercise.

  In the exquisitely beautiful person of
Almina, it was evident he contemplated
his favorite daughter Rosalinda, and his
dim eyes would gaze unsated on her form,
till long suppressed tears would bathe his
aged cheek, and the bitter sigh of recol-
lection' burst from his bosom. But
though the mental faculties of the Earl
were thus unexpectedly restored, it was
perceptible to all around him, that his
bodily strength was fast receding, and he
soon became sensible of his own decay."

  "Fain would I," said he one day to Al-
mina, "ere I leave the world methinks,
behold and thank that kind benefactor of
that hapless mother, and thyself, my Al-
mina, this good Earl Osric, of whom thou             EARL OSRIC.          197

hast spoken so much. As a youth, I es-
teemed him, and as a brave Knight, when 
his renown has reached mine ear, I have
admired him, and applauded his deeds ;
but his kindness and protection of thee,
my child, calls for my warmest gratitude, 
and I would pay him at least the poor
meed of my acknowledgments, could I see
him." "Wouldst thou not then, my Lord,
that I should address him by letter, and dis-
patch a courier with it to Fitz Oswald?"
said Almina, "for full well I know how
it will glad the Earl, to know that I am
happy in thy parental favor." "Do so then, 
my child," said the Earl, "and the trusty
Jaques shall bear thy letter."
  Gladly Almina retired to perform an 
office so accordant to her wishes, and mi-
nutely she related to Osric all that had 
occured at Castle Rosamond. She ex-
pressed the anxious desire of her grand-
father, to behold and thank him for the
benefits he had conferred on herself and

                  K 3

198           EARL OSRIC.

parents, and declared her happiness at
being permitted to remain beneath the
protection of her natural friends. She
concluded with affectionate inquiries af-
ter the little Hector, but she dared not al-
lude to the Countess, for ignorant whe-
ther any tidings had been learned of her
fate, she feared to revive anew, unavailing
grief for her loss, by mentioning her name.
  
  The courier proceeded to Fitz Oswald,,
but Earl Osric had quitted the Castle,
and had proceeded to join King Edward,
and he was obliged to follow to London,
the Earl, having, by command of the King,
returned to Court previous to joining the
army, preparing to invade and effectually
humble Scotland to the English yoke.
 
  Well informed of all events in the
north, Edward had found with satisfac-
tion that some of the most violent of the
Scotch nobles, envying the power and
popularity Wallace had acquired, by his
success in repelling the English army,
were determined on opposing his mea-
            EARL OSRIC.         199

sures, and dispossessing him of the office
of Regent, to which he had been called
by the unanimous voice of the people; and
to avail himself of the treachery and in-
gratitude manifested towards the hero,
who had hitherto so successfully asserted
the liberties of his country, became the
study and determination of Edward.

  The Earl gladly seized the opportunity
afforded by the King's permission, to at-
tend him at Court, to attempt to reinstate
himself in the royal favor, and successful-
ly to vindicate his own loyalty, and ex-
pose the treachery of the fiend who had
displaced him from the heart of Edward.

  The return of Earl Rosamond's mes-
senger brought this answer.

  To the Lady Almina Fitz Oscar,

    AT THE CASTLE OF ROSAMOND.


The feelings of thine own heart, dearest
Almina,will best tell thee what were those
of mine, on perusing the intelligence thy

                 K 4
200          EARL OSRIC.

letter conveyed. Praised be the Almighty
Power, which, through a variety of dan-
gers and difficulties, has conducted thee
at length to thy proper home, and the
protection of thy natural parent.

  I grieve that the fierce passions which
have so long preyed on the reason of Earl
Rosamond, should have also destroyed his
health; and as it appears probable that his
race of life is nearly run, I bless the Pro-
vidence which, ere he sunk to the tomb,
brought thee to console his last hours.

  I go, my Almina, once more to encoun-
ter the enemies of Edward; I need not
tell thee how truly I deplore the cause
which compels me to take arms against
Scotland. I pity its misguided people,
and I admire the wild and almost super-
natural bravery of the young hero, who
leads their armies; but gratitude binds me
to the side of Edward, and the vindica-
tion of my own honor, far dearer to me
than life, requires the complete exposure
of the disloyalty of the villain who has        EARL OSRIC.                    201
been thy enemy, as well as mine, and who,
even now, holds my Eleanora in his toils.
     Sir Ethelred Douglas is in Scotland,
and much, I suspect, under pretence
of being a spy on the movements of wal-
lace and his troops, he has secret intelli-
gence with the enemy, and acts a treach-
erous part, alike to the credulous English
and the deceived Scotch. That all his
insinuations have failed in  alienating the
heart of Edward, I have the fullest evi-
dence; and the strong inclination he ma-
nifests to be reconciled to the friend who
has ever loved and honored him, assures
me that still in his inmost soul he believes
me faithful.

     My  Hector is well. Would I could
once more behold him in the arms of the
friend who preserved him from death at
the hazard of her own precious life, but it
must not be. Heaven in its own good
time, will, I trust, restore both to me.
Happier days, my Almina, I will believe
await us.

       K5
202                 EARL OSRIC.

  The marriage of the King to the fair
and youthful Margaret will shortly take
place, and I augur good to myself from
the union. Margaret is amiable, as she is
lovely, and has ever been most gracious in
her deportment towards me, while resi-
dent at the Court of France. Her interest
will aid my cause with the King. Among
the Knights appointed to attend her, I
hear the name of St.Albert, and much it
grieves me that such an estrangement
should exist between me and the son of
my oldest and most valued friend.

  Here too the mildew of Douglas's
treachery is evident, but still Heaven is
just, and I bid defiance to despair. Com-
mend me to Earl Rosamond, and to the
Lady Laura. Should the fortune of war
destine my return to my native country,
and the favor and friendship of Edward
once more be mine, thou wilt assuredly
behold me at Castle Rosamond; till then
duty detains me from thee.

  In thy retirement let me have thy                EARL OSRIC.                    203
prayers, that the machinations of the
wicked may be discomfited; that the
honor of thy earliest friend may be proved
unsullied to the world, and to the King;
and that the restoration of Eleanora may
one more impart the long estranged 
guest, tranquility, to the heart of 
                                       OSRIC.



                 CHAP. XIII.

                    ______

          "Albeit you have deserv'd
   High commendation, true applause, and love,
   Yet such is now the dukes condition,
   That he misconstrues all that you have done."
                                    AS YOU LIKE IT.

   "I am sorry I must never trust thee more,
   But count the world a stranger for thy sake, 
   The private wound is deepest."
                           TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA.

       ___________________________________

  The immense army with which King
Edward purposed to march in person
against Scotland, was now the general
theme of discourse. The few Knights
who frequented Castle Rosamond, were
now compelled to attend the call of duty,
and even their last and most constant at-                    EARL OSRIC.                  205

tendant, Sir Reginald, was obliged to leave
the presence of the Lady Laura, and bear
arms at the royal summons.
  
  To the Watchful eye of Almina, it soon
became evident, that though the mental
faculties of her grandfather gained daily,
additional strength, his bodily health pro-
portionably declined. Extreme weakness, 
seldom permitted him to leave his couch,
and he at length expressed a wish, once
more to hear from, or to behold his daugh-
ter.

   A courier was therefore dispatched to 
St. Albert, bearing from the Earl a man-
date for Eloisa, or if she were unable to 
obey it, for her son. To an interview
with St. Albert, Almina looked forward
with much anxicty. Should he renew 
his claims, she felt that she ought to yield
immediate acquiescence, but he had as
yet been silent, though acquainted with
her restoration. The long narrative she
had to relate, she dreaded to enter on, so
fearfully must it involve him with one so
206                               EARL OSRIC.

nearly connected with his family. Yet for her own justification, it was inevitable, and she awaited in anxious suspense the return of the messenger. Before he arrived, the indisposition and weakness of the Earl had fearfully increased, and it was evident his last hour rapidly approached. The messenger brought intelligence of the continued melancholy of Lady St. Albert, and that her son, being one of the Knights in attendance on the young Queen, was on duty at court; but that the first hour he could procure permission for absence, should behold him depart for Rosamond Castle.

   Poor Almina in a state of alternate anxiety and dejection for several days, shared with Lady Laura in watching her declining grandsire, whose reason appeared perfectly restored, and he could even converse on former events, and detail his own sufferings. The approaching arrival of Lord St. Albert was at length announced by his herald, and Arthur shortly after
         EARL OSRIC.         207


made his appearance. Thp anticipations
and apprehensions of Almina were all
confirmed as soon as she was presented
to him. He gravely bowed, turning very
pale, and almost shudderingly recoiling
from her offered hand, but recollecting
himself, he began in a hurried voice to
converse of his grandfather, and his desire
to behold him, and being conducted by
Lady Laura to his chamber returned no
more to the society of Almina, but declar-
ed his intention to remain with the Earl
during his stay at the Castle. Though ac-
knowledging that St. Albert had some
reason to distrust the mysterious manner
in which she had disappeared, she felt in-
dignant that he had not sought an expla-
nation from her, and she felt assured that
the malignity of Sir Ethelred had been  
exerted to prejudice the St, Albert family
in her disfavor. Lady Laura seemed much
struck with the grace of person, and cour-
tesy of manner, conspicuous in St. Albert,
and Almina was tempted to breathe a se-208             Earl Osric.

cret wish, that Arthur might transfer to
her cousin, the attachment he had once
felt and professed for herself.  With ex-
cellent health and spirits, unsubdued by
ought in the form of care, Lady Laura
was an object of more striking attract-
tion to the generality of beholders,
then her more sensitive cousin.  The
trials she had endured, had left their
stamp on the countenance of Almina.
Though still exquisitely lovely she
was far more pale and pensive than nature
had formed her, and though the fine ex-
pression of her features, not even sorrow
and anxiety could remove, it was tinged
with a degree of melancholy unnatural
to her character and manner.

     It is uncertain, that St, Albert observ-
ed the alteration.  His eyes, save in the
moment of introduction, never once met
hers, and he appeared assiduously to avoid
her presence, devoting his whole attention
to Lady Laura, and the Earl.  The latter                      EARL OSRIC           209

grew so much worse on thec-
ceeding his grandson's arrival, that it be-
came evident to the groupe that sur-
rrounded his couch,that he could not long
survive.He declared it his wish and in-
tention that Almina should share with
LadyLaura the wealth of her ancestors, and
that as no male heir could succeeded to his ti-
tles and estates, that they should continue
to reside together at the castle of Rosa-
mond.To all that related to Lady Al-
mina Fitz Oscar, St.Albert was invariably
silent; but he assured the Earl, that if his
cousin,Lady Laura would deign to con-
sult him as to her affairs and arrangements,
he would gladly yield his best services
and advice.
  
     The Earl signified his approbation, and
while yet his youthful relatives surround-
ed his bed, he blessed them all, and then
desired to be left alone woth his confessor.
Soon after the last rites had been admi-
nistered, they were again summoned to  210       EARL OSRIC.
his chamber, and in a few minutes his
soul was released from its earthly prison.
It was improbable that Almina should
feel more on this occasion, than the awe
natural to the human mind, on witnessing
a scene of morality. she had been
taught to consider Earl Rosamond as se-
vere and inflexible, and she saw, that too
late, remorse had fearfully embittered his
last hours. To this feeling was she in-
debted for his acknowledgments of her,
though had not chance, or rather the in-
tervention of Providence, brought her to
his view, no inquiry would have been
made after her. She rejoiced in the for-
tunate events, which in her form had
brought peace ti the perturbed spirit of
her grandsire, but she could feel little at-
tachment to either his person or charac-
ter. The asylum of her paternal Castle,
and the respectable protection of her
nearest relations, seemed providentially
offered her, at a period when the mystery
of her late destination, and its publicity,EARL OSRIC. 211

would render her a mark for general ob-
servation.

  After the funeral obsequies had been
performed, St. Albert proposed immedi-
ately quitting the Castle, but Almina felt
an insurmountable repugnance to suffer
him to depart, without explaining as much
of what had happened to her, as would
suffice for her vindication. Whe there-
fore he gravely approached to take his
leave, ere, after the evening repast, they
retired for the night, saying that he
should depart from the Castle at the
morning's dawn, Almina, while a blush
crossed her cheek, said, " If thou art not
too greatly fatigured, my Lord, I would
solicit thy attention for a short space of
time, and in the presence of my cousin
and time, request thou would'st deign to
listen to a recital, which I have not yet
amply given, even to her, who, as I am to
share her home, and she has kindly pro-
mised me her sisterly friendship, has an
undoubted right to know the particulars
212        EARL OSRIC.

of my past Jife. Nay, fear me not, my
Lord, I have no intention to deceive thee,
for, in truth, 1 am innocent of wrong, nor
would I, believe me, recall the sentiments
thou once didst me the honor to profess
for me; for, where once suspected, I
know time is requisite to restore confi-
dence unbounded, such as would be re-
quisite for my happiness. Simply in my
own vindication, and because 1 conceive
it would be reprehensible cowardice to
shrink from an investigation of my con-
duct and actions, have I intruded myself
on thy notice, which, as thy once favored
cousin and friend, I grieve to see is unwil-
lingly given."

  " Almina," said Lord St. Albert, with
strong emotion, " hitherto I have believed
myself the injured party. If thou, as thy
words bespeak thee, art innocent, then art
thou most injured indeed. 1 had re-
solved no more to listen to thy words, nor
hear any defence of thy mysterious con-
duct, but in spite of appearances, thouEARL OSRIC. 213

assuredly wearest an aspect free from
blame; and Oh! how greatly do I wish
thon may'st be enabled to exonerate thy-
self from suspicions like those affixed to
thy character, from the late dark events
which have attainted thy fair fame, and
given a severe blow to the peace of thy_
best friends."

"Alas!" said Almina, "the peace of
my friends will be scarcely less wounded,
from the tale I have to relate, than if my
actions had been as reprehensible as they
at present deem them. I have, indeed, a
narrative to give, which will, which must
severely lacerate the hearts of those I
most revere."

The curiosity of St. Albert was fearfully
excited, he felt that something dreadful
Was about to be disclosed, and he began
to apprehend that he had injured his fair
relation by his suspicions. With breath-
less eagerness he listened to her recital ;
but who can paint his indignation, when
the treachery by which she had suffered
214                 EARL OSRIC.

was delineated, he could not hear her
in patience, but started up, vowed furi-
ously to revenge her wrongs, called her
his injured Almina, and protested he
would pursue the miscreant, Sir Etherlred,
through the world. "No my Cousin," said
Almina, " heaven will avenge my cause,
do not thou rob thy unhappy parent, of her
last hope, by sacrificing thy life to the
sword of a traitor. Rely on it thy sovereigns
ire, will sooner or later be raised against
him, and not always will he be suffered to
triumph. No revenge of thine can res-
tore the injured Adeliza, and the exposure
of Sir Ethelred will completely justify my
honor." " It is repugnant to every felling
of my soul,dearest Almina," said St.Albert
" to wait the tedious process of the law.
Rather let me publicly unmask the traitor,
and let this arm punish his baseness be-
fore the assembled world."

  Lady Laura joined earnestly with Al-
mina, in supplicating him to be discreet,
                  EARL OSRIC.

and to restrain his impetuosity lest it should mar his intentions of displaying Sir Ehtelred in his true colours.  Should he, by any imprudence on the part of St. Albert, discover the plans forming againt him, his native art and subtlety would lead him to measures that might frustrate them wholly, since they were well aware that he would hesitate at no falsehood, nor be prevented by any scruples of conscience; from seeking to disappoint their aims by the most violent means.
     To all these reasons, adduced with gentleness by Almina, he acquiesced, and promised to preserve his temper; and suppress as much as possible, that indignation, which, the recollection of the injuries his family had sustained, could not fial to raise.  While yet the mind of St. Albert was fearfully agitated, by the late communication of almina, and e're he had leisure to examine how far it had revived the sentiments he had formerly
216         EARL OSRIC.

professed for her, a messenger arrived ex-
press, to demand his attendance at court.
A decisive battle with the Scots was every
day expected, but whether he was to
bear arms and join the King, or remain
to guard and attend the young Queen, was
at present unknown.

  In taking leave of Almina, he betrayed
great emotion. " Adieu my fair cousin,'
said he, " I go to clear thy fame, from
the pestiferous breath cf calumny, and
ere thou again beholdest me, trust me the
traitor Douglas shall have dearly paid for
thy injuries." " I wish not for revenge,"
said Almina, "only restore my character
unspotted to the world, and let the mis-
creant be punished before a higher tribu-
nal, than he can be arraigned at here."

  " And should I succeed, Almina," said
Arthur sighing as he held her hand, " say
shall happiness yet be mine." " I fer-
vently hope it will my dear cousin," said
Almina, " but let it be sought with some
one, whose peace and whole fame are free           EARL OSRIC.                      217

from stain. A mind wounded by misfor-
tune, and harrased by injuries.-A repu-
tation unjustly depreciated, and a heart
deeply feeling the mortifications it has ex-
perienced, will be an ill reward to the
warrior. No Arthur, rather direct thy
choice in future to the unspotted purity
of a mind new to the world,and ignorant
of its cares and anxieties."

 She could not forbear glancing, as she
spoke, towards the spot where Lady Laura,
blooming in youthful beauty stood, by no
means an uninterested spectator, for she
was deeply struck with her cousin, and
secretly wondered at the apathy and indif-
ference Almina manifested towards him.
To her last words, St. Albert made no re-
ply, he only pressed her hand, bowed to
Lady Laura, and attended by his train,
quitted the castle and took his way to
London.


vol.III.         L
                CHAP. XIV.

  " My Spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up."
                                  
                                       TEMPEST.

                  " Can such thing be,
And overcome us like a Summer's cloud,
Without our special wonder ?

                                        MACEETH.

    " Why do you start; and seem to fear
Things that do sound so fair ?"
                                        
                                         INID.


   AFTER the departure of St. Albert,
the fair heiresses of Rosamond were bu-
sied in arranging their household, and
fixing on their future plan of life. Alike
mild in temper, and amiable in disposi-
tion, they resolved, that only death, or the
marriage of one, should separate them.EARL OSRIC. 219

 
Mutually and equally attached, the first
wish of each, seemed to be that of render-
ing the other happy.


The good Dame Janetta, remained
with them, their maternal adviser, and
best friend; and Almina, after the various
and adverse storms of her early life,
seemed to have found, at length, that
haven of quietness, for which she had so
ardently longed.


In the present disposition of her mind,
the retirement of Rosamond Castle was
so precisely suited to her taste, that she
dreaded lest the lively and volatile spirits
of Lady Laura, should lead her to desire
an introduction to the world; but though
gay and happy, her cousin had much of
the timidity a secluded education is apt
to produce, and while she could ramble
through the woods of Rosamond, enjoy
the amusement of the chase, and join the
vassals in an evening dance in the great
hall, or on the specious lawn, she sighed
not for more splendid scenes.

 
L 2
220                 EARL OSRIC.

  To indulge her in every innocent recrea-
tion, was the delight and study of the
Dame, and Almina; and though the
armies of Edward, had robbed them of
many of their gallant Knights, they could
still muster sufficient for the dance, and
fill their hospitable board.

  The choice of Almina's heart often led
her to solitude, and the wild woods around
the Castle invited oft her wandering steps
through their intricate mazes; but she
was cautious to suppress any inclination
that might lead to indulgences inimical to
her peace; and, with the same resolution
she had hitherto through life manifested,
she banished, as much as possible, all ener-
vating reflections, and devoted herself to
the duties of friendship, religion, and cha-
rity.

  It was on a warm evening, after a sul-
try day, that walking on the ramparts she
observed the appearance of the heavens
indicated an approaching storm. For
some time she watched the lurid clouds,                 EARL OSRIC.
as they floated in the west, emitting at times the vivid lightning.  Suddenly she espied beneath the Castle walls, a party of pilgrims, who appeared tired and wayworn, and seemed to cast glances of alarm at the threatening prospect of the reddened atmosphere.
     Pausing when they beheld her, and a young female pilgrim ceasing from chaunting a vesper hymn to the Virgin, with which she seemed to be endeavouring to beguile the weary steps of her companions, the travellers made their obeisance; and Almina, noticing and pitying their apparent fatigue, leaned over the wall, and with her wonted courtesy, invited them to share the hospitality of the Castle.  The offer was readily, and gratefully accepted, and orders were immedintely issued to the Seneschal, and a table spread in the great hall for the way faring pilgrims.  Night came on, and the storm increased.  Beds, a luxury to which the pilglims were not always accustomed, were ordered for222             EARL OBRIG.

them, and ere they retired for the night,
Almina and her cousin repaired to the 
hall in their way from their evening
orisons in the chapel.
       No sooner had they entered it, than a 
cry of surprise from one of the strangers
saluted their ears; and a young female pil-
grim darting forward, and letting fall her hood, threw herself at the feet of Almina;
who, in great amazement, eagerly exam-
ined her countenance, and that of the
male companion, who also bent beside 
her, and with unqualified joy, discovered
the persons of her two faithful attendants
in misfortune, Valentine, and Mabel.
With almost incredible joy, she recognised 
her favoured attendants, and after the first
surprise, listened with eager attention, to
the tale of their miraculous escape from
death; which was effected, by both cling-
ing to a part of the wreck, which happily
floated towards the coast, and they were
cast on shore exhausted, and nearly
starved, in a remote part of Scotland.
            EARL OSRIC.         223

  After innumerable hardships, and an ill-
ness, the consequence of her immersion ;
which confined poor Mabel to the hut of
a fisherman many weeks; during which,
she was carefully attended by Valentine,
they procured a passage in another vessel
to England, where they arrived pennyless,
and were humanely received, and sheltered
in a convent on the coast, often the Asy-
lum of distrest travellers like themselves.
Here they encountered some pilgrims, who
were journeying towards that part of Eng-
land, which Mabel was most desirous to
reach, that she might convey to the friends
of Almina, the melancholy tidings of what
had befallen her ; little supposing that ere
they could attain Cattle St. Albert, they
should meet Almina herself.

  The offer, liberally made them by their
benefactress, to remain with her at Castle
Rosamond, was joyfully accepted.
  
  " Thou Mabel," said she, " shalt be my
still favoured attendant, and shaft preside,
if it be agreeable to thee, in the tapestry-

                      L 4     224         HARL OSRIC.
room over the other damsels. Thou hast,
I hope, learned wisdom by experience, and
wilt conduct thyself discreetly. And,
thou Valentine, Shalt be my Esquire.
My cousin, Lady Laura, of Rosamond,
has a person in that capacity, and has long
urged me, also, to inquire for one, to
whom such an office would be acceptable."

     "Any office, Lady, will be acceptable
that will retain me neat thee, and in thy
service," Valentine gratefully answered,
"I would spend my life, or sacrifice it,
if necessary."

     "I thank thee, good Valentine," she
replied, "and trust me thy devotion shall
not go unrewarded."
 
     The unexpected sight of mabel,and
Valentine, though it was a source of real
satisfaction to Almina, as it restored her
to the comfort of knowing they had
escaped the catastrophe of shipwreck, by
recalling to her memory the strange
scenes she had passed through at the
Tower of Glenmorn, banished sleep for

         EARL OSRIC.     225

some time from her pillow, and perhaps
contributed, by agitating her mind, to
produce the uneasy dreams that disturbed
her sleeping fancy.
  
  For no sooner had she, after many vain
efforts, closed her eyes, than a vision was
presented to her imagination, in which,
she fancied that a light suddenly appeared
in her chamber, and that the curtains of
her couch were withdrawn by an invisible
hand. She looked up, and with terror,
which even in sleep, shook her whole
frame, discerned the form of her ancient
persecutor, the recluse nun ; who holding
a taper in her hand, stood, with hollow
eyes fixed on the countenance of Almina,
bending over the couch. The wall re-
membered veil was lifted, and the same
emaciated visage appeared. Excess of
alarm prevented any termination to her
dream, for in extreme agitation she awoke,
and starting from her reclining posture,
thought the glimmer of the taper still
discernable.

                L 5
226       EARL OSRIC.

  Nor was she mistaken, the curtain was
slowly drawn back, and the exact figure
she had beheld in her dream, stood beside
her, and leaned over her couch. A faint
shriek escaped the terrified Almina, and
almost insensible, she concealed her face
in the covering of the bed.

  She was restored to recollection, by die
same voice she had formerly heard, " Al-
mina !" it said, awake, awake, and listen
to the part assigned thee !—Awake and
fear not' It ceased, and Almina remained
motionless. Again, the voice spoke, " Al-
mina !" it said, " dost thou hear and
comprehend me ?" Almina now just
gained courage to raise her eyes, but the
horrid countenance of her nocturnal visitor,
terrified her so; that she again sank into
the same attitude, exclaiming in a faint
tone—" Mysterious Being! Who art
thou ?"

  " One." answered the voice, " who
would not injure thee, for worlds. One,
who knows thy worth, and would try it-                   EARL OSRIC. 227

All human excellence is imperfect, and till
brought to the test, virtue is merely pas-
sive:-- not thine shrink from trial!"

  Almina felt the cold, and death-like
pressure of an emaciated hand on her arm,
she shrunk from the touch, and springing
from the couch, sunk on a seat by the
window, and the run remained standing
by her. And now she had a more perfect
view of this mysterious Being. The long
veil, which shaded the pallid visage, was
in part thrown bac, and in sable folds
seemed to envelope the whole figure.

  The eyes of Almina now rested on the
ground, and her strange visitor continued,
"Alimina!" she said, "is thy heart un-
changed? Art thou still good and inno-
cent? "I hope so," said Almina, faintly.
"The voice of Fame," continued the nun,
"has loudly proclaimed the beneficence of
the hand; but is thy heart eqully
liberal?" "Ah! I know not!" sighed
Almina. "It shall be tried," said the
nun, "for know, the fate of an human

                   L 6


  

228                               EARL OSRIC.

Being depends on they exertions, on thy courage and resolution.'' Ah! who?— Whose fate depends,'' she would have said, ''on one so weak as I am;'' but her lips refused her utterance, and the first words only escaped her. ''Tis one,'' said the stranger, ''who is good, young, and innocent as thyself. Yes, Almina, the wife of Osric, lingers in imprisonment from which thou must emancipate her.'' ''Good Heavens!'' cried Almina, ''the Countess of Osric! ''Yes,'' answered the nun, ''even she, the hapless Eleanora. In a lingering confinement, life ebbs apace, and if thou flyest not to her succour, it will soon cease to animate her frame.'' ''How is it possible I can afford her succour, seeing that I know not where, or by whom she is enthralled?'' said Almina, losing part of her terror of the nun, in the interest she took in her words. ''Wilt thou, if the means be given thee, make the necessary exertions?'' asked the nun, in a slow and solemn tone. ''Oh!''                 EARL OSRIC.               229

answered Almina, "if it were in my
power, how gladly would I not fly to her
rescue, but I like not mystery.  The
deeds of the virtuous should be open as
their hearts, and if the incentive be good,
why are thy actions and advice thus
shrouded in darkness?"  "I pardon thy
suspicions," answered the nun, "because
I know they are the dictates of prudence;
but I am, myself, a mystery.  One day, per-
haps, it may be explained; meantime, I ad-
jure thee, let not they fears deter thee from
an act, by which thou mayest restore a
fellow Being to light and life."  "How
am I to accomplish it?" demanded Al-
mina, in a tone of assumed firmness.  "By
a journey neither long, nor toilsome,"
replied the nun.  "In a remote part of 
the Welch coast, at rather more than a
day's journey from hence, amidst almost
inaccessible rocks, stands a ruined time-
worn building, but though in appearance
dilapidated, it is the seat of mirth and
revelry.  Thither with a strong escort
230         EARL OSRIC.

direct thy steps. Procure admittance
within its portals, by any means thy
imagination shall suggest. This " holding
out a many key, " will unfasten any lock.
Be prudent and cautious, and amidst the
train who compose the household in that
region of dissolute mirth note well an
ancient man, habited as a minstrel, who
wears, in a conspicuous part of his dress, a
jewel similar to this ; at a proper oppor-
tunity, secretly, and cautiously expose to
his view, this counterpart to the brooch he
wears, and he will readily assist thy plans
for the liberation of the imprisoned
Eleanora. The time, the manner, with
the place of her destination, thine own
heart must suggest. Thou canst alone
decide, whether the spirit of benevolence
is sufficiently active within thee, to impel
thy exertions. They are, doubtless,
optional; but remember, thou wilt not
sin from ignorance."

  Almina was silent from the wonder,
which the strange words of the nun in-
           EARL OSRIC.         231

spired, and while yet she dwelt with awe
on their mysterious import; the speaker
added, " Farewell, Almina !—My mission
is accomplished. May thine be performed
speedily and safely." So saying, she
glided from the astonished sight of Al-
mina, the taper disappeared and she was
left in profound darkness.

  A considerable space of time had
elapsed, before her thoughts were collected
enough to allow her to reflect on what had
passed; and when at length she began to
recover from the first effects of the alarm
she had felt, she rais'd her eyes, and saw
the first streaks of early dawn gleam
through the gothic window, opposite her
bed.

After several efforts, she reached it,
and overcome by drowsiness and terror,
she sunk into an unquiet slumber; from
which she was awakened by Lady Laura,
who accustomed by the Dame from infancy
to quit her couch early, and inhale the
first breezes of morn, had already taken   232          EARL OSRIC.

her morning ramble. Wondering at Almina's unusual  
delay, she sought her in her chamber,and laughingly
chided her indulgence.  "In truth my dear cousin,"
said she, "I am marvellously hungry, and must intreat the honour of thy presence at the breakfast
table. I have been enjoying the sight of your pilgrims devouring theirs,and I am equally eager for my own."
    "Where are the pilgrims ?"  asked Almina--a sudden idea that the mysterious nun was one of the number, darting into her mind.  "They departed an hour since,"  said Lady Laura,  "blessing us both,
and praying for our welfare, and truly, we may hope
their prayers may avail; for it should seem, they have one among them little less than a saint."
    "Almina, anxiously inquired further,and Lady Laura continued,  "did you remark one tall female,
whose form and face,were so enshrouded in her cloak and hood,as to be quite invisible? She, it

           EARL OSRIC.         233

should seem, is performing some strict
vow of penance, since it appears by the
report of her companions, that from the
time of her joining them, she has observed
the strictest abstinence; passed the nights
in prayer and devotional exercises ; and
resolutely maintained a rigid silence,
which your attendant, Mabel, declares to
be the hardest part of all."

  This description at once explained the
mystery of the nun, so far as related to her
admittance to the Castle; but all else
concerning her, was as perplexed us ever.
After some deliberation, Almina came to
a resolution, to re ate to Lady Laura, and
Dame Janetta, the many singular circum-
stances connected with her knowledge of
this extraordinary Being; her former
meetings with her ; and the task she had
now imposed; and solicit their advice as to
the performance of it.

  She therefore requested Lady Laura,
when their breakfast was over, to accom-
pany her, with the good Dame, to her own234                   EARL OSRIC.

apartments,where unreservedly she re-
counted the strange tale, in confirmation
of which the massy key and the splendid
brooch, both left on her nocturnal visit by
the nun,were found on her toilet.The
superstition of the age, and its prevailing
influence over all ranks, must account for 
the eagerness,with which the Dame, and
Lady Laura, advised her not mysterious
counsellor.

  "The ways of Providence," said the
good Dame, " are wonderful as wise;
and oft-times its agents are involved in a
mystrey, which it were presumption to
attempt to penetrate. Still, Lady, thou
who hast had the advantages of learning
far beyond most of thy sex, must be most
competent to judge, how far it might be
prudent to confide in the words of a per-
son, who comes beneath the veil of dark-
ness to counsel and admonish thee." "I
am strangely inclined,methinks, to adopt
her advice," said Almina, "Valentine,       EARL OSRIC    235
with as strong a guard as the castle can
muster, shall escort me.” “ And I will
be thy companion,” said Lady Laura.
No my cousin,“ answered Almina, “ if
there be danger, or imprudence, in the
enterprise, I alone will encounter it. Let
me not have the remorse of involving thee,
my Laura, in my indiscretion; but the
Virgin] trust, will guard me; since I go with
an intent to succour the distressed, and to
obey the call of humanity. Should I be so
happy as to rescue the unfortunate Coun-
tess of Osric, thou wilt hospitably receive
her, and will assist me in giving her con-
solation and relief. Oh l what. happiness to
tell her, that her child lives ; and that her
lord has yet escaped the direful perils of
war, and is restored in some degree, I
trust, to the favor of his Sovereign.”

On this subject, Lady Laura could not
partake of the enthusiasm of Almina,
for she knew Earl Osric only by report,
but she anticipated with pleasure the236              EARL OSRIC.

receiving and consoling his unhappy
Countess, and after a friendly contest,
and much unavailing solicitation to be 
permitted to share her dangers, it was de-
cided, that one day should be given to de-
liberation: and on the succeeding one,
Almina should set forward.                       OR,


             The Legend of Rosamond.


                    A ROMANCE.


                  BY MRS.ISAACS.
    Author of "Tales of To-Day,"-" Wanderings of    Fancy,"
                   &c, &c, &c.


                IN THREE VOLUMES

                VOL. III.-PART II.


                      London.


   PUBLISHED BY C. CHAPPLE, ROYAL SUBSCRIPTION
      CIRCULATING LIBRARY, 66, PALL-MALL, AND
     SIMPKIN AND MARSHALL, STATIONERS' COURT,
                LUDCATE STREET.

                       1820.                   EARL OSRIC;

                     OR, THE

                LEGEND OF ROSAMOND.

                      ======

                     CHAP. XV.

                      ======

   " Say what abridgment have you for this evening?
  What mask? What music? How shall we beguile
  The lazy time, if out with some delight?"

                        MIDSUMMER-NIGHTS' DREAM' 


                            " My mind misgives,
  Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
  Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
  With this nights' revels;"


   " But he that hath the steerage of my course,
  Direct my sail!"

                              ROMEO AND JULIET.

         =============================

    THE preparations and arrangements of
Almina, for her undertaking, were began
and pursued with a resolution, that cost
her no small exertion. Valentine, as her
Esquire, was to be her guide and protector
    VOL III. PART II.    M
 
     
238           EARL OSRIC.

on the way, and some chosen vassals in
whom they could confide, were to form her
train.  On the morning of their departure,
Almina, with Lady Laura, and the Dame,
repaired to the Chapel, attended by all
their vassals, and at the high altar offered
prayers for the success of the perilous un-
dertaking, in which the Lady Almina had
engaged.

     The chivalrous spirit of the age, ren-
dered it, in the eyes of all, a meritorious
act; thus to brave dangers, from motives
of religion and humanity.  The youthful
and beautiful form of their lady, was sur-
veyed by the vassals and retainers, with
looks of admiration;-as prostrating her-
self on the steps of the altar, she invoked
the blessing of Heaver on her enterprise.
Could they have seen her inmost heart,
how greatly would the merit have been
enhanced.

     As soon as matins were over, and the
train had partaken of a repast in the great
hall, the steed of Almina was brought              EARL OSRIC.            241

liverance of the Countess of Osric might
be effected, and the remorse she would be
storing up for herself, should any weak
fears lead her to neglect achieving it, when
in her power, urged her forward, and de-
termined her to pursue the adventure.

  The road at length began to wind
amongst lofty rocks; and a vast range of 
heathy mountains seemed to exclude all
view of the surrounding country.  Valen-
tine acknowledged he was bewildered.
Still, Almina felt assured, they were pursu-
ing the direction pointed out by the nun,
and she hastedned on, in the hope of reach-
ing some Shepherd's cottage, where they
might procure information,  fearful lest
night should overtake them, ere they at-
tained any place of shelter.

  With extreme delight, the low dome of 
a small chapel, dedicated to the virgin,
met her eye, beneath the overshadowing
height of a lofty and rugged rock/ and
here dismounting, she declared her inten-
tention of offering her devotions, and then

   VOL. III.             Mpartaking the refreshments which the care
of Dame Janetta had provided for their
accommodation. It was a small rustic
building, and on entering it, Almina dis-
covered beforethe altar, the form of an
aged hermit, in the attitude of prayer.

  Cautions not to disturb or interrupt him,
she knelt at some distance, motioning to
Valentine, and such of her train as fol-
lowed her to silence.

  The anchorite rose at length form his
kneeling posture, and seeing Almina
waiting to address him, "What miracle,
daugher,"said he, "has conducted thy
steps to this remote spot, calculated only
for one, who like myself, devotes his time
and thouts to the heaven, towrds 
which I am fast journeying."

  "Chance my good father," said Almina,
"has led me in the course of a perilous
and warisome journey, to this hallowed
temple, and fain would I rest my tired
frame; and after offering up my humble
devotion at yor holy shrine obtain thy

                   EARL OSRIC.                 243

benediction ere I proceed on my way."-
"Be thy wishes granted my child," an-
swered the pious man, "my humble dwell-
ing is a short distance from this place,
there thou mayest rest, and partake such
plain food as I have to offer."

    So saying, he led the way through a 
narrow winding path, to a secluded and
forlorn hut, erected beneath a cluster of
rocks, which at once concealed it from the
world, and defended it from hostile winds.
Here, the train of Almina spread their
provisions, and seating themselves on the
mossy carpet, that covered a small space 
of ground before the door of the hut, they
partook of rest and refreshment, while
Almina and the hermit conversed within.
The former made inquiries of the anchor-
ite, relative to the place of her destina-
tion, and learned that there was an ancient
edifice at a considerable distance on the
sea shore, said to be the property of some
Knight of rank, who maintained an estab-
lishment of dissolute servants vassals,
                  M2244   EARL OSRIC.

who had given offence to the surrounding
country by their noisy wassailage, and the
riot and confusion they caused; disturbing
and oppressing the humble cottagers
around, and committing with impunity
the most daring depredations.

The description was too well suited to
the character of Sir Ethelred Douglas, to
leave a doubt on the mind of Almina, that
he it was, who authorised such outrages;
and she looked forward with considerable
dread to the encounter. Perfect confidence
in the bravery and attachment of her vas-
sals alone, enabled her to persevere. She
felt assured, that it could, by no means, be
easy to overpower such a number, headed
by Valentine, whose knightly armour
would conceal him effectually from recog-
nition; and after praying with revived
earnestness for safety and success, at the
altar of the church and having received
the benediction of the hermit, she re-com-
menced her journey, guided by his di-
rection.
             EARL OSRIC.               245

  The intricacy of the mountain way,
  much delayed their procedure, and as the
  day began to close in, they entered a wild 
  and barren tract of country, were tufts of
  heath and furze in patches, were the only
  marks of vegetation. The distant roar of
  the ocean declared their approach to the 
  coast and the eyes of all were strained
  forward in the hope of discovering some 
  human habitation. It seemed that night
  would be most favourable to their designs,
  and Almina pushed forward her almost
  exhausted steed, till it gave such evident
  signs of extreme weariness, that she be-
  came apprehensive she should be compelled
  to half, from inability to proceed.
        Scarcely had the unwilling conviction
  forced itself on her mind, when some dark
  object in the extremity of the horizon be-
  came visible, and the train joyfully ex-
  claimed they were lofty towers of a vast
  height. She gazed eagerly onward and
  became convinced they were right, and 
  now uttering an involuntary prayer for
              M3  
 
        246           EARL OSRIC.

fortitude and courage to prosecute the
adventure, in which she was engaged;
she hastened on, and soon came within
sight of a gloomy castellated building;
when a profusion of lights were seen in the
small high windows, and the sounds of
revelry shortly reached their ears. But
hardly had they paused, to consider and 
contemplate it; ere the moon, which had
just arisen, and shed a pale uncertain light,
became suddenly overshadowed. The
big raindrops began to fall, and the loud 
thunder roared at a distance. "Shelter! 
Shelter! for our lady!" was loudly re-
iterated by the whole train, and the excla-
mation suggested a ready excuse, for claim-
ing admission to the edifice before them.
Two of the vassals were despatched, to so-
licit an asylum for the night, for lady Al-
mina of Fitz Oscar, of the noble owners of 
the Castle whoever they might be; and
returned with a courteous answer, assuring
her that every rite of hospitality was pro-
mised by the lord of the place, through                                         EARL OSRIC.                                   247

his domestics who had carried the message of the travellers.

   With a sensation nearly allied to fear, Almina passed beneath the lofty portcullis, and in trembling expectation of she knew not what, followed the steps of her conductors through the spacious hall, that, terminating in a long vista of arches, led to innumerable gothic passages. Having passed by many turnings and windings, large folding doors admitted them to a brilliantly illuminated saloon, where there appeared a promiscuous company of Knights and Ladies. On her entrance, a sudden silence reigned throughout the assembly, and a Knight of tall stature, and graceful demeanour came forward, courteously welcoming her, and inviting her to partake the refreshment necessary after a journey, assuring her of a safe asylum for herself and train.

   ''To whom, Sir Knight,'' said she, ''am I indebted for a reception thus courteous and hospitable?'' ''In the absence

                                           M  4248             EARL OSRIC.

of a valued friend, Lady," he answered, 
"I, Sir Bernard de Coucy, welcome thee
to the halls of Morven, the seat of former
Welch Heroes, now the occasional abiding 
place of English Knights, and those fair 
friends who render its gloomy towers the 
scene of revelry and delight."

   There was a strange expression in the 
eyes and countenance of the Knight, when
he addressed her, which she liked not, but
all the powers of her mind were wrought 
up to the fulfilment of her purpose, and 
maintaining a resolute composure of man-
ner, the happy medium between supercili-
ous reserve, and the levity too visible in 
her host and his other guests, she thanked 
him with her wonted affability for thus
hospitably giving shelter to a benighted 
wanderer, and consented to be led to the
banquet, which luxurious in the extreme, 
consisted of the choisest delicacies, and 
while they partook of it, Valentine re-
mained near her. He was solicited by Sir
Bernard to take a seat, but bowing he si-
lently declined.                  EARL OSRIC.           249

     "Urge not this Knight, I entreat ye,"
said Almina, "a rigid self-prescribed vow
of penance, must be his excuse for continu-
ing in his armour, and partaking alone of
the scanty fare he allows himself." "If
there be a vow in the case," said Sir Ber-
nard, "I will no longer urge the matter;
but thank Heaven," he added, laughing,
"that my confessor is more lenient, and
my conscience more accommodating, than
to compel me to refrain from the good
things of this world, and keep an iron
mask over my face, when a down pillow
invites me to repose. How shouldst thou
relish such severity, my pretty Rosa?" he
added, addressing a young female of beau-
tiful, but suspicious aspect, who sat next
him. "Not at all," she answered, "I
hat all restraints, but such as I choose to
impose on myself, and I'll take good care,
believe me, Sir Knight, that they are not
too rigid. Such monastic nonsense and
bigotry, in truth, suits not my taste.
Thou and I, Isabel, were surfeited of such
                       M 5
250           EARL OSRIC.

amusements, as penances and fasts, in the
convent; and'when we bid adieu to the
Lady Abbess, we cast off her authority
and made it our first rule to forget her
formal precepts." The name of Isabel
struck familiarly on the ear of Almina,
and raising her eyes to the person addressed
by that name, she thought she recognised
in the gaily habited licentious looking fe-
male opposite her, the favoured and confi-
dential attendant of Lady Elfrida, at Cas-
tle St. Albert. She saw that Isabel was
determined not to know her, and a shud-
dering horror pervaded her whole frame,
as she became convinced, by the bold looks
and manners of her companions, of the
class of company she had unwittingly fal-
len into.

  With humble confidence in her own in-
nocence, she instantly resolved not to be-
tray the disgust she felt, either by look or
action, but calling all her courage to her
aid, she answered with the mild affability,
natural to her, the numerous questions                 EARL OSRIC.                    251

put to her, by the miscellaneous group as-
sembled at the board. No sooner was the
banquet over, then they adjourned to a
hall, where the minstrels struck their lyres
to sound of mirth, and the jovial song and
dance commenced.

  Almina, under the plea of fatigue, de-
clined entering into the amusements, and
became every moment more and more an-
noyed by the licentious deportment of the
females present.

  She was, at first, somewhat surprised,
to perceive that Isabel acted as mistress of
the revels, and while she assumed a de-
gree of authority over her companions, she
joined them in their sports, and exceeded
them in loud and boisterous mirth.--
Shocked and distressed at their attitudes,
and the levity visible in their whole de-
portment, she sought in her own mind an
excuse for retiring, and while her eye
glanced around the spacious apartment, in
listless anxiety, it fixed on the group of
minstrels, who, in an ornamented gallery
                  
                  M6
252           EARL OSRIC.

raised only a few feet from the floor, at-
tuned their instruments to the measured
steps of the dancers. An aged form in-
stantly drew her attention; while the rest
were seated, he stood leaning over the
gilt ra.ling of the gallery, and as the lights
glared on his venerable figure, they re-
flected full on the brilliant brooch that
connected the folds of his Minstrel's
robe.

  Instantly, the words of the nun recurred
to Alinina's recollection, and her gaze
dwelt with intense earnestness on the
Being, through whose means her perilous
adventure was to be accomplished.

  In a low voice, she enjoined Valentine
to hold her train in readiness for instant
departure, through the night, and to pre-
serve the same caution and reserve, that
he at present practised.

  " I have demanded permission, Lady,
in fulfilment of my vow," said he, " to
pace the Eastern gallery through the long
hours of night. It befits me not to par-              EARL OSRIC.      253

take repose, and there I shall await thy
orders for our departure at the dawn of
day."

  This speech was intended for other 
ears than hers, and Almina then addressing
Sir Bernard de Councy, the only Knight,
with whom she had yet conversed, she so-
licited to be allowed to retire, and recruit
her exhausted frame by rest.

With infinite gallantry, Sir Bernard re-
quested her to consult only her own incli-
nations, and saying he would summons at-
tendants to conduct her to her apartment, 
he disappeared. Seizing the opportunity
of his absence, she sauntered towards the
Minstrel's gallery, and as she passed close
to it, she drew from beneath her robe, the mysterious brooch, and while she observed
the eyes of the aged Minstrel intently
gazing at her, she exposed it fully to his
view, and satisfied that it had been seen,
passed on.

   The dancing ceased, and intimidation was
given that the old Bard of the Castle, was
254                  EARL OSRIC.

striking his lyre, to utter an extemporane-
ous strain; all were immediately seated,
silence proclaimed, and the following
words in a burst of wild melody, and the
tremulous accents of Age, reached Almi-
na's wondering ear.

                        THE

                    BARD'S SONG.

The Bard, as he passed the Lady fair,
And mark'd her mild and courtly air,
Lowly bowed as she walked along,
And greeted her ear with his Minstrel Song.

" Ah lovely Lady ! thy peril is great,
" List and beware of an awful fate !
  " In the gloom of the night,
  " Ere the morning light,
  " A deed of note shall be done ;--
  " Mark the letter'd book,
  " In the gallery's nook,
" And speed thee well ere the rise of the Sun."
               EARL OSRIC.            255

     "What dismal ditty is this, good Or
car?" said the lively Isabel, "I pray
ye, give us a blither strain. We wish to
hear of no gloomy tales, and dismal
legends, fit only for the old, and the
formal."

     The Bard, in compliance, changed his
measure, and in a lively tone, sang as fol-
lows: while Almina, convinced from his
late words that this method was adopted by
the mysterious Minstrel, to give her the
necessary information, which he could no
otherwise convey, listened with trembling
anxiety.

     "The Lady was young, the Lady was fair,
     Mild were her features, and graceful her air,
      For hers was the season of youth,
        And sweet 'tis to sing,
        Of life's lovely spring,
      The season of joy, love and truth,
       When hope's smiling form,
       Averts every storm,
      By her voice of magical power;--
        Cheers the wayward mind,
        By her aspect kind,256                  EARL OSRIC.

And points to the coming hour.
Be her precepts heard,
And her power rever'd,
For virtue guides the way;
Makes the darkness of night,
Like the morning light,
And midnight turns to day.

  The Bard again ceased. "It is an odd
strain thou hast chosen, Old Orcar, to-
night," said Sir Bernard, who had returned
during the song. "Thy Muse has been
wandering sure. These are not the joyous
sounds thou art wont to bring forth."

  Almina now arose, she felt assured, that
to her the words of the Bard were secretly
addressed, and her courage was too weak
to encounter fresh difficulties. Sir Bernard
had brought an attendant, to conduct her
to the chamber appointed for her, and
Valentine, in the same feigned tone in
which he had yet spoken,said " I shall at-
tend thy steps, Lady, as far as the gallery
where my nightly vigils are to be per-                   EARL OSRIC                 257

formed, and making an obeisance to the
company, he followed the steps of his
mistress.

  No sooner had they quitted the Hall,
than they heard the loud laugh that greeted
their departure, from the rioters they had
left; and Almina, offering to Heaven an
inward prayer for her own preservation and
success, hastened on, guided by the female
who bore a lamp before her, till they en-
tered a wide and gloomy gallery, of vast
extent. Curiously she looked around, for
here was to be the abiding place of Valen-
tine for the night, and from the dismal
aspect of the place, she shuddered to
think what unknown dangers might await
her.

  The nook, mentioned by the Minstrel
in his song was anxiously looked for, but
the gallery was dimly illuminated, and
scarcely could her eye discern aught, save
patches of dark and tattered tapestry, re-
presenting hideous figures, large as life.

  A small recess, at length, presented
itself, the entrance to which, was partly

258       EARL OSRIC.

concealed by a large screen of curious
workmanship, and the folds of some rich,
but ancient drapery, that was meant to
conceal, what was intended as a small
oratory,

  This was, however, no time to examine
it, and softly bidding Valentine adieu for
the night, and having heard him, as she
retreated towards the other end, answer,
" The Virgin protect thee Lady," she was
led to a large and antique chamber, situ-
ated at the remotest extremity of the gal-
lery, and only separated from it by a small
Gothic entrance.                 CHAP. XV.

"Do not for one repulse forego the purpose
That you resolv'd to effect.
I say to night; no more."
                                      THE TEMPEST.

     "That she is living,
Were it but told you, should be booted at
Like an old tale; but it appears are, she lives,
Tho'yet she speaks not."
                                     WINTER'S TALE.

IN the silence and gloom of an immense 
vaulted chamber, Almina, had at length
opportunity to reflect, but the night was
wearing fast away, and it was necessary to
be expeditious and decisive.

So far, she had succeeded to her wish.
She had gained admission within theap-
pointed edifice, apparently without incur-
260          EARL OSRIC.

ring suspicion of any sinister purpose,
and she had avoided any encounter with
Sir Ethelred Douglas, whom she had most
feared meeting.

  Valentine now awaited her orders,
and the nook in the gallery must be ex-
plored.

  The pointed meaning of the Minstrel's
song seemed to allude to her present under-
taking and after a few minutes considera-
tion, she no longer hesitated. She had
dismissed the attendant, saying that she
required not her services.

  All around was still. The gallery, ad-
joining her chamber, was too remote from
the apartments occupied by the company,
for any sounds to be distinguishable; but
it was possible there might be those in the
Castle, who were on the watch. Carefully
she examined every part of her chamber.
There appeared to be no communication
with it, but by the door through which she
had entered. It was hung with dark
arias, and large portraits in heavy giltEARL OSRIC。      261

frames were indistinctly seen, by the pale
light of the lamp.

  Listening with a beating heart, she
could plainly hear the measured steps of
Valentine in the gallery; but no other
sound reached her, and calling all her
courage to her aid, she at once determined
to venture forth.

  Cautiously unclosing the door, she was
on the point of issuing forth, when she
heard the distant door of the gallery un-
close, and hasty footsteps advance; darting
back, she shut and re-fastened the door, and
immediately a confused din of voices
reached her; but it was from the other
end of the gallery, and the words were lost
in the vast space of the apartment. She
fancied it was the sound of altercation,
and she stood in breathless suspense till
suddenly the voices ceased, and all was
again silent. The feet of Valentine, hea-
vily treading the oak floor, were again
heard; he seemed to approach very near
her door; then retreat, and once more262   EARL OSRIC.

drew towards it; she certainly paused,
and feeling assured, he was now awaiting
her, she contrived to unfasten the door with
little noise, and having ascertained that 
Valentine was indeed alone, and seemed
looking anxiously towards her chamber,
she no longer delayed; but advancing
towards him, while she cast a fearful glance
around, she was on the point of speaking,
when Valentine made a sign for silence,
and beckoning her to follow him, pro-
ceeded towards the end of the gallery.

Surprised that he passed the recess,
without pausing, she would have remon-
strated, but with earnestness he grasped
her arm, and still by signs enjoining her
not to speak, he forced her to pass on.
It struck her that some unforeseen danger
had arisen, but she so implicitly relied on
the tried friendship and natural good
sense of Valentine, that she feared not to
trust him, and suffered herself to be un-
resistingly led forward.  
           EARL OSRIC.          263

  Unclosing hastily the gallery door, he
conducted her through several passages
and apartments which she had not before
entered, till they reached a splendid
room, brilliantly illuminated, and hand-
somely decorated. Here they paused, and
with indescribable surprise she beheld her
conductor fasten the door on the inside.
" What means this ? Sir Knight," she
demanded in a trembling voice. He an-
swered not, but throwing himself at her
feet, and raising his vizor, with horror
and amazement she beheld—not Valen-
tine, but Sir Ethelred Douglas. All her
worst fears were at oiice realized ; a fearful
dizziness seemed in an instant to confuse
her faculties, and for a minute she felt
completely subdued ; but the dismay that
this discovery produced, was only tempo-
rary. She recalled all her courage to her
aid, and resuming, with a desperate effort,
her wonted firmness, she darted an indig-
nant glance at the Knight, and was re-
treating towards the door; but as she had264            EARL OSRIC.

foreseen he prevented her unfastening it,
and springing on his feet, demanded to be 
heard. " The Lady Almina" said he,
exultingly, "has voluntarily surrendered
herself.  Shall I not then avail myself of
her condescension to obtain from her lips
that pardon, without which I must be
wretched, though possessed of every other
requisite to happiness?" " What you
mean, or what are your intentions Sir
Ethelred" she said, " in leading me by
means of a base disguise to this remote
apartment, you best know. Of this be
assured. When I solicited the hospitality
of the owners of this Castle, to gran 
shelter to me and my train, I knew not
(how should I,) that your were an inmate
here. Your own heart can best suggest 
the motives which would lead me to seek
any asylum, however lonely, in preference
to one inhabited by the treacherous de-
ceiver of innocence; and much I marvel,
that you should voluntarily seek the pre-
sence of those you have so deeply injured.EARL OSRIC.   265

Suffer me, I pray ye, to depart in peace.
I seek no retaliation:--to God and your
conscience alone, I trust for retribution."
"And thou really thinkest, fair Almina,
that I shall allow thee thus easily to escape
me?" he exclaimed, while a smile of min-
gled triumph and malignity was diffused
over his handsome features. "truly
thou must think me a singular be-
ing; or perhaps thou has conceived an
idea that I have profited by the righteous
example of thy idol, Osric, and adopting
his monkish precepts, mean in future to
devote myself to chaunting priestly ori-
sons, and godly melodies:--shave my
crown, assume the cowl, and spend the
rest of my life in a pious hermit-like
manner. but faith! I have still some
relish for life, and unless thou wouldst
adopt the veil at the same time, and elect
me as thy confessor, I would fain enjoy
the world sometime longer."

With unqualified disdain Almina turned
from him. She would not answer a speech

266         EARL OSRIC.

of such unfeeling levity, yet she wished
not to irritate him to acts of violence.
Concealing with difficulty the horror and
aversion she felt, and agitated by various
fears for the destiny of Valentine and the
Micros of her arduous enterprise, thus
fearfully interruptcd, Almina felt despair
fast stealing over her mind. - She walked
silently to the other end of the spacious
apartment, Sir Ethelred followed, and
drawing her towards a couch, would have
seated himself by her, but resisting his
efforts, with a countenance of solemnity
she said " Mistake me not, Sir Ethelred,
nor imagine that I am actuated by fear,
for full well I know, that when the confi-
dence is fixed as mine is, in a defender
who will never fail or forsake me, I am
armed against all violence. But for your own
sake reflect, I am not now, as I once was,
friendless; and but for Earl Osric's pro-
tection, destitute. I have now armed vas-
sals at my command, and friends powerful
and anxious to rescue me from any evil that             EARL OSRIC.            267

may assail my person: to you, then, the
consequence may be dreadful."

  " I fear them not, sweet prophet of ill,"
said the Knight in a tone of assumed
softness, 'tis thy frowns, thy scorn only
that I fear, and never, never again shalt
thou escape me.  Day and night it has
been my study to regain thee, and from
the hour I begeld thee blooming in youth-
full beauty within the high wall of Osric
Castle, it has been the settled purpose of
my soul, the end and aim of all my actions
--to get thee securely in my power.  This
thou hast now thyself effected, and to the
world it shall appear, as in truth, it is
thine own act and deed."

  He seized both her hands as he spoke,
and gazed triumphantly in her face.

  Pale with agitation, it was turned from
him, and though her lips moved not, her
heart was in silent prayer,---when a rust-
ling sound near them attracted the atten-
tion of both.  Sir Ethelred started, and
to the infinite amazement of Almina, the

                    N 2

             EARL OSRIC.

  form of the Recluse Nun rushed from amidst the drapery of the couch, and stood before them. The guilt struck Sir Ethereld fell back, and the hollow voice of the Nun once more sounded on the car of Almina. "Fly," it said, "Fly Almina, fasten the door on the outside, and speed thee well."

  Almina waited for no second admonition, she unlocked the door, and securely fastening it by a ponderous bolt on the outside, she darted along a wide vaulted passage. Her rapid course was arrested by Valentine, who seemed awaiting her: he was without his helmet, for the wily Sir Ethelred had compelled him to resign it to him, to complete the deceit he had meditated, and succeeded in practising on his Lady. The look of Valentine was wild and haggard, he beckoned her to follow, and hurried her back to the Oaken Gallery. At the recess they paused and by the faint glimmer of a small lamp which Valentine bore, they discerned a large missal, resting on a
     EARL OSRIC.          264

cushion beneath a crucifix within it.
Hastily Almina examined it, and beneath
the velvet covering a small scroll of vellum
met her eye, on which these words were 
traced:--

Oaken Gallery--North and West Pas-
sages--Spiral Staircases--Chapel--Turret
Staircase--Topmost Tower.

   "These," said Almina, "are doubtless
the directions of the minstrel. Let us
minutely follow them." Her spirits were
raised, and her courage invigorated by
the certainty that the Nun herself was
assisting in the execution of her plan, and
taking the arm of Valentine they proceed-
ed according to the scroll, and reached
the ancient chapel by a decayed spiral
staircase, evidently in total disuse. The
chapel itself was certainly not frequented
for purposes of holiness. The great altar
was hung with cobwebs, and all the orna-
ments were defaced; but Almina scarely
paused to notice the desolate scene it
presented. She sought diligently for the270                  EARL OSRIC.

turret staircase, and guided by the forma-
tion of the building, discovered the low
entrance that led to it in an obscure cor-
ner. It was so narrow as only to admit
one person, and the door that opened to
it was securely locked ; but the master-
key given her by the Nun enabled her to
overcome all difficulties, and though al-
most stifled by the close and unwholesome
feel from the confined air in the dark
staircase, she resolutely persevered, and
at length reached the landing place: but
another of greater length remained to
ascend, and after resting to breathe, op-
pressed with the heat, and panting from
the exertion, she again began the ascent,
and toiled with unremitting diligence till
she attained a small square resting place, 
in which a low arched door-way appear-
ed. The various apertures in the roof
freely admitted the winds of heaven, and 
would have extinguished the lamp if
Valentine had not guarded against it.
  
  Again the key was applies, and admit-
                   EARL OSRIC        271

ing them to a small low chamber, no object but a dusky curtain drawn across one side appeared;but as they hesitated, and looked around, the low and indistinct breathing of a person in disturbed slumbers met their cars. They hastily advanced a female form stretched on a mattress on the floor. Seizing the lamp from the hand of, Valentine, and anxiously examining the features, Almina bent over the coach with fearful eagerness. The eyes were closed, but she left assured that it was the Countees of Osric she beheld; though, pallid and emaciated, few traces remained of the gay, the beautiful Eleanora. The light which glared in her face, recalled her from the torpid slumber that seemed to have seized on her faculties, and gazing languidly around her, she at length looked earnestly in the face of Almina. "Ah! where am I?" she cried with a faint effort to raise herself. "Am I at length released from earthly misery?"

                       N 4

272         EARL OSRIC.

" You are with friends dear lady, who
come to serve and save you" said Almina,
" Am I ?" she cried feebly. " Ah, 'tis
long since 1 beheld the face of a friend."
" No time must be lost" said Valentine,
" Can you lady rise, and accompany us
from this dismal place?" " I know not"
she answered vacantly, and reclosing her
eyes seemed again sinking into the same
torpor.

  It was evident that her intellects were
disordered; and it appeared probable,
that want of air and confinement had
produced this lamentable effect. Promp-
titude and decision were too necessary to
allow her to deliberate long. Taking off
the long mantle she wore, and seeing that
the poor invalid, though not undressed,
was scantily c!ad Almina, with the assist-
ance of Valentine, wrapped it round her;
and bearing her between them, the ath-
letic arms of Valentine sustaining with
case the slight attenuated form of the
Countess, they hastily resolved to convey                  EARL OSRIC.  273
her to the chamber Almina had left,
where the latter would remain with her
while Valentine reconnoitred the castle,
and if possible prepared for their imme-
diate departure.
  The perseverance of almina succeeded
admirably, and she had the comfort of
seeing the hapless Eleanora deposited on
the bed in the chamber allotted to her-
self.  Valentine, then, afte receiving her directions and lighting a lamp which they
found in the room, departed, and securing
the door within, Almina seated herself by
the couch.
  The senses of the Couniess still seemed
involved in a profound stupor.  At times 
she opened her eyes, but no ray of reason
illumined them.  Could this be the once 
blooming Eleanora?
  "Ah! thought Almina" is this the fair and lovely being, who, once in the short-
ness of human foresight I dared to believe
was destined for a life of unmixed happi-
ness?  The long restrained tears gushed

                       N5

forth, as she bent over the unconscious,
object of her care, and dropped on the
pallid cheek of Eleanora.  She started, 
looked more earnestly at Almina, and 
sighed deeply.  Any return of animation
was hailed with delight, but it was mo-
mentary, and instantly the same dreadful
torpor seemed again to benumb her intel-
lectual powers.

The time of Valentine's absence seem=
ed insupportably long, and to Almina it 
appeared as if the feeble spark of exist-
ence that remained, must be extinguished
soon, if immediate assistance, such as in
her present situation she was incapable of
affording her, were not shortly adminis-
tered.  The lamp burned dimly; should
it go out, the horrors of darkness would
add to the gloom and terrors that sur-
rounded her.  The profound stillness of
the Castle, which probably arose from
the immense distance she was at from the
inhabited part of it, inclined her to think
that the revellers were now retired, and             EARL OSRIC.         275

a ray of hope again cheered her. Some-
times rising, she paced the oaken floor
with quick steps, invariably pausing at
the door to listen for the sound of steps,
but the minutes slowly passed, and no
indication of Valentine's return met her
ear.
   
   Once before in the caverns of the Con-
vent, when beguiled thither by the emis-
sary of Sir Ethelred, she had waited in the
same tremulous eagerness; but not as
now, had she the sacred charge of another's
life and safety to watch over, and overcome
at length by dread and fatigue, she threw
herself on her knees, and in the wild ac-
cents of despair, offered fervent prayers for
quick relief for the poor sufferer before her.
They were accepted, for ere she quitted
her supplicating attitude, rapid footsteps
approached, and the voice of Valentine in
a tone of caution demanded admittance.
   
   All was ready, and to convery the still
insensible eleanora without the walls of
this fatal castle, in secresy and silence,
                 N  6
 276             EARL OSRIC.

was the arduous task that remained; but
the same courage and perseverance, which
had already performed so much, overcame
this last difficulty.


  The strong arm of Valentine was again
her support, and the slender form of Al-
mina, her guide and comforter.


  The fresh air, that played over her ex-
hausted frame, seemed instantly to revive
the strength of the Countess, but though
she opened her eyes, she was so confused
and bewildered at the novelty of her
situation, that all sense was lost in
wonder.


  The revellers within the Castle, were
now gone to repose, and silence reigned
around.


  The well arranged plans of Almina, and
her trusty confidant; Valentine, had
very nearly been overthrown by the arts of
Sir Ethelred, who hud no sooner disco-
vered that it was she, who asked the
shelter of his Castle (which he concluded
she did, without knowledge or suspicion          EARL OSRIC.     277

that he was the owner) than he retired
from the saloon, leaving his friends to re-
ceive and entertain her while he laid in
wait, once more to secure her in his toils.
To his own heart he acknowledged, that 
though general licentiousness had marked
his conduct towards females, she was the
only one, whom he had ever truly loved
and the bare idea that she, of all woman-
kind, should be attached to Earl Osric,
spurred him on to divide them for ever,
even if violence were necessary, to prevent
them from again meeting.

  The fearful appearance of the mysterious
nun, it should seem, had an effect the most
appalling, on the irritable conscience of 
Sir Ethelred, for he had fallen back in a 
swoon on beholding her.

  Whether he was detained by force or
stratagem, in the remote apartment, whither 
he had decoyed Almina, under the sem-
blance of Valentine, or whether his insen-
sibility was of long continuance, could
not be ascertained.  Certain it was, that at  278         Earl osric.
            
  a late hour on the following morning, he
  was found alone, securely bolted and
  locked within the same room; where she
  left him in a state of weakness and exhaus- 
  tion bordering on derangement, and re-
  clining helpless on a cough, by one of the
  attendants, who had vainly sought him
  in his own chamber; but not till some
  hours after Almina and her interesting
  charge, had quitted the dreary and dan-
  gerous preeinets of the seeluded Weleh
  Castle.                 CHAP. XIII.                              


                --------------                         

            " Remember me                               
       
In all humility unto his Highness ;          
Say his long trouble how is passing                 
Out of this world;-tell him in death I bless'd him;  
For so I will. Mine eyes grow dim.  Farewell."       
                             HENRY THE EIGHTH.         


    "What is he, whose grief                           
   Bears such an emphasis?                             

                                HAMLLET.             

          ------------------------------             

      BENEATH the covert of night, Al-                     
 mina and her train conducting their charge,            
who was carefully supported on her steed                 
by the protecting arm of Valentine, reached              
the nearest town ; for instead of taking a              
private road, as on their journey thither,      280                EARL OSRIC.

it was a part of their plan to return by the
most public, and frequented ways.

  Here they procured a litter, in which
the unfortunate Countess was gently
placed with Almina; and, by the aid of
cordials and restoratives, now plentifully
administered, she gave signs of some
returning animation.

  She seemed, at times, to gaze with an
expression of wild curiosity in the face of
Almina; and then, as if unable to compre-
hend the seeming wonders of her situation,
sink at once into torpor and forgetfulness.
By slow approaches, they at length reached
the Castle of Rosamond; but eare they at-
tained it, Lady Laura, with all her vassals
and retainers, came forth to meet them;
having from the height of the ramparts,
where she daily watched for their return
discerned their approach.

  She contemplated, with interest and
compassion, the faded form of Elcanora,
and gladly lent her aid to the almost ex-          EARL OSRIC.      281

hausted Almina in having her removed
into the Castle.

 Her apartment, joining that of Almina
herself, was prepared for the Countess,
and Father Luke; who was a skilful and
experienced leech, attended to administer
medical relief.

  As soon as Eleanora had been laid on
the couch, and the attendants, who were
appointed to wait on her, stationed by her
bedside; Almina, Lady Laura, and Dame
Janetta with all the vassals proceeded to
the Chapel, to offer thanks for the success
of the enterprise, and to pray for the mercy
of Heaven to the apparently dying object
of their care; after which, Almina retired
to her chamber to enjoy the blessing of
undisturbed repose, after her late fatigue
and anxiety.

  Meantime, Lady Laura was her repre-
sentative in the sick chamber, she attended
with care and humanity to the poor inva-
lid, and left her not till Almina, her
strength recruited by rest, took her station.
282         EARL OSRIC.

Many tedious hours elapsed, ere the
Countess gave any signs of actual sense,
hut the judicious management of Father
Luke, and the tender attentions of her ex-
cellent nurse, at length prevailed; and
Eleanora, fixing her eyes languidly on the
face of Almina, entreated, in a low and
faint tone, to know where she was.

  By degrees, her removal to Castle Ro-
samond was imparted, and explained, but
no words could express the various feelings
that agitated the gentle mind of the Coun-
tess, when she became sensible of the ob-
ligations conferred on her by the active
and persevering benevolence of her young
deliverer.

  She tried, by pressing the hand extend-
ed to her, to make herself understood; but
extreme weakness forbade all speech, and
Almina, so positively prohibited exertion,
that only by looks and gestures, could the
object of her humanity evince her gra-
titude.                EARL OSRIC.     283

Revived by care and cordials, Eleanora
was at length able to rise from her couch,
and in an easy chair, inhale the pure 
breeze from the window of her chamber;
but her attenuated form, sunken eyes, 
and ghastly complexion, too surely con-
vinced the attentive friends who surround-
ed her, that her misfortunes and under-
mined her constitution, and that she was
rapidly hastening to the termination of
her earthly career.

     A courier had been dispatched with all
speed to the Castle of Fitz Oswald, to 
acquaint the Baron and Baroness of the
restoration of their daughter, but the
intelligence that he brought back was no
of a nature to be made known to the
dying Eleanora, without apprehensions
of the most fatal consequences from the
communication. Her parents were no
longer there, and the office of the King
were in possession of the Castle. in con-
sequence of a warrant issued by the
crown, to apprehend the Baron Fitz Os-284                EARL OSRIC.

wald, and his son-in-law Earl Osric, both
accused of high treason.

  When the messenger from Castle Rosa-
mond had left Fitz Oswald, neither had
been apprehended; but diligent search
was making, and all ranks joined at once
in wonder and commiseration, at the fate
of two nobleman whose rank and popu-
larity were too conspicuous and well-
known, not to render their delinquency
the general subject of discussion. For
this blow Almina had not been prepared,
but she guessed in a moment, the invisi-
ble hand which had aimed it. Her own
escape, and that of Lady Osric, from
the power of Sir Ethelred, had made him
desperate; he knew that on their lips
hung his sentence, and to avert the fate
he so well deserved, some dark and dread-
ful practices had been resorted to, of
which Earl Osric and his father-in-law
were to be the victims. Horror struck,
and bereft of all power to speak or move,
she sat in speechless emotion, after the          EARL OSRIC.              285

messenger had made his report; unable
even to think precision, much less
to attempt to soften intelligence so dread-
ful to Countess. Wholly to conceal
it from her knowledge was at length the
resolution she formed.

"Whatever be his fate," she exclaim-
ed, with tearless eye and the wild look of
despair,--" Eleanora, and the happy Elea-
nora will not live to know it:-while I,
still destines to endurance and conceal-
ment, may exist to know that Osric is 
condemned to die. Now then, dear suf-
fering Eleanora, thy fate is indeed prefer-
able: be it my sad task to shield thee
from the knowledge that would at once
accelerate and embitter thy parting hour.

In a state of suspense the most harrass-
ing, Almina awaited the return of another
messenger whom she had despatched to
Castle St. Albert, to learn tidings of the
Countess's health; charging him to male 
inquiry as to public affairs, whatever he
could gain intelligence; and Valentine

286                     Earl Osric

set out on the same errand, commissioned
by his lady to visit the Priory of St. Mar-
garet before his return, and bring her
information of her friends there.  Her
heart longed to partake once more the 
reciprocations of friendship, and to be-
hold the kind Dame Maddelina, and her
amiable community.  How did she wish
to meet again the beloved Lady De Mow-
bray, or her friendly Bertha.

     The situation of Lady Osric forbade
her at present leaving Castle Rosamond,
or she would have undertaken a journey
for the purpose of renewing connexions
which she valued so highly, but a sacred
duty remained to perform.  She beheld
the wasted form of Eleanora daily making
nearer advances to the tomb, and yet she
was unable to give her the exquisite satis-
faction of seeing Osric.  He was pro-
scribed, and probably a wanderer.  All
therefore that remained, was herself to
bestow on her the most tender attentions,
and to soften as much as possible, theanguish of the inevitable hour.  IIer fa-
tigue, her cares, "were all shared ny Lady
Laura, and Dame Janetta; and the sufier-
ing invalid was rendered, by their inde-
fatigable humaunity, as comfortable as her
situation would admit.  Her intellects 
were completely resotred, and she held
long conferences with Almina, in which
she related all she had endured, when in
the confusion of the attack of Osric Cas-
tle; she had been seized by a party of
soldiers, and hurried through the dark-
ness of night to a place of concealment,
from whence she was afterwards conveyed
to the seeluded Castle, where her deliver-
ers found her.

In return, Almina had many commu-
nications to make, and had the infinite
delight of relieving the maternal appre-
hensions of the Coutness, by relating the
escape of her child from the emissaries of
Sir Etherlred.

Eleanora heard her with wonder and
thankfulness, and clasping her hands-


288              EARL OSRIC.

" Almina," said she, " thou art the sa-
viour of Osric's family, and well hast
thou discharged thy debt of gratitude.
Mayest thou, Almina, may thy gentle
friendship support and comfort him, when
the form of Eleanora shall be mouldering
in the dust. I feel that misfortune has
subdued me :-this weak frame has been
unequal to the trials assigned me; and
when I am gone- thou, Almina, must
be a mother to my boy. How injurious
to thee were once my feelings! Perhaps
I am punished for having indulged them;
but the unworthy suspicious were suggest-
ed by that fiend in the form of man, who
seems to have been sent as a scourge on
earth."


   To beguile the tedious hours of illness
and confinement, Almina would relate
every particular of her own short, but
eventful life; and still oftener were the
pain and sorrows of Eleanora charmed
to temporary ease and peace, by the
powers of her lute.                   EARL OSRIC.                 289

  In the art of music, as well as the still
more uncommon accomplishments of the
mind,Almina was a proficient; and her
lute had ever been her cherished solace,
from the period when she first learned
to draw forth its tones, beneath the in-
struction of Earl Osric, in her childhood
to the present time. it had then sweet-
ended solitude, during her court life it
had been her best loved recreation, and
always in retirement a never failing re-
sources.

   Now, as she sat by the couch of the
dying Countess of Osric, and joined the 
melody of her soul-subduing voice to the
gentle tones of her instrument, while her
mild eyes were cast upwards, as she
played an evening address to the Virgin,
Eleanora gazed on her, till she thought
her more than mortal. " but Osric must love
a creature so transcendant in goodness as
well as beauty ; and to her be committed
the sacred task of rendering the autumn

  VOL. III.
  290           EARL OSRIC.

  of his life happy. Let no mean jealousy
  actuate the heart ennobled by the choice
  of Osric, and let me learn to wish for his
  felicity, even when I am not here to
  form it.
       For several days the spirit of Elcanora
  seemed hovering between life and death,
  on the confines of immortality, but still
  clinging to existence. One only wish or 
  hope appearing to possess her mind,- that
    f once more beholding Osric.  "Oh,
  could I but gratify her," thought Almina,
  "willingly would I sacrifice what I most
  valued,to procure this peace to her part-
  ing soul." Rapidly the awful moment
  seemed to approach, but towards the
  close of a sultry day the acute pains the
  Countess had endured in the course of it
  seemed to abate, and Almina leaving
  Dame Janetta with her, walked for a
  short time on the ramparts of the Castle,
  in the hope that the night breeze would 
  allay the feverish throbbing in her head.
  The evening was mild and serene after   
            EARL OSRIC             291
the excessive heat, and she meditated on
the various events which had brought
beneath her roof and exclusive car, the
wife of her earliest friend: as she paced
the length of the ramparts vainly wish-
ing that she could gratify the fervent
desire she manifested-once more to be-
hold her lord.

The sun was setting, and she watched
its last tinge on.the glowing horizon with
a palpitating heart. “ Ere that great
luminary again shall awaken the universe
to light and life" thought she, “ may not
the feeble spark which animates the frame
of Eleanora be extinguished for. ever.
Grant me, Gracious Heaven! fortitude to
support her in the hour of trial, and
courage to view the final struggle which
will restore her guileless soul to its Ma-
ker.” Lady Laura joined her as this“
aspiration escaped her lips, and told of
the arrival of some travellers and pilgrims,
who as usual had claimed the shelter of
-the Castle for the night. She also men-
              02292             EARL OSRIC.

tioned the sudden illness of Father Luke,
who was obliged to decline his evening
duty in the chapel, and was unable to
leave his bed. " Tis particularly unfor-
tunate," said she, "as the Countess has
just inquired after him, and seems to
wish for his presence. Alas! I fear me
much that she feels the quick approach
of that hour, when the holy and final
rite must be administered."

     "Let us return to her my Laura," said
Almina, "and from her patient acquies-
cence to the divine will, learn how a
christian should die." They found Elea-
nora evidently worse in body, but more
serene, more amiably mild, and resigned,
than ever. Purified by sorrow and suffer-
ing, she seemed already on the verge of
Heaven. "How unfortunate!" said she,
"that our good spiritual director should
at this aweful crisis be detained from
me. Methinks I need much his holy
counsel, to aid me in repressing that
spirit of repining, which will arise to                 EARL OSRIC.                293

embitter my soul's flight from earth."
Dame Janetta entered at this moment,
and brought intelligence that amongst
the pilgrims lately arrived, was a pious
father, who was journeying to a distant 
monastery, and hearing of Father Luke's 
indisposition had offered his services to 
attend the sick chamber of the Countess, 
and administer the holy rites of his reli-
gion. Gladly was the offer accepted, and
Almina, and Lady Laura disposed them-
selves to j in in prayer.

   The holy man returned with the Dame,
his cowl was drawn close over his face,
and making a low obeisance as he enter-
ed, with a murmured benediction on 
those within it, he passed straight to
the couch.

     The form of the stranger monk was
tall and dignified; and as he walked
forward into the apartment Almina's eye
fell on his graceful figure, she thought he
had more the air of the court, that the 
convent; but glad to procure for Elea-294 EARL OSRIC.
nora the aid she required, she forbore to
make any remarks. The Countess at her
own request was left alone with the con-
fessor, and after a long conference, the
fair cousins were again admitted. The
damps of death bung on her once lovely
countenance, and its palsying power
evidently pervaded her fame. The monk
knelt by her, and addressing Almina,
she told her that her mind was now per-
feetly at ease. "All is over Almina,"
said she, "the great struggle is passed;
and I feel that the world is grad ally re-
ceding from my sight. Yet I quit it not
unwillingly. I am assured that to those
I best love my loss will eventually con-
tribute to good:-and joyfully would I
ever have yielded life to promote the
felicity of Osric."

A groan from the monk reached the
ears of all the greatly affected auditors,
and Almira turning towards him, saw
that he appeared in deep and earnest
prayer; but she had no time to dwell on               EARL OSRIC.             295

the singularity of the circumstance, death
havered over the frame of Eleanorn, and 
the blow was only for a few moments
suspended.  Lovely even in dissolution,
her fine features retained all their wonted
expression, and while yet on earth, she 
looked an Angel.  "Too late," thought
Almina, as she sorrowfully surveyed her,
"too late I knew her. Oh! that I had soon-
er known and loved her as she merited!"
A sweet and heavely benignity was dif-
fused over the countenance of the sufferer,
she looked cheerfully round on all; and
fixing her dying eyes on Almina, she
pressed her hand with fervour, and while
a supernatural brilliancyillumined her look.
" Farwel, a long farewel, sweetest, best
Almina!" she cried, "To you I commit
the sacred task of soothing the sorrow of
Earl Osric.  You share with him, the last
thoughts of her, to whom, with scrupulous
honor, his kind attention was unvaried;
and should fate ordain him a second part-
296            EARL OSRIC.

ner, may he be blessed with one as gentle,
as tender,and as noble-minded as Almina."
She ceased :-the pulse of life beat low ;
the tide of existence ebbed ; and the
pressure of her hand relaxed.

     "It comes," said she, "the moment 
of certainty is arrived, and even Osric
now is indifferent. Blessed Spirit! I obey
the mandate." A celestial expression
overspread her face, a tinge of animation
for a moment illumined it, and the next
was supplanted by the livid hue of disso-
lution. She gently withdrew her had,
and her eyes were closed for ever.                CHAP. XIV.

                   ====

   "We still have known thee for a holy man."
                              ROMEO AND JULIET.


    "Her body sleeps in Chapels' monument,
  Aud her immortal part with angels lives;"

                                        IBID.

        " I do beseech your grace,
  Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me;
  If with myself I hold intelligence,
  Or have acquaintance with my own desires,
  If that I do not dream, or be not frantic,
  Never so much as in a thought unborn
  Did I offend your highness.

                               AS YOU LIKE IT.


            ===========================

   WHEN Almina was convinced that all
was finally over, and that the pure spirit of
Eleanora was released from her earthly
sufferings, the courage and fortitude so suc-

298                 EARL OSRIC.

cessfully assumed, at once failed her, and
she fell on the fair corse before her, in all
the tearful imbecility of grief. No longer
the heroine, she mourned as the woman
and the friend.

     Subdued by the exertions she had made
to repress emotions that she was anxious
to conceal from  her poor charge, she now
felt all the effects of her efforts; and was
conveyed to bed by her attendants, in a
state of illness that awakened all the fears
of the affectionate Lady Laura. For many
hours a feverish slumber enchained her
senses, but she awoke restless and ll, and
it was several days before she was well
enough to rise and join her kind friends.

     Then, when she beheld her in some de-
gree restored, it was, that Lady Laura de-
livered to her a scroll, left for her by the
venerable monk, who had attended the
Countess in her last moments. "I was
unwilling to deliver it sooner, my cousin,"
she said, "lest it should contain aught
that would distress thee, for methinks therewas much of mystery in the appearance of
that stranger monk."  "I remember me
now you mention it," said Almina, "that
my thoughts of him were precisely the 
same. I, too, fancied there was somewhat
mysterious in his air and manner,"  "I
must tell there," contined Lady Laura,
"how he behaved on the morning of his
departurem which was the next succeeding
to the day of the sad event he witnessed,
I was uneasy for thee, my cousin, and I
quitted my chamber early, to take the
morning air, on the ramparts, and I had
reached the buttress on the North side,
when I saw the stranger monk close by 
me.  He had followed me unperceived,
"Lady," said he, "I crave thy forgiveness
for this instruction, but I hasten to procced
on my pilgrimage, and have a boon to beg
of thy kindness."  "Name it, good Fater."
I said, "and if in my power it shall be
villingly granted,"  "It is only," he an-
swered, "to deliver this scroll to the Lady
Almina, of Fitz-Oscar Whenever her health300   EARL OSRIC,

will allow her to receive it. Commend
the wanderer to her prayers, Lady, and
say, if it so please thee, that his shall be
offered for her, in whatsoever region his
destiny may conduct him. And now,
gracious Lady, farewell. Accept the
thanks and benedictions of a desolate, but
grateful stranger;" and so saying, he dis-
appeared from my sight, and I find, left
the Castle immediately afterwards.

"Perhaps," said Almina, as Lady Laura
ceased, "this scroll will unfold the myste-
ry;" and so saying, she unfastened, and was
proceeding to decypher it, when a shriek
of surprise escaped her, and the scroll fell
to the ground; for no sooner had her eye
rested on the interior, than she recognised
the well-known characters of Earl Osric.

It was some minutes, during which,
conviction rushed on her mind, that she
had beheld him under the disguise of the
stranger monk, ere she could be composed
enough to peruse the scroll. It contained
the following words.
         EARL OSRIC.       301

   
     To the Lady Almina of Filz-Oscar.

  
  " AN exiled wanderer has claimed the
shelter of thy hospitable dome, Almina,
beneath the semblance of a pilgrim friar,
little imagining that there he should find
his lost Elconora; and that to thy virtuous
exertions, thy pious care, she owed the all
of comfort she possessed.

  " The unjust persecution I am at pre-
sent sufiering, thou hast probably heard,
it drives me a wanderer from my home;
and till my fame shall he re-established,
I will be self-banished from all I hold
dear.

  " But the time will come, when Edward
will be convinced of my truth and loyalty,
and methinks I am now indifferent whe-
ther this shall be during the few years I
may sojourn on this earth, or when my
memory alone can be restored to the
honors, I can proudly assert, my conduct
towards the King has ever merited. 302             EARL OSRIC.                            

 "The particular accusations against me                  
I am yet to learn, and my conscience, I                  
thank Heaven, fails to convict me. Still,               
therefore, am I in ignorance of the crimes                
imputed to me.                                            

  "Not till the fullest restitution he made              
to my injured honor, will I again behold                
thee, Almina ; but never, never, can I for-            
get what I owe thee.                                     

  "The dear Saint, whom death has re-                    
leased from misery, did the fullest justice                
to thy merits. I thank God she died ig-                  
norant of my injuries, and that she was                
consoled by my presence in her dying                    
hour.                                                    

  "Availing myself of the private inter-                 
view, to which in my priestly character I              
was admitted, I discovered to her that it                           
was her husband she beheld ; but without                         
disclosing all my motives, I intimated a                 
wish to remain in privacy, saying that                   
having quitted the army, to visit my child,               
I wished to avoid the publicity of travelling            
in my own character.                                    EARL OSRIC.                                   303

   ''By nature unsuspicious, and her mind weakened by sickness and sorrow, happily for herself, and me, she saw not the mystery that lurked beneath my words, and credited them literally. Her whole discourse was of her child and Almina, they were associated in her imagination and her pious gratitude was unbounded.

   ''Should we ever again meet, my Almina, thou shalt know more;—meantime, suffer the manes of my Eleanora to rest in the vaults of Rosamond Castle, till happier times shall enable her relatives to claim them, and to deposit the sacred relics in the tomb of her Ancestors.

   ''Adieu, perhaps a long adieu, and believe, that thou, Almina, and my infant Hector, share between ye the widowed heart of—

                                         ''OSRIC.''

   ''And where,'' exclaimed Almina, as she finished the perusal of the letter, ''where is this beloved child? Ah!

304 EARL OSRIC.

where has he found refuge amidst this
dreadful wreck of his presents happiness?
A Few additional lines on the edge of the
vellum met her eye, they were these.

"My Hector is, I think, for the present
safe beneath the care of poor Maud in an
obscurity so profound, and so desolate,
that guarded by heaven alone, the malig-
nity even of our deadly foe, will I trust
fail to reach him. Oh that he were under
the watchful eye of the friendship Al-
mina!"

"Oh that be were! echoed the heart
of Almina, but as she had no clue to guide
her search for him, she was compelled to
rest in uncertainty. After having faith-
fully complied with the wishes of Osric,
relative to the remaims of the Countess,
and a dead calm succeeding to the bustle,
in which her life had lately been passed,
the depressed spirits of Almina were gra-
dually sinking into a state of despondence.
Their insolated residence precluded the
            EARL OSRIC.                305

possibility of frequent communication,
with the more populous parts of the king-
dom, consequently they were obliged to 
trust to accident for public intelligence,
and a state of the most torturing suspence
became the fate of Almina. Sometimes
a wandering pilgrim, or benighted travel-
ler, would stop at the castle, and impart
some imperfect tidings, such as that the
armies of Edward were marching against
the devoted Scots with redoubled vigour.
Sometimes flying reports reached them,
that the English were in all parts victori-
ous, and that the subdued Scots, once more
retreating to their mountain fastnesses,
had sought shelter and safety by flight.
Then would they hear, that Wallace was
triumphantly bearing down all before
him, that the English were flying in all
directions towards the borders, and that
Edward himself had nearly fallen into the
hands of the enemy; but no news of a 
more private nature reached them; the 
306 EARL OSRIC.


fate of Osric was involved in obscurity,
and the heart of Almina, continued to
pant for information relative to her first
friend; with less and less hope of relief.
To ride out, and partake the amusement
of the chase, was often the occupation of
the fair heiress of Rosamond ; it seemed
to relieve somewhat of the weight of Al-
mina's mind, and Lady Laura, who care-
fully studied her looks, promoted the ex-
ercise, To her, in the full glow of youth
and health, it was a delightful relaxation,
and she greatly enjoyed it; when she
could persuade her cousin to share her
pleasure. It was on a fine Spring morning
that Almina, after a night of suffering,
during which her mind had been more
than usually depressed, and wakeful an-
xiety had banished sleep from her pillow,
tempted by the mild beauty of the wea-
ther and the persuasions of Lady Laura,
suffered herself to be led by the sport,
            EARL OSRIC.                        307

to a greater distance, than she had been accustomed to go; but feeling tired she loitered behind the rest, and while her gay cousin on her spirited courser, pursued the cry of the dogs, she lingered amidst the woody glades and forest scenes, enjoying the distant sounds of the chase and viewing with melancholy pleasure, the renovation of nature at this lively season. Gradually the sounds of the hunters died on her ear, and all was silent. She had lingered till she found herself quite alone, in a part of the country to which she was a stranger. Not 
having, like Lady Laura, been reared amidst the scenery she beheld, she had not like her, the advantage of local knoweledge to direct her; but hoping her steed would find bridle on its neck, and suffered it to lead her in what direction by the exercise, the animal immediately began to cop the herbage under its feet, seeming308                                     EARL OSRIC.

as little inclined to venture forward as its rider.

   The immense solitude of the forest glades, which had before appeared beautiful, now looked awful and terrific, and she gazed around her in surprise, at the profound stillness that prevailed. No murmur broke on the dead silence, and it seemed as if by some sudden stroke of fate, she had been at once cut off from all communication with the world.

   The steed proceeded slowly forward, as if bewildered like its fair mistress, who, in vain urged him on. Had the powers of superstition been as prevalent in the mind of Almina, as in many of those of her equals in rank and station, she might have been tempted to fancy the horse as well as herself under the influence of enchantment; but rejecting all vain alarms, she dismounted, and, leaving the animal to graze, cautiously looked around for some path or road through the wild. Neither, 


            EARL OSRIC.        309

however, appeared, and she was in the
act of again mounting her horse, when she
discerned a column of smoke curling
amidst the trees. Instantly convinced it
must proceed from some human habitation,
she approached nearer, and through the
thick underwood, discovered a very small
and lonely hut.

  Charmed with the sight; she made her
way towards it, and as she unclosed the
humble door, the mingled sounds of infant
cries, and the murmuring of complaint
met her ear.

  An outer division of the cottage, in
which a neat old woman was heading
something over a small turf fire, met her
eye. Almina quickly dispelled the sur-
prise and alarm that appeared in the wo-
man's countenance, and simply asked her
to direct her the nearest way to Rosamond
Castle.

  " Lack-a-day, Lady," she answered,
" the distance is but small, though these310   EARL OSRIC.

thick woods make the way hard to find.
If I dared leave the cot, I would myself
show you the road; but in truth, I have
nobody to leave with a poor sick wayfaring
body, whom chance conducted hither last 
night. She is on my own bed in that 
room, and truly, I fear me much for her
life. If I could have reached so far, I
would have craved the aid of the kind
Leech at the Castle: but I am old
and lame, and could not leave the sick 
Dame and her babe alone here, now
especially, when the country is full of sol-
diers, and I am told even such poor peo-
ple as we are not free from them."

  A moan of pain, that proceeded from
the sick traveller, now reached Almina,
and again a child's voice, crying, suc-
ceeded.

  "May I see this poor woman?" said
she, "I may perchance be able to advise
some remedy, and send it from the
Castle". "If it so please you, Lady,"
                 EARL OSRIC.                   311

the woman answered,"to open that door
she will hardly hear you, for she is sensi-
ble to little but pain. The Virgin help
her, and send her ease, I say."
   
   Almina unclosed the inner door, and
saw a female figure in coarse garments,
extended on the tatteres bed, and an in-
fannt of three year old hanigng over her.
Its little head was turned towards the
opening door. Another loud cry escaped
its lips, in an instant it was off the bed,
and the next moment it was in the arms
of ALmina,who, though she beheld the
blooming countenance and well remem-
bered features, could scarcely credit the
evidence of her own senses, or believe
that she actually once more caressed the 
lovely and beloved hector of Osric.Poor
Old Maud, for she it was,who,overtaken
by sickness, laid extended on the cottager's bed, no sooner heard the voice of her
beloved young lady, than starting from 
her recliing attitude,-" The Virgin be
312        EARL OSRIC.

praised," she exclaimed, "my prayers,
then, are heard. Ah, Lady, how I have
prayed that I might again behold thee,
ere God calld me hence. Journeying to
find thee and deposit my little charge in
thy care, the hand of sickness has fallen
heavily upon me, and much I feared I
should never reach Castle Rosamond.
Many a weary mile have I travelled, with
this poor babe, to find thee, Lady, for
alack-a-day, age was creeping fast upon
me, and in the little lone cot where my
Lord left me, I had no friend to take
charge of my blessed child, if I should be
taken from him, so I e'en left it, and
hoping my strength would last till I
reached thee, dearest Lady. I set forwards,
knowing thou wouldst gladly receive and
protect the son of my my dear Lord and his
old servant."

  "Gladly, my good Maud," said Almina,
"and happy am I, that it pleased Heaven
to guide my steps hither. Thou shalt be
                 EARL OSRIC.                    313

immediately conveyed to the Castle,
where rest and nourishment will, I trust,
restore thy exhausted strength, and there
shalt thou find a comfortable asylum for
thy latter days."

"Blessings on thee,sweet Lady," said
Mand, "thou wert ever good and kind,
and to die beneath thy roof, methinks,
comprises all my wishes on earth." "But
thou shalt still live, my good Dame,
to witness the happiness of thy children,"
said Almina, trying to inspire the poor
creature with hope and cheerfulness, "for
this dear babe and myself,thou knowest
Mand, are alike the children of thy care;
but we must lose no time."

So saying, with Hector clinging to her,
she called the woman of the cottage, and
making known to her, the late discovery,
proposed that she should herself remain
there, while her hostess hastened to the
Castle, and ordered the attendance of
some of the servants, and vassals, to con-
                  

   VOL. III.           P314           EARL OSRIC.

vey Maud thither. This was speedily accomplished, by the persevering activity of Almina, and mounting her steed, she placed Hector before her, accompanying the litter, which had been hastily constructed to bear Maud to the Castle. Lady Laura  beheld, with surprise, the cavalcade advancing, on her return from the chase, and gladly lent her aid towards settling poor Maud in a comfortable apartment.

Little Hector soon became the favourite and plaything of the party.

The good Dame Janetta was delighted to undertake the office of preceptress ; under the inspection of his "good Lady," as he termed Almina.

His lisping accents were daily more formed, and he every day more strongly resembled his noble father.

Often would Almina gaze on him, till, unable to restrain the starting tear, she would fly from the dangerous contempla-
               EARL OSRIC.                    315

tion, and in the retirement of her oratory,
commune with her heart, seeking by
prayer and meditation to render it resigned
to the decrees of providence.















                     CHAP. XV.


"Yet again, methinks,
Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune's womb,
Is coming toward me; and my inward soul
With nothing trembles."--

                       SHAKSPEARE's RICHARD II.

IN serenity, it not in happiness, six
moons had successively risen and set on
the existence of Almina, since the death
of the virtuous Eleanora; and piously
had she, during that space of time, de-
voted herself to the duty of attending and 
rearing her young charge. "Through
thee, dear infant," would she mentally
ejaculate-" will I try to repay the im-
mense debt of gratitude I owe thy parent,
 

                 EARL OSRIC.   317

and as he watched over my helpless infan-
cy, will I guard and cherish thine."
   During this period no certain intelli-
gence of public affairs had reached the
insolated inhabitants of Castle Rosamond.
The continued successes of Edward,
against the now almost subdued Scots,
were often mentioned by the wayfaring
traveller, who partook the hospitality of
its sheltering roof; and that the sun of
Wallace's popularity was set, became cur-
rently reported.  Deserted by his parti-
zans, and envied by some of the most
ancient of the Scottish nobility, whose 
rights and privileges he had so ably de-
fended, his lamentable fate was fortold;
and the brave hero, whose praises had
been the theme of every tongue, was
likely to become an outlawed wanderer.
Such is the evanescence of public favour
and popularity.  In a private station, the 
virtues of Wallace might have seemed
temporal felicity.
  It was on a calm beautiful evening after

                P3
318         EARL OSRIC.

vespers, that Almina- meditated on this
subject as she p iced the western ramparts,
and contemplated the latest glories of the
setting sun. It had been recalled to and
impressed on her mind by an old pilgrim
soldier, who had paused at the Castle, on
his way to the shrine of his patron saint;
he had served under King Edward in the
French and Scottish wars, and the painted
the character of the fervent and patriotic
Wallace,—though with the pencil of an
enemy,—as that of an hero and of a
christian.

  Of Earl Osric, Almina could hear no-
thing, though she had closely questioned
the soldier. She could only learn that
Sir Ethelred Douglas still retained his
situation near the king; but more than
all, she marvelled what could have be-
come of St. Albert, and of his anxiety to
retrieve her fair fane in the eye of the
world, and to punish the delinquency of
Douglas.

  While reflecting on all these things, as                EARL OSRIC.                  319

with measured step she paced the ram-
part, and marked the departing beams of
the great luminary, she suddenly heard
the great bell sounded; and from one of
the breaches in the parapet saw the
bridge lowered, and a messenger, whose
horse was covered with foam, ride over it
into the court yard. The sound of " an
express with despatches for the Lady Al-
mina," was heard soon throughout the
edifice; and hastening through the western
gallery, she was met by the Lady Laura:
-"Heaven forefend my dear cousin,"
said she," that any great misfortune
threatens thee, but this messenger comes,
I hear, direct from the court; and is 
charged with despatches of consequences to
thee."


   " Fear not, dear Laura," Almina re-
plied," no human being have I wilfully
offended, and the mercy of Heaven will
shield me from the false accusations of
enemies:- In him, his power is my
rust, Laura; there, where only it can be 
                 
                    P 4


 320               EARL OSRIC.

placed with an assurance that it can never
fail.“ ” Thy life, dear Almina,“ answer-
ed Lady Laura, ” has been so eventful,
that I am filled with a thousand fears lest
thy vile and malignant enemy should have
devised some new and plausible pretext to
prejudice the King's mind, and involve
thee in the ruin of thy friend Earl Osric.
But let me not detain thee;--in the hall
the messenger awaits thy presence.“

  The fortitude of Almina was inherent
in her nature, and with firm step, though
an anxious heart, she followed her cousin
to the great north hall.  There the mes-
senger, bending his knee to the ground,
said--” Gracious Lady I bring thee des-
patches of high import from the court,“
presenting a packet--” and am also
charged with a commission of a more pri-
vate nature, from the Lady De Mowbray,“
and he delivered a scroll of vellum tied
carefully up and indorsed :--

   To the Lady Almina, of Fitz-Oscar.           BARL OSRIC.          321  

  The heart of Almina, amidst all its
anxiety, rejoiced that Lady De Mowbray
was restored to her native country, and
felt considerably relieved to find, that
some part of these dreaded despatches
was from the hand of that dear friend.
After ordering refreshments, and every
rite of hospitality to be paid to the mes-
senger, she retired to her apartment,
where unfolding the large packet she dis-
covered with surprise, and not without
dismay, the mandate for her appearance
at the Court; and for bringing with her
the infant, known by the name of Hec-
tor, son of Earl Osric, who it had been
confidently affirmed, was under her care.
Her first emotion was extreme alarm,
" And must thou too, sweet infant," she
exclaimed, " be involved in the fate of
your unfortunate father? Has the blight-
ing mildew of malignity extended its
baleful influence to thy innocence?”

  The order for her appearance was sign-
ed by the King himself, and instantly

               P 5
322                EARL OSRIC.

her apprehensive mind conjured up the
most terrifying terrifying fears, that Osric was ap-
prehended and that she was in some way
implicated in the crimes laid to his
charge, this sudden and abrupt in full
possession of conscious inncocence, still
an involuntary shudder agitated her
frame, at the idea of what the fertile and
evil genius of her arch enemy might lay
to her charge.

 It was some time ere the perturba-
tion of her spirits would suffer her to
unclose the vellum, dicated by the friend-
ly hand of Lady De Mowbray: at length
she unfolded it, and these words met
her eye:--

 " Once more dearest Almina, Igreet
thee on my native shore, after an absence
which has been painfully, and uninten-
tionally prolonged. Recalled by our pre-
sent Gracious Queen, who is indeed a
worthy successor to her we both so great-
           EARL OSRIC.         323
ly loved; the Royal Margaret is pleased
to offer me her kind patronage and pro-
tection, and again I have taken my station
in my natural sphere, a Court. Strange
events I find have occured here; ru-
mours the most extrordinary reached us
e're we attained the English shore, and
here we found all in confusion and dis-
may. High characters impeached, and
some of our nearest friends implicated in
charges the most serious. The King, I
am told, requires your presence here;-
it is rumoured that the son of Earl Osric
has been some time secreted in Rosamond
Castle. What, Almina, dies it all mean?
I shall impatiently expect thy arrival, and
anxiously wilt thou be received and
greeted, by Sir Orlando, as well as by
thy yet partial friend,

        "CONSTANCE DE MOWBRAY."

     With agitated heart, though with as-
sumed firmness, Almina commenced the

         P6


324           EARL OSRIC.

necessary preparations for her journey to
the metropolis; and with somewhat of
surprise heard that a military guard was
sent with the messenger, to escort her to
London.

  When the soldiers entered the great
court, Lady Laura, who stood at the
gallery casement, suddenly exclaimed ;—
" My dear Almina, I like not this mar-
tial appearance. It seems, methinks, as
though the King were conducting thee as
a prisoner to London."

  The words sunk deeply on Almina's
heart: a chill of horror pervaded her
whole frame, but resolute to conceal her
feelings from Lady Laura, she tried to
smile at the idea her fears had conjured
up. " While conscious I have offended
no law, divine or human, my Laura,"
she answered, " surely I may bid defiance
to such apprehensions." But the alarms
of her cousin were not easily appeased,
and fain would the affectionate maid have
accompanied her; but this Almina stre-
                 EARL OSRIC.        325

nnously opposed. "Thinkest thou," she
said, "timid damsel as thou art, and
accustomed only to this secure and remote
Castle, these wild woods and forest
scenes, that I would rashly expose thee
to the dangers and turbulence of a Court,
before I know how I shall myself be re-
ceived. No, let me first, my dear cousin,
know my allotted fate; willingly shalt
thou share it, if destined to be happy,
but if bitterness and adversity be in store
for me, may I at least suffer alone. Let
me not have the additional horror and
remorse, of involving thee in my misfor-
tunes. Believe me, Laura, they would
be inconceivably aggravated, by a know-
ledge, that thou wert a partaker of the
evils it may seem good to providence to
inflict on me."

     "Be they what they may, I would
rather partake them," she answered, "for
should harm happen to thee, in this
journey, never shall I again know  peace;"
but no persuasions could induce Almina
326                EARL OSRIC.

to consent to her youthful relation's first
quitting her retirement, under circum-
stances so doubtful and singular.

     Valentine, her faithful 'Squire was her attendant; and the little Hector, with
delight beheld himself placed in the litter,
destined to convey him to scenes so differ-
ent to those in which his short life had
hitherto been passed; and amidst the bles-
sings and prayers of her vassals and depen-
dants, Almina quitted the hospitable roof
of Rosamond Castle, once more to visit
the tumultuous scenes of a Court, and to
encounter those unknown dangers which
her foreboding heart predicted awaited
her.                       CHAP. XVI.

"Mark his condition, and the event, then tell me
 If this might be a brother."

                                       THE TEMPEST.

  "If powers divine
Behold our human actions (as they do)
I doubt not then, but innocence shall make
False accusation blush, and tyranny
Tremble at patience."

                                      WINTER'S TALE.

  When Almina inquired by Valentine
what route her escort intended to pursue?
and when they expected to reach Lon-
don? She was answered, that they had
received their orders before they quitted
it; that they should rest that night at a328                EARL OSRIC.

monastery which had been indicated in
their directions ; and hoped to reach the
town in three days.


  Every particular of the journey, seem-
ed indeed, to have been arranged for her;
" By what strange mystery am I sur-
rounded," thought she, as she surveyed
the unilitary who rode close by the litter.
Her own attendants, headed by Valen-
tine, followed. This faithful and attach-
ed domostic seemed more keenly to feel
for the apprehended misfortunes of his
Lady, than she herself felt.

  On the point of marriage with the
componion and partaker of his travels,
Mabel, he would not consent to complete
his own happiness, while that of his
honoured Lady was in doubt; and both
he and Mabel agreed to postpone their
nuptials, which were to have been cele-
brated in the Castle of Rosamond, till
Lady Almina was enabled to be present
at them, as she had promised.

  Mabel accompanied her Lady in the

  

            EARL OSRIC.        329

litter, she took charge of little Hector,
instead of Maud, who was left under
the care of Dame Janetta and Lady
Laura.

  Trying as much as possible, to discard
from her mind, the enervating apprehen-
sions that haunted it, and collecting all
her courage to her aid, Almina conversed
calmly and cheerfully with her little
friend; and at times left the litter, and
mounted her steed, which was led by
her Page.

  The air and exercise revived her sink-
ing spirits, and only pausing in the
middle of the day, to take some refresh-
ment, and give their steeds the necessary
rest. The fiist day's journey was per-
formed in safety, but night drew on ere
it was concluded. The air felt chilly,
and Almina entering the litter, and wrap-
ping her cloak round her, began to wish
they had reached the place of destination^
The cross-roads they had travelled, were
quite unknown to her, and the part of

                P 6330               EARL OSRIC.

the country they were now in, had a wil-
der and more dreary appearance, than any
the had passed. The high towers of a
building soon after came in sight, and she
was informed that they were those of the
convent, where they were to spend the
night.

   The moon shed a brilliant light, and
reflected on the lofty spires of the mon-
nastery, and the long avenues of high
elms which led up to it.-- No sooner
had the whole Building broke on her view.
then staring and leaning forward, Almina
uttered an involuntary exclamation; itim-
plied a doubt, which another minute re-
mov'd, and convinced her, that the Edi-
fice befor her was the beloved priory of
St. Margareta. Every feature of the scene
was too deeply impressed on her memory
to be mistaken, and when the carriage and
its escort rolled into the paved court, her
suspicion was confirmed by her Esquire,
who had learned the name of the convent,
from the Military Guard. the great bell                 EARL OSRIC. 331
was sounded, the inhabitants of the con-
vent came forth, and Almina, with plea-
sure found herself pressed with maternal
affection to the bosom of the good Dame 
Maddelina.

  "Alas! my dear child!" said she "waht 
trials hast thou sustained, since I last
beheld thee, and how have they robbed
thee of the bloom that once mantled on 
thy cheek" "And how, my good Dame
can all this hae been made known to thee?"
she asked.  "all will soon be explained, my 
child" answered the Dame.  "Thou knowest
my brother and his excellent Constance
are returned - Ah! what an eventful period,
the whole Kingdom in arms, the Monarch
himself sharing all the fatigues and hard-
ships of war, and only resting, it seems,
like his commonest soldiers, some of our
noblest Knights degraded by imputations
of the darkest crimes.  Anarchy and trea-
son are abroad, and thy return to the 
world, Lady Almina, will be greeted by 
the sad tidings of treachery and woe".332           EARL OSRIC.

  "Oh propheey not so woefully, dearest
mother" said Almina "or I shall be tempt-
ed to turn back on my steps, and tretrace my
way to Rosamond Castle; let us hope the 
best. Aweful as are the times, know wer
not, that every event is directed by a hand,
that cannot err. In wisdom and in mercy
are they planned, and never should the
mind of true piety despair".

  "Thou art truly my monitor, dear
Almina" said the Dame smiling--" and
in truth, I need one just now. Long and
eventful despatches from a world of sorrow
and misery, have opened afresh, the
scarcely healed wounds of our admirable
sister Alicia's saint like heart, and to her
griefs, have I this morn, paid the tribute
of tears, which I ought only to shed, at
the foot of the altar" my mind seems
weakened by listening to tales of woe I
hasten to seek the fortitude, that has for-
saken me, at you hely shrine--wilt thou
attend me thither children? " willingly" Al-
mina complied, and after offering her fervent                  EARL OSRIC.     333
orisons, in the chapel, she partook of some
refreshment, and with her little charge,
Mabel, and the other attendant damsels,
sought the rest she needed.
  At an early hour on the following morn-
ing, she arose, and revisited the altar.  Ere
she sought the Dame, anxious for some
explanation of her hints, concerning sis-
ter Alicia.  She felt the more inter-
ested in all that related to her, since she
had discovered the manuscript of Sir
Alfred, in the Abbey of de Warville, and 
had been aware of her affinity to the de-
tested Sir Ethelred, and she awaited anx-
iously a summons from the good superior.
With her she found sister Alicia, to the
kind hearted Abbess she was communicat-
ing her sorrows, and from her pious sym-
pathy, seeking consolation --silently she
returned the affectionate greeting of Al-
mina, and her humid eye, and meek look
of holy resignation.  She gazed on the 
countenance of Almina, and seeming to334                                     EARL OSRIC.

shudder as the contemplated her, she said in a low and faint voice to Dame Maddelina.

   ''Behold another victim to the same malignant power—the poison of the same serpent has reached her also—avert oh heaven from her its direful effects.''

   Almina gazed in silence, alternately at the sister and the Dame. The latter perceiving that her curiosity was much raised, said ''thou art as yet perhaps, my child, ignorant of a circumstance, which will unravel to thee the meaning of our dear sister's words—sister Alicia was, by birth, the last female descendant of the house of Douglas, and the only sister of that Sir Ethelred Douglas, by whom thou hast been so basely wronged.''—Yes, dear injured Lady'' said Alicia ''well mayest thou be shocked—In me thou seest the victim of a brother's cruelty and selfishness. Ah! how would the horror; with which thou must have listened to his impious love, have been encreased could some angel          EARL OSRIC.                     335

have whispered thee. In him who now
pours forth his vows at thy feet, thou be-
holdest the destroyer of a sister, the be-
trayer of the erring Edith, and virtually
the murderer of the innocent, the lovely
Emma-Thou mayest remember Lady,
that at the tomb of that sister of my soul
I gave to thy er, the sad recital; little then
imagining, that thou thyself wert des-
tined, to be also a prey to his insiduous
arts-Thank heaven thou hast at length
escaped unhurt-May those friends of 
thine, whose ruin he has also sought; be
equally fortunate."-

    The chief part of this day was given to
confidential communications, and the sweet
reciprocations of friendship, but the par-
ticulars of Earl Oscric's impeachment Al-
mina could not learn-The Dame either
was, or pretended to be ignorant of aught
relating to it, but Almina fancied, there
was somewhat of mystery in her manner,
when she alluded to the subject-She found
her however impenetrable to all questions,336              EARL OSRIC.

and therefore desisted from all attempts
to obtain further information-All she had 
heard of Sir Ethelred, his early and buse
desertion of his sister, after having forced
her into a convent, to gratify his own in-
satiable passion for riches, his villanous
conduct to the unfortunate sisters Edith
and  Emma, added to all she herself knew,
convinced her that his heart was to de-
praved, to deter him from any step that
would promote his own interest, or contri-
bute to the attainment of any object in
view.

     From such a character, what had she
not to expect; with only innocence to
protect her, she would have to encounter
his specious arts, but with such a shield,
Almina was to pious to think herself un-
defended. "No" she mentally ejaculated
as sh retired to rest, "A greater than any
earthly guard, will be my protection from
his violence; in him, has my trust ever yet
been placed, and never can my confidence
             EARL OSRIC.        337

be shaken—with these consoling reflec-
tions, she reclined on her pillow in peace.

  An early hour on the following morn-
ing, saw her on her way towards the me-
tropolis, with ample subject for medita-
tion. The weather was mild and beautiful,
her little companion was all spirits and
happiness, and she had argued herself
into a frame of mind, so tranquil and re-
signed, that the latter part of her jour-
ney was performed in far greater comfort,
than it had begun.

  To the residence of Sir Orlando de
Mowbray she was, she found, to be con-
ducted. Thither her own wishes had
pointed, and she entered the mansion of
friends, from whom she had been so
long separated, with emotions of tremu-
lous expectation, that almost overcame
her. In the hall, Lady de Mowbray
awaited her, and fondly was she pressed
to the heart of this inestimable friend.
With her wonted vivacity, she exclaimed
" how do I rejoice once more to behold

   VOL. III.           Q
338          EARL OSRIC.

thee my Almina ! true, thy bright bloom
has suffered from all the crosses, a wicked
world has inflicted, hut trust to the pro-
phecy a friend. We shall find means
to restore it with tenfold beauty."

  " Oh! talk not thus dear Lady de
Mowbray," said Almina, " but tell me
for what I am reserved ? Why has the
King commanded my presence here ? and
why am I thus forced from retirement ?
" For purposes which thou wilt soon
enough know," she answered. " The
King wishes to see thee, to know, from
thyself, the particulars of some events,
which have come to his knowledge.
Meantime this house is to be thy prison,
and thou art to hold communication with
no one but its inmates."

  " Prison!" cried Almina, " what a ter-
rific sound ! were I conscious of aught
that could merit such a punishment, but
while its limits are those of this mansion,
and an' inward monitor tells me I have
naught to apprehend froth candour and           EARL OSRIC                339

justice.  What can I fear? In my own
person certainly nothing.  But ah!  Lady
de Mowbray where is my first, my best
friend?  ease I conjure you, the torture
of my mind on that subject, and tell me
where is Earl Osric?  and how far has the
malice of a demon prevailed against him?
Lady de Mowbray answered, with a par-
ticular expression of countenance, which
her young guest could not understand.

  "He is at present safe and well, and his 
confinement, I trust, will not be longer, 
or more irksome than your own.  Be sa-
tisfied, my Almina," she added observ-
ing the deep anxiety of her feature.
"The malice of a demon will not pre-
vail against him, Earl Osric has great and
powerful friends, and in the breast of his
Royal master, he has a host.  Time will
develope all, but were the life or honour
of Osric in danger, thinkest thou that I 
would thus calmly discuss a subject so
dear to the heart of Sir Orlando, inquire
no further.  Of thee I ask no questions,
340           EARL OSRIC.

for I know all. Thy trials, thy heroism
in danger, thy exemplary conduct to my
sainted friend, the hapless Eleanora, all
have been faithfully detailed, and while
I admired and applauded have shed a
deluge of tears at the recital, In two
days if thou art sufficiently rested from
thy journey, thou art to have an audience
of the King. The Queen, too, will pro-
pably be present, and on the issue of this
interview thy fate will depend. It will
be private, for the King knows thy timid
nature; and would spare thee all possible
publicity. If thou wouldst prefer a lon-
ger period to prepare thy mind. I can
easily solicit their Majesties to defer your
admission to their presence, till the fol-
lowing day."

  " No preparation is required," said Al-
mina, " for as I am utterly ignorant of the
imputations laid to my charge, and
wholly unconscious of ill, the sooner I am
made acquainted with what I have to fear
the greater will be the satisfaction."         EARL OSRIC.       341

  "Your calmness delights me", said
Lady de Mowbray, "and now my Almina
let me conduct you to your chamber, and
may you be enabled by rest, to appear
with your native firmness before your
Royal patrons."

  "Fear not for me", Almina answered,
"the best of all possible support is mine,
an weak as is the mortal frame, when it
rests on an immortal aid, with confidence
and hope. there can be little cause for
appehension." A kind and friendly re-
ception from Sir Orlando, who now joined
them, completed the satisfaction of Al-
mina, and she sought the chamber of
rest, with revived trust, in the power
which had hitherto guided her in safety
through the intricate mazes of destiny.

                   Q3                    CHAP. XVII.

  Hastings. His grace looks cheerfully this morning,
There's some conceit or other likes him well.
When he doth bid good morrow with such spirit
I think, there's ne'er a man in christendom,
Can lesser hide his love or hate than he;
For by his face straight shall you know his heart.

  Stanley. What of his heart perceive you in his face,
By any likelihood he showed today?

  Hastings. Marry that with no man here he is offended;
For were he, he had shown it in his looks.

                                    RICHARD III.

  THE eventful day which was to conduct
Almina to the presence of her Sovereign
dawned with brilliancy, it found her re-
freshed and invigorated by a night of
calm repose, undisturbed by harrassing
reflections or terrifying dreams. Sleep,
such as innocence only can know, hovered             EARL OSRIC.                     343

Over her pillow, and, "steeped her senses 
in forgetfulness." With her wonted tran-
quility of countenance, she met her friends
at the morning repast, and was informed 
by Sir Orlando, that at the mid-day hour
she would be admitted to a private au-
dience with the King.

      "The feelings of his Majesty," added
Sir Orlando, "have been deeply wound-
ed. Accusations, tending to criminate
those, in whom he placed his utmost con-
fidence, have lately succeeded one another, with such alarming frequency, that his 
faith, in the loyalty of all, seems shaken,
and he is become irritable on the slightest
cause, Wonder not, therefore Lady
Almina, if the manner of his highness be
not so gracious as you have been accus-
tomed to find it. All will, I trust, end
well, and the mind of our Royal master 
be restored to peace after the investigation
he is resolved to make, into occurrences
that have tended so greatly to disturb it."

    What those occurrences were, and in

344         EARL OSRIC.

what situation Earl Osric now was, she
could not discover. It seemed extraordi-
nary that so much of mystery should be
observed in all that related to her; candid
and unsuspecting by nature, she longed
for an explanation of events, which seem-
ed to involve more than herself, and in
the hope that the approaching interview
would produce the desired elucidation,
she proceeded to it with the same firmness
and resolution which had marked her con-
duct in the most trying events of her
life.

  The preparations for her reception, and
the ceremony, attending on this dreaded
audience, were sufficient to intimidate a
bolder spirit, than that which inspired
tb.e gently bosom of Almina, but upheld
by conscious innocence, no weakness or
alapn appeared in her look or manner,"
and though the blush of modesty mantled
on h,er cheek, :her step was firm, and her
deportment dignified, when she entered
the Royal presence. Her veil, thrown                 EARL OSRIC.       345

back, disclosed her whole countenance to
view ; the paleness, which had of late
supplanted by the faint flush, produced by
the graceful and retiring diffidence na-
tural to her character. The King, seated
in his chair of state with the young and
lovely Margaret by his side, marked her
with a watchful eye from the moment of
her entrance. He seemed desirous to re-
press his natural candour, for in general
it was remarked by those who knew him
well, that his looks were too apt to betray
his sentiments.
  
   They were now cautious and reserved, 
but it seemed an over exerted degree of
caution, and a forced reserve, and certain-
ly discovered an anxious curiosity his
own feelings. Such to an accurate ob-
server he would have appeared, but Al-
mina was too greatly absorbed by doubt,
fear and expectation, which alternately
swayed her mind, and in preserving her

346         EARL OSRIC.

own equanimity,to remark minutely aught
around her. With pcrfect composure
and a sweet serenity of countenance, that
betokened the purity of her heart, she
advanced to the circle. She saw, with
satisfaction, that Sir Orlando de Mowbray
was to be present, and stood near his
Majesty ; and with si ill greater, that his
Lady was in attendance on the Queen.

  " Approach Lady Almina of Fitz Os-
car," said the King, " and may the an-
swers thou wilt be required to give, to the
questions demanded of thee, prove that
the malice of thy enemies, not thy own
delinquency, has caused this inquisition
to be made."

  Almina advanced as the monarch spoke,
gracefully she bent her knee before the
Royal chair. Edward carelessly put forth
his hand to raise her. "Our Queen,"
said he, " is thy- advocate Lady, though
unknown to he, she would vouch for thy
truth and: honour."

  Prostrate before the Royal Margaret,                                        EARL OSRIC.                              347

the graceful form of Almina bent in grateful acknowledgement. ''Rise Lady Almina,'' said the smiling Queen, ''My life on it, thy innocence will be proved. Such a countenance accords not with impurity. Our holiest vestals might covet the sanctity depicted there.'' ''And, I'' said the King, ''am as willing, as your Majesty, to believe it is a fair index of the mind but I need not, I think, add, that appearances, e'er now, have misled the wisest of us. But a truce with observations. Come we now to the examination, on which the acquittal of our fair prisoner depends.''

   With an accuracy and precision, that astonished Almina, the King then proceeded to question her on the leading events of her life, and her amazement, to find him so well informed, could only be equalled; by the satisfaction he appeared to feel from her answers. They were scrupulously dictated by truth, and every circumstance of her residence at the terrific Tower of Glenmorne, not even omit-

                                          Q 6

   348                 EARL OSRIC.

ing the catastrophe of Adeliza's death,
was accurately detailed.

  Valentine and Mabel were ready, she
added, to confirm, if necessary, her state-
ment, through both were ignorant that
such evidence would be requisite. As she
proceeded in her narrative, her auditors
became more silent and attentive, and
losing in some degree the timidity, which
had, at first, confined her speech to under
tones, and short, though accurate answers,
but still preserving the retired air of deli-
cacyand reserve, which rendered her gene-
ral manners so fascinating, she became
warmed by the subject.

  She felt that the dearest gem she pos-
sessed, the spotless purity of her fame,
was at stake; and while the excess of her
feelings,at times,gave a tremulous softness,
to the naturally sweet tones of her voice,
her glistening eyes, sparkling with in-
telligence, her heightened complexion,
her air of animation seemed every mo-
ment to give added interest to the reci-               EARL OSRIC              349

tal, and the attention of the hearers ap-
peared enchained by wonder and admira-
tion.  When she had concluded, a silence
of some minutes, the most profound suc-
ceeded.

  The Queen looked anxious to embrace
the beautiful orator, but restrained by her
fear of the King's displeasure, she waited
the signal of his approbation.  Rising
majestically from his seat, and approach-
ing the half sinking Almina, who had
retreated from the spot where she had
stood, to the kindly shelter of Lady de
Mowbray's side; he said with an air of the 
sweetest condescension.  "Well and per-
fectly art thou acquitted, fair Lady, gladly
shall my tribute be paid to thy excellence,
for now are the fullest proofs of it in my
possession.  In two days the Queen will
hold a drawing room.  Let not our
Court be longer deprived of its brightest
ornament."
 
  So saying the Monarch and his trane
withdrew.  The lovely Margaret, as
350         EARL OSRIC.

she passed Almina, extended her hand
"Adieu sweet Lady," she said, " soon I
hope shall I be permitted to express all I
feel for thee," and Lady de Mowbray, as
she followed her Royal mistress, accom-
panied by the amiable Duchess of Glou-
cester, kindly congratulated her.

  " All will be well rely on it,' said the
friendly Constance. "I see your triumph
in every line of his Majesty's countenance"

  Still all was mystery to Almina. With
care, was every relative circumstance con-
cealed from her, and she returned to her
apartment at De Mowbray house, as per-
plexed as ever, but not long was she to
remain so. By Lady de Mowbray she
received a gracious message from the
Queen, intimating her Majesty's wish,
that she would take up her abode in' the
same apartments, she had formerly occu-
pied in the Palace. Of course Almina
could form no objection to a proposal so
every way desirable and immediately by         EARL OSRIC,         351

Lady de Mowbray's advice removed
thither.
  Once more established in her own apart-
ment, she revisited with melancholy plea-
sure the little oratory adjoining her bed
room, that commanded that beautiful
view of the majestic thames which she 
had so often contemplated with delight,
in the society of the amiable Princess
Mary, now become Abbess of Ambres-
bury.
  In two days she was to appear at Court,
and yet she knew not the destiny of Osric.
How, her heart whispered, could she dress
her face in courtly smiles, where her bo-
som throbbed with uncertainty? she had
promised, solemnly promised Lady de
Mowbray to make no inquiries on the 
subject, but to await with patience, a de-
velopement of the mysteries that sur-
rounded her, and though a sleepless night
was the consequence, she resolved faith-
fully to perform it. E're she retired to
rest, she was visited by her kind friend  352               EARL OSRIC.

who conjured her to calm her mind and
try to procure repose.

  " "Tis essential my dear Almina," said
she,"that thou shouldst appear to the ut-
most advantage at Court, and trust me, no
apprehensions need agitate thee.  Surely
the parting words of the king to day,
ought to inspire these with confidence, and
believe me thy best friends will be pre-
sent to note thy looks and demeanor."
The departure of her friend at a late hour,
left Almina to solitude and reflection.
She repaired to her oratory, and as her
best preparation for rest, passed on hour
in the pious offices of religion. Scarcely
were they performed ere the sweet sounds
of soft music from the river beneath her
window stole softly on her ear,Once before
she remembered to have heard them when
Bertha de Wilton was her companion,and
she had concluded he stranger knight, so-
lemn, pensive and soothing continued to
float on the air. Not such as then had
         EARL OSRIC.         353

declared the feelings of a lover, but such
as were best calculated to calm the
troubled fancy, and sooth the soul to
peace. Passionately fond of the charm-
ing art which she herself had carried to a
high degree of perfection, for the age she
lived in, Almina could willingly have
passed the night in listening, but appre-
hensive that though it soothed, it might
enervate, she resolutely closed her case-
ment removed her light and retired to her
chamber.

  The music soon after ceased, but Ma-
bel as sh6 attended her, ever delighting in
the marvelous, described how she, and
the other damsels, had been charmed by
the fine sounds from the water,

  " But Ambrose the porter said, Lady,"
continued she, " that it was no more than
was to be expected now, for that the famo
of your beauty was so great at Court, that
doubtless we should have crowds of your
suitors every night in their boats as used
to be the case." " Pr'ythee peace good354        EARL OSRIC.

Mabel," answered Almina smiling, "and
do not thou so soon learn the adulatory
style of Courts, nor yeat with thy wonted
credulity, credit every wondrous tale
thou hearest. "My suitors, as thou
callest them, never but in one instance
adopted such a mode of compliment; and
that was probably some romantic foreign
Knight ignorant of the English customs."
"It becomes not me, Lady," said Mabel,
"to oppose my opinion to thine, but me-
thinks it is such a gay and gallant mode
of address, that I marvel greatly any heart
can withstand it." "Let us then hope
Mabel," her Lady answered, "that thine
will never be so assailed, lest the plain and
rational affection of our good Esquire Va-
lentine, should chance to be rivalled by
some musical lover, who may only mean
to amuse himself, and ridicule thee. And
now, good night damsel, dream not of
serenades, but be thankful that one honest
heart is thine own, and cherish it as thou
shouldest -- with gratitude and content."
              CHAP. XVIII.


                 =====

 " Madam you'll find it so. You wrong your virtues
   With these weak women's fears. A noble spirit
   As yours was put into you, ever casts
   Such doubts as false coin from it.
                         The King loves you."

                                       HENRY VIII.  

" The gentlemen is learned, and a most rare speaker,
  To nature none more hound-
                              Yet see
  When these so noble benefits shall prove
  Not well dispos'd the mind growing once corrupt
  They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly
  Than ever they were fair."
                                          IStD,



            ========================

   The encouragement of Lady de Mow-
bray was not lost on Almina, she felt
persuaded that Constance would not so
greatly have deceived her, as to inspire 356            EARL OSRIC.

her with false hopes, and the happy idea
brightened her countenance with smiles,
and infused a placid delight to her bo-
som, which had the most beneficial effects 
on her health and spirits.

  The morning of the day on which she
was once more to appear in public, found
her elate with joyful hope.  Still that
Earl Osric was under some personal re-
straint, she counld not doubt, or she was
convinced he would have sought her.
Perhaps he was still a wanderer, pro-
scribed and forlorn; he was not aware
that the King's sentiments were becoming
more favourable towards him.

  A sentence of recall would however,
soon restore him to his place in society,
and to the sphere he had so long adorn-
ed.  She prepared for Court with revived
spirits, but a throbbing heart.

  If her singular fate, and the eventful
period of her absence, had not improved
her bloom, it had not impaired her

           EARL OSRIC.          357

beauty. Naturally of a strong constitu-
tion, it had happily been proof against
the various hardships she had encounter-
ed ; her health was now completely
restored, by the quiet and regular mode
of life she had adopted at Rosamond
Castle; and though paler, her eyes were
animated and expressive as ever. The
fine regularity of her features, anxiety
and misfortune had no power to de-
stroy.

  Lady de Mowbray visited her early,
she was particularly desirous, that the
appearance of her young friend should
be as striking as wealth and.jewels could
make it; and she counselled her to be
more than usually attentive to the mag-
nificence of her attire.

  Almina promised to be guided by her
advice, but she sighed as she braided
her beautiful hair, and mixed the jewels
with its glossy ringlets, when she re-
flected, that not as formerly would the
358        EARL OSRIC.

eyes of Osric behold her triumph, and
with gratified affection view her restora-
tion to the Royal favour. Memory, intrusive
memory would paint anew to her mind's
eye, the morning of her first brilliant
presentation; when gay in youth, in
health, and hope, she was received with
warmth and encouragement by the re-
vered—the excellent Eleanor, whose vir-
tues and goodness were still gratefully
remembered,

   The qualities of Margaret 'might be
equally estimable, hut Almina could not
feel for her that reverence and attach-
ment, she had felt for her faultless pre-
decessor ; nor could she confide in the
favour of one so young and volatile as
the Queen appeared, with the same as-
surance of stability, as the firm mind
and matured judgment of Eleanor had
offered. Still tht manners of Margaret
were so fascinating, that a less reflecting
mind than Almina possessed, might have
been - fascinated by their witchery, and                EARL OSRIC.                    359


even she could fail of being  charmed 
by the vivacity and naivete of the young Queen.

Hoping,fearing,but confiding with
firm trust in the providence that had
hitherto supported her, Almina proceed-
ed to Court accompanied and supported
by the kind friendship of Lady de Mow-
bray, and with an assured step, though
a beating heart, she entered the drawing-
room; there, where when first presented,
she had beheld the beloved countenance
of Osric, in his station, behind the Mo-
narch's seat; his eyes beaming with joy,
at beholding her restored to the titles
and estates of her ancestors, and placed
in the rank to which she was born. She
sighed deeply as this idea presented it-
self; and, " Ah! where is he now?"
was suggested by anxious thought, as
her foot pressed the same floor on which
she had then seen him.

She came within view of their Majes-
ties. Lady de Mowbray hastily led her
360          EARL OSRIC.

forward.  " Look up, be all yourself
dear Almina," she whispered as she felt 
her hand tremble.

  Almina obeyed her, she did look up--
but did see aright? or did some
illusion mock her dazzled sight?  In the
self-same spot his glistening eyes fixed on
her form, and his whole countenance
beaming joy and animation, leaning over
the chair of the King, who seemed con-
versing familiarly with him; did she, or
did she not, once more behold Earl
Osric?  Yes, conviction flashed on her,
but her head grew giddy; a convulsive
motion agitated her lips, and but for the
supporting arm of Lady de Mowbray
she would have fainted at the Kings
feet.

  Her good friends had foreseen, and
guarded against the effect of surprise
and joy.  Sir Orlando was instantly at
her side, and a few moments at an open 
casement sufficed to restore her fleeting
strength, and self-possession.                EARL OSRIC.                    361

    Again she was led toward their majes-
ties; and conscious of the the importance
of presence of mind, she collected all
her courage and foutitude to her aid, and
with her wonted grace, went through
the necessary ceremonies.

    Her presentation to the Queen was
marked by the sweetest condescension
on the part of Margaret, and when she
quitted the circle, rejoiced to be libe-
rated and to indulge the overflowing
thankfulnes of her heart; how did it
palpitate on finding herself greeted by
St. Albert, who loudly congratulated her
appearance. Scarcely had she answer-
ed his kind greetings, e'er her hand was
grasped with fervor, and she recog-
nised the friendly pressure and affection-
ate voice of Bertha de Wilton.

    " Not so, exactly," said Lady de Mow-
bray, smiling, " she has this day been
presented by another name. See ye not
in your cavalier, Almina, a recreant Knight
of your own:" Almina understood by

 vol III.            R
362      EARL OSRIC.

this, that Bertha had just been present-
ed on her marriage; and looking forward,
beheld a gentleman advance.

"Ah! Lady," said Bertha, whisper-
ing, "know ye not the stranger Knight?"
Almina did ineed recognise him at once,
as the stranger Knight, and as Sir Ed-
win de Mowbray, the romantic brother
of Sir Orlando.

Wonders crowded so thick upon her,
that she was bewildered, and could
scarcely credit the evidence of her sen-
ses. Lady de Mowbray saw her per-
plexity. "Thou shalt return home
dearest Almina," said she, "Bertha,
who is half wild with delight once more
to behold thee, shall follow us, and our
domestic circle to day shall re-unite
many who have been long separated."

So many of their friends met, and
stopped them in their way, that their
return home was long delayed. Nume-
rous were the compliments and con-
gratulations Almina received on her re-

           EARL OSRIC.    363

appearance ; and truly glad was she to
escape from them all, and seek the
kindly shelter of Lady de Mowbray's
hospitable roof; and here another and
most agreeable surprise awaited her.

  E'er she entered the room, where they
usually sat, the voice of Hector arrested
her attention, and in a moment, she be-
held him in the arms of his father;
while she herself was clasped in those
of Lady Laura, with the most joyful
exclamation of delight. Surprise to be-
hold her cousin so unexpectedly, was the
predominant emotion, but her appear-
ance was soon explained.

  A courier had been despatched, by the
Queens particular desire; her Majesty
having heard such an account of the
youthful Laura, as induced her to wish
to add her to her train of courtly beau-
ties ; but having arrived, after Almina's
departure from Castle Rosamond, she
was of course ignorant of the event. The

                R 2364                   EARL OSRIC.

circle that surrounded Sir Orlando's
hearth on his day, was composed of long
divided friends, restored to each other
by one of those providential turns in
affairs, which are ordained to bring con-
viction to the mind of man, of the jus-
tice and wisdom of Omnipotence.

     The vile Sir Ethelred who, finding
himself on the eve of discovery had im
peached Earl Osric of high treason, in
the hope, by forged testimonials, of thus 
getting rid of a principal evidence against
himself, had, as is often the case, been
in his turn betrayed.

    No sooner had the King been persuad-
ed by his insidious arts, to grant the
warrant for Osric's apprehension, than
he repented his own precipitancy; for
in spite of all that had been alleged
against him, he élt an internal assurance
that his loyalty was unimpeached. Had
he not from early youth known his in-
tegrity to be unshaken, his honour invio-
late?

             EARL OSRIC.         365

The noble mind, the perfect sincerity
of Osric, had ever been above disguise;
and even in those discussions which had 
first given offence to himself, he could
not to his own heart deny, that the op-
position which Osric has manifested to
his sentiments, originated more from the
honourable candor of his disposition,
than from any desire to espouse the Scot-
tish cause, against his own country.

Still, why should Sir Ethelred Douglas
invariable aver in private to his Majesty,
that Osric was in secret treat with the
most rebellious of the Scotch nobles?
and that he had even maintained a pri-
vate communication with Sir William
Wallace himself.

The King knew of no cause of en-
mity, that could urge Sir Ethelred to
the baseness of a falsehood; and the
plausible and fascinating manners of the
knight, had long since infatuated him.
Deeply versed in the ways, as well as
the hearts of men, that of the King was


366          EARL OSRIC.
    
exposed to the view of the artful Sir
Ethelred; he read there an obstinate
adherence to his own will, and a dislike
of all counsel that militated against his
own wishes.


  By arts wholly unknown to Osric,
which his noble soul would have spurn-
ed, as unworthy of him, did Sir Ethelred
entwine himself into Edward’s confi-
dence. Observing always the most pro-
found caution, and never off his guard,
it was impossible the unsuspecting mo-
narch should detect his artifices; till,
having as he conceived, secured a firm
station in the King’s esteem, he ventured
at the master-stroke which was to silence
all his enemies, and raise him to perma-
nent power and greatness; for having
always maintained a treasonable corres-
pondence with the Scotch, he intended
as the price of betraying them, to secure
honours and emoluments to himself
which would place every nobleman in
the kingdom at an immeasurable dis-EARL OSRIC. 367

tance below him; but short-sighted are
the plans of mortals, and providence saw
not fit that the race of iniquity should
run further.

Of the particulars attending the altera-
tion in the King's sentiments, or where
the change arose, all was mystery to those
around him--Earl Osric had escaped ap-
prehension, and the old Baron Fitz Os-
wald lay at the point of death. Late in
the evening after a day of agitation to
King Edward, for in the course of it he
had held long and private converse with
those Lords who, urged on by Sir Ethel-
red had envied the favour shewn to Earl
Osric.

An ancient Monk, announcing himself
as having journied from a distant, convent,
demanded an audience of the King; but
his Majesty, fatigued by the events of the
day, had retired early and given orders
that he should not be disturbed. The
Friar was importunate, and solicited so
earnestly to be permitted to await his


                R 4
368              EARL OSRIC,

rising in the Palace, that he was offered
a lodging, but this be declined, saying
that neither food nor rest should be his,
till his mission was accomplished, adding
that he would return to the adjacent Mon-
astery, and perform vigils in the Chapel
during the night--The singular air of 
mystery and dignity, that pervaded the 
whole appearance and deportment of the
Monk, so inconsistent with the usual hu-
mility and lowliness of the order, surprised
all those, who saw him; and as soon as
the King was visible on the following 
morning, he was informed of the Friar's
importunity for an audience, but from the
mysterious secresy that was visible, and
his avowed desire to see the King alone,
it was deemed right to plant a guard at
the door during the interview.

The stranger Monk was shut up in close
converse with the Sovereign, more that
an hour, and when he retired from the
presence, it was observed, that the King 
was greatly moved--Privately he was




                 Earl Osric.                     369

again visited the same evening, by the mysterious Monk, whose tall spectral fi-
gure excited much observation. The at-
tendants were said to have whispered,
that he wore an unearthly look, that the
tones of his voice were deep and hollow,
and his step soundless.
     Certain it is, that after every interview
with this singular visitor, Edward's agita-
tion was perceptible: his confidential min-
isters were summoned and numberous pri-
vate conferences were held. After they
were over, the Monk had been generally
observed, stalking with noiseless step,
through the galleries or the passages of the
Palace, but his approach and retreat were
quietly made; he entered unannounced and
retired without ceremony--.Sir Ethelred
Douglas was summoned, to attend one
of these private assemblages of the coun-
sellors of Edward.
    It had been observed, that for some
days he had not been admitted to the
presence of the Kind, and that his Ma-
                R 5
370            EARL OSRIC.

jesty had, during that period, been
more than usually perturbed, admitting
only the stranger monk, and passing al-
most the whole night in pacing his apart-
ment with unquiet step.

  Suddenly, a change appeared in affairs,
that astonished every body but those in
the King's secrets. It was understood that
Sir Ethelred Douglas was a prisoner in his
own mansion, by order of the King, and
that Earl Osric was returned to court,
the warrant for bis apprehension was re-
called, and he was in as high favour as
ever.
  
  Sir Orlando de Mowbray had reached
England a few days preceding, and had
been closeted with the King several
times. Such was the aspect of affairs
when Almina received her sudden sum-
mons at Rosamond Castle.

  What it all portended was unknown,
but that the sun of Sir Ethel red's pros-
perity was setting for ever was pretty
evident. His splendid mansion was for-
          EARL OSRIC.         371

saken by the court sycophants who had
hovered round him in the day of power.
Gradually had they fallen off, and he
found himself a state prisoner, in his
own superb dwelling, and left to the
worst, and most dreaded of all compa-
nions, himself.








                 R 6                 CIIAP. X1X                  

               ________________                                                                          
                    


    " There was s friar who told me of this man."
   
    " Oh prince, I conjure thee,as thou believest
      There is another comfort than this world,
      That thou neglect me not with that opinion
      That I am touch'd with madness; make not 
      impossible  
      That which but seems unlike."

                         MEASURE FOR MEASURE

             _________________________ 

      A REVIEW of the happy party assembled in the 
      tapestried dining room of Sir Orlando de 
      Mowbray, will be a not unpleasing contrast to    
      the picture represented at the conclusion of
      the last chapter. The excellent Knight and 
      his Constance, restored to the friends they  
      loved,hospitable and happy,looked round EARL OSRIC.   373

with pleasure nearly unalloyed; for they
beheld Osric once more in peace and
safety, and though a pensive air still
hung on his countenance, it betrayed
evident marks of returning happiness.

Almina, lovely amiable as ever,
was listening with delight to the volu-
ble details of the happy Bertha, who when
she attended the Princess Beatrice abroad,
had discovered the stranger Knight in
the train of the Ambassador. His grace
and elegance had previously won her
heart, and it was her happy fate to
banish the recollection of Almina from
his breast, a romantic passion for whom,
had induced him as his brother had fore-
seen, to quit his beloved retirement and
take up arms.

In many engagements he signalised
himself, and all the trophies of victory
were laid at the feet of Bertha: she was
not inexorable, and ere they returned to
their native land, bestowed on him her
hand.374           EARL OSRIC.

   And now was eclucidated the mystery
attending " the stranger knight," which
at the time had so greatly surprised
Almina.  The impression she had left
on the heart of Edwin, forbade him 
longer finding in solitude, the romantic
happiness he had before fancied he en-
joyed; but ashamed to acknowledge the
change in his sentiments, and unknown
to any one of his friends, he entered on
the profession of arms; and taking his
way to the metropolis, indulged his
hopeless passion by a sight of its ob-
ject.

   The tournament, that was to celebrate
the beauty of Lady Janet de Monther-
mer, gave him an opportunity of appear-
ing publicly as Almina's champion;
and though he sedulously concealed him-
self from her knowledge, he hovered
perpetually about her dwelling, and
haunted her steps. Thus he had pro-
tected her in her nightly walk to the
monastery of the Black Friars, with          EARL OSRIC.          375

Bertha; and his was the music which 
had reached her from the water, on the 
eve of the day on which he had deter-
mined to quit his native land, and seek
renown in foreign countries.

   He had accidentally taken up his 
abode in a house of public resort, which
Sir Etherland Douglas sometimes fre-
quented, and by one of those chances
which are ordained to accomplish the 
designs of providence, he overheard a
conversation between the knight and a
confidential creature of his own, in which
the name of Osric was more than once
mentioned ; and though Edwin could
not learn particulars, he became con-
vinced that some design was in agitation
against him, and instantly he devised
the plan, of affixing an anonymous in-
formation to the point of an arrow, which
from a boat he conveyed into Almina's
apartment.

   Infinite was the pleasure with which
the latter listened to the narrative, and376              EARL OSRIC.
in her turn had a long recital to give,
to which her attentive friends listened 
with wonder and interest; even to Osric
many of the details were new, he knew
not till now all the trials which his ward 
had sustained, their interviews had been 
brief, and few in number, and Almina
had possessed neither courage nor oppor-
tunity to relate to him her many escapes
and adventures, in their short and hasty
conferences.
  But though compelled to be the nar-
rator, she felt that she had much to learn,
and she was anxious beyond expression,
to hear how so many and wonderful revo-
lutions had been wrought.  "Every
thing" said Lady de Mowbray, "has
been most providentially accomplished.
Here comes my Lord  of St. Albert," she
added, as the later entered the room,
"he will aid in elucidating this seeming
mystery, for he has shared the labour of
removing the mist of error, which had 
obscured the optics of our good King."                  EARL OSRIC.     377
   It was true that St. Albert, on leaving
Rosamond Castle, had hastened to Lon-
don, with a resolution to throw himself at
the feet of the King, narrate the whole of
Almina's tale, and implore vengeance on
the author of her sufferings, and his sister's
injuries;  but Edward was in the North,
hastening to meet, and humble the forces
of Wallace.  Sir Ethelred Douglas was 
supposed to be with him; and Arthur
found himself one of the Knights, ap-
pointed to guard the Queen till she 
rejoined her consort.
  She was to meet him at York, and
thither St. Albert would have attened
her, if the unexpected return of the King
had not prevented the journey.  And now
the Earl determined to execute his pur-
pose, as soon as be should again be able to
procure an audience of his Majesty, but
the conscience and ready genius of Sir
Ethelred, had anticipated him, and he
learned that warrants were issued by the 
King's order to apprehend Earl Osric,

378         EARL OSRIC.

and the Baron Fitz Oswald, both accused
of High Treason.

  This could only be the work of Sir
Ethelred, who had obtained intelligence of
St. Albert's visit to Rosamond Castle, and
consequently knew that he must have heard
the tale Almina had to tell.

  Panic struck by this intelligence, St.
Albert, for a moment conceived that all
was lost; but collecting his thoughts, he
became convinced of the necessity of in-
stant exertion.

  Earl Osric, he understood, had hitherto
escaped; his retreat was not even hinted
at, and the Baron Fitz Oswald lay at the
point of death; but how to support his
allegations against Sir Ethelred he knew
not; but by bringing forward the delicate,
the timid Almina to public notice. Again,
he was" most unwilling to expose the sad
fate of Adeliza, and to render his other
sister, Lady Douglas, a mark for pity and
observation.

  Yet could he suffer the guilty to triumph,
while knowing, as he did such particulars                  EARL OSRIC.       379
of his baseness? While deliberating how to proceed, he received a summons to attend the King, who was just arrived in London, after the defeat of the Scots at Falkirk.

Amidst all the fatigues and confusion of war, notwithstanding the vast and momentous concerns that agitated the mind of Edward, the imputed treachery of Osric, and a something like fear of injustice towards him, had hung heavily on the heart of the King; and St. Albert found him in a state of the most fearful anxiety,

His Majesty was alone in his private cabinet, and after closing the door, he admitted St. Albert to his confidence. It was on the evening of the same day, that the mysterious Monk had been admitted to the King's presence. That extraordinary being had approached with an air so firm and undaunted, so unlike the servility which usually marked the address of those around him, that Ed- 
380             EARL OSRIC.

ward gazed at him in silent astonishment.
" Who art thou?" said he, " and what
is the business that thus in privacy thou
wouldst communicate?"  " I am one,"
said the Monk, " who fears no earthly
King, because I am devoted to the ser-
vice of him who reigns in an eternal
kingdom, yet would I warn thee, as one
of the erring sons of mortality, of an error
thou art about to commit; and as thou hast
hitherto professed thy wish, to adminis-
ter even-handed justice to thy subjects,
I would save thee from that remorse,
whic availeth not, and would render thy 
latter days bitter."

  The King continued to gaze in mute
wonder at the strange being, who thus
dared to address him in the undisguised
language of truth.  " Thou art surpris-
ed," said the Monk, " at my temerity,
but know, Oh King! that to me, thy
greatness and thy power are as no-
thing. The first, I too well know how
to appreciate, and the utmost stretch of




         EARL OSRIC.           381

the latter could only go to take from me
what has long been valueless, save as it
affords me time and opportunity to pre-
pare for a better state of being. Having
then, I hope, convinced thee that I am
disinterested, for if I have nothing to
fear, I have as little to hope for. I pro-
ceed to relate a tale, that will, I trust,
convince thee thou hast already erred
in judgment, by admitting to thy favour
and confidence, a man, whose conscience
is fearfully blackened with crimes ; and
now would consummate bis atrocity, by
injuring in thy opinion, the worth and
integrity which, if cherished as they
ought to be, would be the firmest support
to thy throne."

  The Monk here paused, ,f Go on,"
said the King, " relate the tale thou
hast to tell, that I may know what, faith
to put in thy words." The Monk obey-
ed, and all the iniquities of Sir Ethelred
Douglas were accurately detailed, when
he had concluded.382     EARL OSRIC.

   " But how," said the King, "am I to
know that thou art not some secret
enemy, who would injure Sir Ethelred
Douglas in the same way as thou sayest
he would injure others?"

   " I demand to be confronted with
him," answered the Monk," but be-
ware, let him not previously know what
he is to encounter ; or, subtle is his
spirit, that he will elude our vigilance.
By fraud, must fraud like his be met. I
am ready to appear whenever I am called
on, but be this remembered:--he be-
lieves me an inhabitant of another 
world, for I am one, long since condem-
ned to misery and death, by his infamy
and cruelty."

   The King promised to consider the
subject, and dismissed the Monk, after
inquiring where he was to be found, and
hearing that he was at present an inmate
with the father of the White Friars, he
resolved on privately summoning some 
of his most trusty counsellors, and afterEarl osric. 383
detailing what had occurred, be guided  by their advice.
 In Lord. St. Albert he had long remarked a strength of judgment, and firmness of mind, that eminently fitted him for an adviser. Knowing his connection by marriage, with Sir Ethel-red Douglas, he was compelled at first to dissemble; and by questioning him cautiously, try to discover if he were at all aware of the Knight's delinquency.
 St. Albert hesitated no longer: at the feet of his Sovereign, he detailed the injuries of his family, from Sir Ethered's baseness, as well as the outrage on Al-mina. Others of the ministers were now summoned, and after some farther conference, it was decided that Sir Ethelred should be ordered to attend his Majesty, when he should be informed of the crimes laid to his charge, and finally confronted with the Monk.
 This plan was put into immediate execution, and Sir Ethelred, who had been 384                 EARL OSRIC.

absent from London for several days, and
was of course wholly unprepared for any
reverse of fortune, conceiving that his
Majesty, as had often before been the
case, required his advice and aid, attend-
ed the summons unsuspicious of any 
thing uncommon. What was his dismay
and astonishment at being received by
the King with a frowning aspect, and
upbraided with his falsehood and trea-
founded to answer, and all his boasted
self-possession seemed at once to have 
deserted him; but soon recovering, he
rallied all his courage, and calling his
wonted art to his assistance, he affected
to disbelieve the evidence, he affected
"For once," said he, "my sense of
hearing must deceive me, it cannont be that
my Royal Master has conceived any dis-
trust of the most faithful of his servants."
"Serpent!" said the King, "believe 
not, that thy insidious arts will ever
more avail thee; but if thou dust expect
         EARL OSRIC.        385

expect mercy, answer to the questions
proposed to thee. Where is the unfortu-
nate Countess of Osric, whom thy bar-
barity and violence have separated from
her Lord ? What canst thou say for thy
daring outrage, to the excellent Lady
Almina, of Filz-Oscar? and do not the
names of Adeliza, of Emma, and of
Edith, sound harshly in thine ear?"

  Sir Ethelred stood for a moment as if
panic-struck, but his habitual command
of countenance did not yet forsake him,
and boldly he replied:—The Countess of
Osric, my Liege, I have by accident
heard, escaped from the Castle amidst
the bustle and confusion attending the
attack made upon it, when, in my zeal
to detect the traitors to my King, 1 led
my soldiers to its walls, and it is not
many days since I learned that she was
resident at Rosamond Castle; doubtless
she proceeded thither to claim protection
from the chosen friend of her Lord. Of
the outrage, as your Majesty is pleased

    VOL. III.         S
386         EARL OSRIC.

to term it, made on the person of the
Lady Almina, of Fitz-Oscar, I have
only to say, let her produce the proofs,
that the whole was planned and executed
contrary to her will, and I will abide
the event. On the subject of Adeliza of
St. Albert I profess not the stoicism that
can withstand the united temptations of
youth, beauty, and evident attachment.
I used no constraint, and am no such
ungallant Knight, as to refuse the proffer-
ed society of female attractions. The
last question relates to the fair sisters,
Edith and Emma, by those names in
early life, I knew the two lovely daugh-
ters of Sir Hildebrand de Morne; and
I marvel greatly, to what your Majesty
can allude: both, methinks, have long
since been numbered with the dead. I
would not be a vain boaster, but it is
well known, that the passion of the lofty
Edith, and the fond attachment of the
beauteous Emma, might have made both
mine."                      EARL OSRIC          387

"Thou wert truly a fortunate
Knight in the favour of the fair" said
the King, "Let us hope thy integrity
was equal to thy good fortune, and that
no advantage was taken of the partiality
of these fair dames."

  "To no man living, but to you, my
Liege, would I answer such questions,"
said Sir Ethelred in an accet of rage;
"It is a known fact that Emma de
Morne retired to a convent by choice,
where I have understood she died; Edith
had been for many years also consigned to
the tomb, her frailty, like her story,
died with her: my conscience is free:--I
can say no more."

  "Edith also retired to a convent
then?" asked the King, "and she did too
die there?" This question for an in-
stant blanched the bronzed cheek of Sir
Ethelred, but recovering his usual hardi-
hood, he replied: "In truth I know
not, her final retirement was unknown
to me."
388                 EARL OSRIC.

  " Greatly then hast thou been calum-
niated sir Knight," said the King, "for
not only art thou accused of being privy
to her retreat, but of an attempt to acce-
lerate her death." Again the check of 
Sir Ethelred was of deadly paleness.
" I demand," said he` "to be confront-
ed with my accusers ; I answer uo ambi-
guous accusations. Let them appear, 
and to my face accuse me. I disdain to
reply to these anonymous imputations."
   
  " Thy wish shall be granted," said the
King, and stepping to the door of his
private cabinet " Come forth father," he
said, " and confirm thy assertions."
  Immediately the tall figure of the mys-
terious monk issued from the cabinet, 
and majestically advanced towards the 
circle. He paused opposite Sir Ethelred.
"Who art thou?". said the Knight indig-
nantly, "but whoever thou art, I defy
thee to prove thy base accusations. I
know thee not, thou must therefore be
some impostor."     "In this garb, thou sayest truly, thou
dost not know me," the Monk answer-
ed, "but now, say, am I unknown to 
thee?"  And to the astonishment of
the assembly, the monkish hood and 
cowl, before drawn over the face, were
thrown back, and displayed a counte-
nance so spectral and ghastly, that all
stood dismayed.  At the same moment,
the priestly garments were discarded,
and the tall majestic, but emaciated
form of a female, stood before them. The
glazed eye of Sir Ethelred was fixed on 
her: the fabled power of the basilisk
could not apparently be more terrific;
for not once did the ball move from the 
object that had attracted it, till, with a
convulsive motion he fell back, and was 
caught in the arms of the surrounders.
     It was soon known that the pretended 
Monk was no other than the once beauti-
ful, celebrated, Edith of Mornne, whose
testimony alone, on being investigated,
proved sufficient to convict Sir Ethelred
                   S 3390              EARL OSRIC.

of the crimes imputed to him. He was
ordered into strict confinement, till the
King's pleasure should be known; Almi-
na was summoned to Court, as has been 
related, and the Nun Edith undertook
to find the retreat of Earl Osric, with
which it was evident she was well ac-
quainted.

 He was informed of the discoveries
that had been made, and solicited in the
King's name, to come forward, and vin-
dicate his injured honour.

 Sir Orlando and Lady de Mowbray,
both innately convinced of the perfect
innocence of Almina, had suggested the
expediency of concealing from her all
that had occured, till she had related her
narrative to the King himself; and the
to surprise her, with the happiness of
seeing her best friend reinstated in his
Majesty's favour, and restored to his an-
cient honours.

  Almina listened with wonder to the re-
lation, and gazed around her with thank-                  EARL OSRIC.              391

fulners, as she reflected, that the mercy
of Providence had at length disclosed
the truth to the King.

  The fellings of Earl Osric, as he held
in his arms the darling child for whose
welfare he had long suffered such acute
anxiety, and reflected that he owed its
preservation to the lovely and amiable
being, in whom from her earliest infancy
his own earthly happiness was centered,
may be conceived, but no description
could accurately define them. His long
and tried affection, and the painful efforts
he had made to subdue it, with his ex-
emplary conduct to the object of his
early and forced engagement, were all
well known to those friends who knew
his inmost heart; though never had a
sound escaped hios own lips, that could
have intimated such had been his fate.

  And now remained the painful task to
all those concerned in it, of executing
justice on the miscreant, who had caused
such infinite miscry.

                     s 4392 EARL OSRIC.

The proper steps were immediately ta-
ken. The King, resolved to do justice,
perseveringly examined every necessary
evidence, and had not tenderness to the
amiable family which whom he was so
nearly connected, availed to mitigate his
sentence, the wretched Sir Ethelred would
have paid with his life, the penalty of his
iniquities.

A due consideration for Lord St. Albert,
his mother, and the injured Lady Douglas,
induced the King to change his punish-
ment to perpetual banishment, beginning
with a pilgrimage to the Holy Land. All
his estates were confiscated tot he crown,
except such as the King granted to the
Lady Elfrida, his wife. Such a sentence
was worse than death to the high spirit,
avaricious mind, and violent passions of
Sir Etherlred, and he vented his despair
in unavailing reproaches. He was com-
pelled for ever to bid adieu to a country
he had disgraced by his crimes; and thus
remove far from his family, the cause of

          EARL OSRIC.        393

the stigma attached to it by his conduct.
On seizing his papers, his treasonable
correspondence in Scotland was clearly
discovered, and Earl Osric's complete ex-
culpation ascertained. At the intercession
of the latter the former was suppressed,
and his sentence of banishment only con-
firmed.CHAP. XX

-----

"Therefore, fasten your ear on my advisings; to the
love I have in doing good, a remedy presents itself. I do
make myself believe, that you may most uprighteously do
a poor wronged Lady a merited bengfit."

MEASURE FOR MEASURE.

"For miue own part
I have toward Heaven breath'd secret vow,
To live in prayer and contemplation."

MARCHANT OF VENICE.

---------------------------

THE unfortunate Edith of Morne, in
whom it will not be difficult to recognise
the Recluse Nun, the singular aud terrific
monitor of Almina, having executed the
purpose for which she seemed to have
lingered in a world of misery, retired to

                    EARL OSRIC                395

THE Priority of St.Margaret to die;but for the satisfaction of all whom her extraordinary story had interested,and for that Almina in particular,before her earthly career was terminated,she caused the following narrative to be written,properly by herself,and edited-

             THE LEGEND OF EDITH ME MORNE
                DICTATED BY HERSELF
     Written and arranged by Father Peter,Confessor
           of the Monastery of St.Margaret


HIGH is the annals of ChivalRy stood the name of De MORNE,Sir Hildebrand the last venerable Knight who bore it,had signalised himself in war,as well as in the genter arts peace,and his noble lady was a consort worthy a Knight so valiant.Unfortunate pair!the trembling frame,of her,who would record thy virtues,hovering on the brink of the grave,is all that remains of thy once

                       s 6

396         EARL OSRIC.

boasted lineage. Child of thy love!
Eldest born of thy twin offspring, the
morn of youth, like that of a lovely
summer-day, was ushered in with joy
and peace. No cloud obscured the
smiling prospect, and many revolving
years saw the Castle of de Morne, the
seat of feudal hospitality, and domestic
happiness: but a long night of misery
succeeded.

  Beneath the form of all that was most
graceful and fascinating, the spoiler came,
and to both sisters proved alike attractive.
The lovely Emma, innocent as beautiful,
seemed at first to be the favoured object,
and though pride forbade me to betray
my mortification, deeply I felt the pre-
ference; for Ah! too greatly had the
graces and apparent merits of Sir Ethel-
red Douglas penetrated to the depths of
that heart, which had hitherto resisted
the attacks of the most accomplished
Knights.

  Bitter to myself, and painful to those               EARL OSRIC.     397

who shall peruse it, would be the pro-
cess of passion; I will forbear to trace
it, and only add, that while another 
Knight of more exalted rank was fixed
on by my parents for my future Lord,
every secret thought was devoted to Sir
Ethelred; who, for that reason, so he
pretended, not daring to profess himself
publickly my admirer, was ostensibly 
that of my sister, till having lone deluded 
her with the semblance of an attachment,
which doubtless he never felt, he left her
to all the misery of unrequited affection;
and after secreting me for some time in 
the tower of Glenmorne, embarked for
the Holy Land, whither in the disguise
of his Page I accompanied him.

   Innumerable were the hardships I en-
countered, but all were trifles, compared 
to the dreadful blow inflicted on my 
heart, on discovering the unworthiness
of him, for whom I had sacrificed every
thing that ought to be dear. Incessantly
I watched his conduct, and dreadful to                 398   EARL OSRIC.
relate, daily were the instances of turpi-
tude that came to my knowledge.
  Yet never might I have had strength
of mind, and resolution sufficient, to
break the unworthy bonds imposed by
passion, had not a ministering angel in
and earthly form, lent his salutary
aid, and led me back from earth to hea-
ven.  And now, ere I seek the peaceful
asylum of the grave, and my soul is
called to its great account, let me pay the
tribute of gratitude to him, whose vir-
tues have placed him at such an immea-
surable distance, that I contemplate him
as I would a being of a purer nature than
mortality, of a happier sphere than this contaminated earth.
   It was on a night singularly eventful to
me, while inhabiting the tent of Sir
Ethelred, just before the siege of Acre,
that Earl Osric first became known to me.
The Chiefs of the British army had that
evening held a consultation in Price
Edward's tent; and I, in my assumedcharacter of Page, awaited the return of
the Knight alone.  The beautiful moon
shone witha splendour unknown in these
regions, and one dim lamp lighted the
interior of the tent.  I had been seated
at the entrance contemplating the glrious
planet of night, and my mind had dwelt
with fondness and agony on the scenes of
my youth.

  
  The dereliction of Sir Ethelred became
every day more evident, and yet was my
proud heart not sufficiently humbled, to
induce me,from christian motives, to
bid him an eternal adieu.  Scaling tears
coursed each other down my pale cheek, 
and mad with the recollection of lost
innocence and happiness, I returned into
the tent; and in a paroxysm of anguish,
I threw myself on the couch within it,
covering my face with my hand, and 
groaning aloud.

   
  The heart was intense, and I had un-
fastened the Page's vest around my throat,
and throwing up the sleeve of my habit,400           EARL OSRIC,

my arm, as it  lay across my face, was
bare to the elbow.

A slight movement near me, attracted
my attention, I looked up, and to my
astonishment saw Earl (),rie standing
before me. Starting form my character
attitude, and reass uning my character
of a Page, I arose;--the Earl advanced, I
saw his eye rest on my disordered dress:
I would b we retired, but he prevented
me. " :hou art not what thou wouldst
seem," aid he,"long have I suspected it,
and these tears, these blushes speak the
degrading truth--that thou art a female;
I have some time belived it, and even
sought this interview, for purpose of
persu uling thee to be ingenuous."

  He ceased, and a vague idea that he
would rival Sir Ethelred, bewildered and
distressed me. Perhaps my heart was 
not yet suffciently disciplined, to reject
the idea of such a conquest, but I was
soon undeceived.

  " Thou art right, my Lord," I said,                  EARL OSRIC.       401

"Behold, dost thou not recognise me?"
and instantly displacing the Page's cap,
I unfastened the long ringlets of golden
hair, which had once been celebrated for
their beauty, and stood confessed before
him.

     "Is it possible," said he, "that in a
station so degrading to the female cha-
racter, I behold the Lady Edith de
Morne? Look not so indignant Lady,
nor mistake my motives for this inter-
ference. They are pure from guile. My
character widely differs, I trust, from
that of him, whom thou hast impru-
dently chosen for a protector. I would
be the defender, not the seducer of inno-
cence; and all thy beauty, and all thy
blandishments, would be lost  on me, if
unaccompanied by modesty, that glory
of thy sex."

     Much more he added, and finally pro-
mised me any aid in his power, if I would
quit my present state of degradation, and
retire to privacy and seclusion.402                EARL OSRIC.

  It is but justice to add, that the wise
and pious admonitions of Earl Osric
first awoke me to contrition. He was
not austere, nor did he treat the guilty
sinner with contempt or bitterness; but
mild, patient, and christian-like, he
persevered in his exhortations, till he
wrought in my erring mind a perfect
revolution.

  Heart stricken at once, for the first
time since my fatal dereliction, I knelt,
I wept, and prayed. A voice powerful,
deep, internal, seemed to tell me that
the punishment was merited, that sin
must be expiated by prayer and peni-
tence; and on receiving from him for
whom I had forfeited all earthly good,
repeated provocations, joined to the
remorse which the admonitions of Osric
had raised in my mind, I declared my
intention of returning to Europe; and
dedicating my remaining years to repen-
tance. The intimation was heard, and
treated with the bitterest derision; but
               EARL OSRIC     403

his motivates for trying by any means to prevent me from putting the plan in execution I knew were powerful.I was too deep in his iniquitous secrets to be suffered to return to England,incensed as I was by his perfidy.

  Aided by a native female whom he had selected from numerous favorites.poison was numerous favorites,poison was infused into my food;and though I discovered it early enough to receive benefit from an immediate antidote,I laid for many hours in a state between life and death.My intellects were however,mercifully preserved;and during the apparent  torper caused by the deleterious mixture I had taken,struggling with the antotode,and a good natural constitution, I formed in the intervals of ease,a plan,which heaven mercifully enabled me to put in practice:this was to escape,and make my way to Europe in the absence of Sir Ethelred,who was now before Acre with the allied army.404                 EARL OSRIC.

     One of his women, my attendant, 
was easily bribed to favour my plan;
she was to inform sir Ethelred of my
death on his return, and all succeeded 
to my wish.

      At the time I effected my escape,Earl
Osric was also with the allies , and for
some weeks I had not beheld him; but
his benevolent hand had supplied me
with wealth sufficient for all the purposes 
of subsistence, and to him under provi-
dence I am indebted, as the earthly
agent to effect my salvation.

      Emaciated and altered by long illness,
and the effects of the poison, I arrived
after numerous difficulties and dangers,
disguised in the habit of a pilgram,in
my native land; no longer the proud,
the admired Edith of Morne, but poor,
sick, and lowly; so greatly altered that
my nearest realtives would never have 
recognised me,and humbled to the dust
by grief and penitence.

      I had, from the benevolence of Earl      EARL OSRIC       405
Osric, sufficient worldly wealth about
my person, to answer the few purposes
for which I required it; and I tried seve-
ral convents, before I fixed my residence
with the Benedictines.

I resolved never wholly to exclude
myself from the world, for in it I had
yet a duty to perform, that of guarding
others against the insidious arts of a
wretch, whose specious manners created
him friends in all who saw him.

Till the return of Prince Edward, and
the death of our good King Henry, I
remained a quiet inhabitant of the Benc-
dictine comzent, near Castle St. Albert;
wearing the habit, and adopting the
severest practices of the Recluse Nuns.
I devoted myself to a life of penance, but
Itook no enforced vows: mine were all
voluntary, but they were rigid, painful,
and self-denying. No food passed my
lips till long prayers on the cold pave-
ment had exhausted my bodily strength,
to even infantine weakness:-no sleep406   EARL OSRIC.

closed my heavy eyelids till excessive fa-
tigue compelled me to rest:--no day was
suffered to elapse unmarked by some deed
that might be acceptable in the sight of
an offended God:-- no labour, no trou-
ble, was spared if I knew I might yield
aid to any human being. The lowest
offices I spurned not, for how was guilt
like mine to be expiated if the mind and 
body were pampered by indulgence?

  I knew the Abbess of St. Mary to be
far different from what she appeared. I
had more than once in my nightly
penances in the chapel and wilderness
adjoining, marked a disguised figure,
secretly and carefully conducted by pri-
vate passages, from the interior of the
Convent; and one remarkable night in
which, by the Abbess herself, he was led
through the sanctuary.  I, who in dark-
ness and silence lay prostrate before the
holy shrine, was passed unobserved; and
though they cautiously proceeded through 
a side aisle, the stranger, in answer to                   EARL OSRIC.               407

some low breathed observation of the
Dame raised his voice, an instant, and
the tones for ever impressed on this erring
heart, discovered to me Douglas, himself,
in this nightly visitor of the Abbess.

  This disguise,--these visits, portended
ill to some destined victim of his art;
and I watched, listened, and at length
discovered, that Osric's ward was in
some way implicated; hence my warn-
ings to her.

  There was, on the domain of, and not
far from the Castle of St. Albert, an
ancient half ruined chapel: the shrine
was yet entire, but it was deserted save
by the wayfaring pilgrim, who perchance
sought shelter beneath its mouldering
walls. This was often the scene of my
nightly penaces. Large gifts to the
Abbess, for the benefit of the commu-
nity, procured me permission to wander
where I pleased; and in my nocturnal
visits to the chapel, I discovered a very
ancient subterranean passage, which com-404         EARL OSRIC
  

municated with some deserted chambers
of the Castle of St. Albert Doubtless
this was some monkish cintrvance, to
facilitate a secret interconre with the 
former inhabitants of the Castls; by this
means I got access there, and often
glided unseen through its galleries and
passages, thus procuring by the only
means in my power, intelligence of the
haing whose evil parposes, I resolved to
exert all the power of my mind to coun-
teract, be the danger, pain or trouble
to myself, ever so great: that I might in 
some measure expiate the sin of loving
one so corrupt : but though I ganed in-
telligene of some machinations to be
employed against Almina of Fitz-Oscar 
than only known as the ward of Farl
Osric the terms used by the confede-
rates in their converse, were so ambigu-
ous, that I could not with certainty
discover thier exact plans. Ilearned,
however, sufficent to wan her more than
once                    EARL OSRIC.   409
  At the time the grand attack of con-
veying her to the tower of Glenmorne
was planned and executed, I was con-
fined to my pallet by sickness, which I
believed was mortal; but heaven spared
me for longer repentance, and I hoped to
consummate the work of bringing a traitor 
to justice.
  Various were the disguises I assumed,
in order, the better to obtain a know-
ledge of his proceedings; - day and night 
it was my study next to that of my reli-
gious duties, and innumerable were the
journies I undertook, and the characters
I personated.
  Under the semblance of a travelling
pilgrim, I have been present at his mid-
night orgies; when mirth, and wine,
conspired to lead him to utter undis-
guisedly his real sentiments; and thus
it was, that after infinite trouble, and with unwearied assiduity, I gained the 
knowledge of the hapless Eeanora's fate.
I knew from observation, the heroism of 
     
          VOL.III.   T410                 EARL OSRIC.

Almina; and having myself, neither the
power to effect singly her deliverance,
nor an asylum to place her in, I again
presented my self before her as the Re-
sluse Nun.

     An ancient minstrel, and bard of the
house of De Morne, to whom I had in
my infancy and childhood been much
attached, was, I knew, in the service of
Sir Ethelred Douglas; but where, or at
which of his numerous seats the old man
reside, I knew not. With indefatiga-
ble inquiry, I discovered that at an old
country house on the borders of Wales,
the Knight had formed an establishment
for the purpose of his pleasures, to which
he could occasionally resort when he
wished for privacy.

     Here now resided one of the objects
of his seduction,--the abandoned Isabel,
she--who, while yet in attendance on
Lady Douglas, became by her arts, her
favourite damsel; and was the principal
agent, as I discovered by old Oscar the-                 BARC OSRIC           111

minstrel.in luring Almina to dungeons,in the disguise of a monk, at the Benedictine Convent;when by a letter from the Abbess,she had on false pretences been drawn thither,previous to conveying her to the tower of Glenmorne.

  The whole of that nefarious plan was formed and executed by Sir Ethelred,in conjunction with Isabel,and the Abbess,aided by the connivance of an old monk,a creature of the Dame's;to whose cell in his monastery,Almina was conducted through the subterrane.There in the wine,the soporific was administered,which enabled the confederates to complete their scheme;and to place her under she care of a needy adventurer,who had long been in the pay of Sir Ethelred,for similar services.Thus had they enshared her;and this Oscar learned at times,by the discourse of leable;and her dissolute companions,at Welch Castle.

                        T 2
412        EARL OSRIC.

  In my wonted habit of a pilgrim, I
got admission there, and availed myself
of the first opportunity to discover to
Oscar who I really was. The joy of
the old Bard almost overcame him, and
he related the misery he suffered from
witnessing the enormities of the master
he served; yet what could he do, he
was old and destitute, his order was fast
falling to decay, and he might not pro-
cure another service, should he quit his
present station.

  He disclosed to me, that there was
now within the walls some prisoner of
consequence, who had been secretly
brought there. Instantly I guessed it
must be the Countess of Osric. The
rest is known.

  Never have I for a moment, ceased
to remember my countless obligations to
Earl Osric, and a veneration the most
enthusiastic for his godlike virtues; and
for that evenness of temper, which no
provocation could irritate to intemper-       EARL OSRIC.     413

ance, led me to wish ardently for his
happiness. Once I ventured to predict
to him, during an encounter in one of 
my manifold wanderings, the happy issue
of his perplexities, for such I was con-
vinced would ensue.

  Often have I regretted, that I had
not sooner known the intended connexion
of Sir Ethelred, with the House of St.
Albert; but from the time I settled in the
Benedictine Convent, I held no communi-
cation with its inhabitants; and forbade
myself the relaxation of social converse, 
till just previous to his marriage with
the Lady Elfrida, when, for the first time
his name reached my ears, since my
escape from him in Palestine; I learned
by overhearing the conversation of the
nuns in their hours of recreation, that
he was the destined son-in law of the
Earl St. Albert.  Fervently then I prayed,
that his former errors might be repented 
of, and the work of reformation began.
Alas, I was soon convinced to the con-
           T3414     EARL OSRIC.
trary, though little did I imagine all
the atrocity of his conduct, or that he
was the seducer of Adeliza.  I believed
the Lady Almina to be the only object
of pursuit, nor knew the melancholy
fate of Adeliza nor its direful termina-
tion, till the accidental rencontre with
Mabel and Valentine ; in whose company 
I was journeying back to the Benedictine
Convent, and had undertaken to guide
them to Castle St. Albert, when we 
paused at Rosamond Castle, where it had
been my plan to rest; in order to find
an opportunity of urging the Lady Almi-
na, to the deliverance of the imprisoned
Countess.
  When such a narrative was in my 
power to disclose, could I hear that
Osric, the noble-the excellent Osric
was impeached by the miscreant who
sought his ruin, and not try to avert
the impending evil ?
  I saw all those most deeply concerned,
powerless to prevent the threatened catas-              EARL OSRIC.                    415

trophe, and in pursuance of my original
determination, I resolved to brave peril
or death, rather than suffer the guilty to
triumph.

   The disclosure was made, and retribu-
tion is the consequence.

   That felicity, temporal and eternal may
be the fate of Earl Osric, I have never
ceased to pray; and that, she, who is 
destined to form it on earth, may be
worthy a lot so exalted, comprises all
that on earth can be wished for here.

    (Signed,) EDITH DE MORNE.

 The singular narrative of the unfortunate
and penitent Edith explained to Almina,
many events that had perplexed her.

 It was Edith, whose temporaty resi-
dence at the Tower of Gelnmorne had
caused those reports, which Ursula had
narrated of the beautiful Lady who had
disappeared so suddenly.

Ere humbled by adversity and peni-
                 T 4 
 416        EARL OSRIC.
tence, the manners of Edith were proud
and uncinciliating; and as she quitted
the Tower as privately and mysteriously
as she had entered it, and assumed her
disguise of a Page, it was believed by
the ignorant and superstitious vassals
around the Tower, that some frightful
mystery had attended her disappearance.
                    CHAP. XXI.

" And now what rests, but that we spend the time
  With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows,
  Such as befit the pleasures of the Court?"

                                 HENRY VI. 3d. Part.

" Please you, I'll tell you as we pass along,
  That you will wonder what hat fortuned.

  That done-- our day of marriage shall be yours;
  One feast, one house, one mutual happiness."

                            TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA.

  BRILLIANT was the Court and
bright the cloudless day on which the
heiresses of Rosamond first appeared in
public, when Lady Laura was first pre-
sented to the Queen, and became one
of her attendant Ladies, jointly with Al-

                        T 5418                 EARL OSRIC.

mina. Resident together, it should seem
that neither had a wish left ungratified;
the never failing vivacity of Laura would
often chase the pensive cast of melan-
choly from the brow 'of Almina, when a
retrospection of the past events had over-
cast her fine countenance, with the "pale
hue of thought;" and the prudence of
the latter, was often a salutary check to
the exuberant gaity of the former.

  Warmly attached to each other, their
minds in perfect unison, rich, young, and
gay, they were universally courted and
admired; yet so exemplary was their
conduct, that calumny could find no
mark to point at.

  One circumstance afforded the truest
satisfaction to the generous heart of Al-
mina, this was her conviction, of an
increasing partiality in Lord St. Albert,
for Laura, who had evidently a strong
predilection in his favour.

  The Dowager Countess of St. Albert
was in some degree restored once more to                     EARL OSRIC. 419
reason; but her strength was decaying,
and it was evident she could not long
survive.  Anxious to behold her two
neices, at the earnest solicitations of St.
Albert, Almina and Lady Laura together
visited the Castle, and afforded her the 
only consolation, Eloisa could now ever
know.
  Finding their society afforded her plea-
sure, they procured the Queen's permi-
sion to prolong their stay, to the great
joy of the worthy Lady de Mowbray
and the seclnded Lady Douglas; who,
overwhelmed with the discovery of Sir
Ethelred's baseness, was as greatly in
need of the consolations of friendship,
as her unfortunate paret; but to neither
was the real fate of Adeliza ever dis-
closed.  That she had died in seclusion
was made known to them, but the name 
of him who had Jed her from the way of
peace, was carefully and successfully con-
cealed from their knowledge.
  The abbess of the benedictines, who
                
                   T6420 EARL OSRIC.

had aided Sir Ethelred in his plan of
carrying off Almina, by the King's order
had been dispossessed of her high station,
and condemned to expiate her offences
by prayer and penance, with a rigid order
of the nuns, in a distant part of the
kingdom.

The summer months fled calmly, and
tranquilly at St. albert, they were mark-
ed by the increased attentions of the
young Earl, to Lady Laura ; and at
length he candidly opened his heart to
Almina, on the subject; she was de-
lighted to assure him, that she was
convinced the partiality was reciprocal,
and met her full approbation; and at his
request, she imparted the projected union
to Lady St. Albert.

The Countess paused a moment, and then
said-stedfastly regarding Almina, "Tis
well my child, my only remaining wish on
earth, is to see Arthur happily married ;
and next to thyself, our sweet Laura
would be my choice:" then again paus-
                 EARL OSRIC.                    421

ing--"but for thee Almina," said she,
"I have always suspected another lot
was reserved."

  "That of a single life, dear Lady,
will probably be mine," said Almina, and
a rosy hue coloured her cheek as she
spoke.

  All was now soon arranged. St.Albert
had regained all his wonted gaity of spi-
rit, and Lady Laura was as happy as
the gratification of her first wish could
make her.

  The quietness of their present mode
of life was broken in upon, by a despatch
from Lady de Mowbray; who in the
Queen's name solicited their return to
Court; and St. Albert determined to
accompany them, in order to bring Lady
Laura back as his bride.

  Not once had Earl Osric visited St.
Albert, since the fair cousins had been
inmates there, and Almina had felt some
unacknowledged chagrin, at perceiving
in his manner towards her a shade of422               EARL OSRIC.

resorve, such as he had assumed once
before; but conceiving it best not to
think on the subject, she dismised it as
mush as possible from her thoughts, and
directed them wholly to the corning hap-
piness of her beloved cousin.

   On their return to London, they were
visited by Lady de Mowbray ; she gaily
entered the room where Almina and
Lady Laura were pursuing their usual
morning occupations, and neither, till
he spoke, saw that she was accompanied
by Earl Osric. After the first salulations
Lady de Mowbray, under the pretence
of admiring Almina's work, leaned over
the frame at which she sat, and laugh-
ingly whispered, that the great world
were all eagerly expecting the conse-
quence of her long seclusion at St.
Albert.

    " So convinced were the public of the
truth of the reports that have reached
London," said she, " that half the world
will be disappointed, at your not return-                EARL OSRIC.                 423

ing to it a Countess." "You cannot
have imbibed the same erroneous idea,"
said Almina, "and to the opinion of the
great world, as you term it, you know
I am unfashionably indifferent."

  "If it be not true," said she, "what
on earth can you have found to detain
you so long at St. Albert?"

  "Was I the only person there to sus-
pect of such a conquest!" said Almina,
and glanced as she spoke at her cousin.
Lady de Mowbray, quick as though,
took the hint;-- her countenance sud-
denly, glowed with pleasure, and flying
off from Almina, she seized the hand of
her cousin. "Dear Lady Laura," said
she, "I have a thousand formal visits to
make this morning, and in pity thou must
accompany me, and enliven the dull
round by thy vivacity: my carriage
waits, I have some secrets to hear and
to tell, let us leave thy grave cousin, to
tell hers to my Lord of Osric:" so saying,
she drew Lady Laura away with her, and424              EARL  OSRIC.

Almina was left most unexpectedly alone
with the Earl.

     Neither for some moments broke si-
lence, at length the Earl, with more
hesitation than was natural to him, and
evidently not without an effort, inquired
to what secret Lady de Mowbray alluded;
adding--" But I believe the voice of
report which has reached my ear, will
enable me to guess, though you are not
as formerly ingenuous enough to make
the disclosure."

     "Relating to myself, my Lord," said
Almina, " I have no disclosure to make,
and my cousins secrets I scarcely thought
myself authorised to reveal."

     " It was to myself and thy prospects,
Lady," said the Earl gravely, " that I
conceived Lady de Mowbray's words
pointed: and as thy early friend, she, like
me, imagined that I should not be the
last to whom they would be revealed."
" I will not affect to misunderstand you,
my Lord," said Almina, "and I am happy                                      EARL OSRIC.                                  425

I can add, that my kinsman, Lord St. Albert, has selected a worthier object to fill the station, where he would once have placed me, and not myself, but my amiable cousin, our dear Laura, is now his chosen bride.''

   The Earl gazed anxiously at her while she spoke, and ''Is it possible?'' burst from his lips, while his eyes beamed with more than their wonted animation; ''And art thou Almina,'' said he, in a voice of emotion, ''reconciled to this plan, or has thy native generosity of mind induced thee to sacrifice thy own happiness to promote that of thy friend?''

   ''I boast no such merit, my Lord,'' she answered with an air of candour, that at once spoke to the heart of Osric, ''my wish has long been to be liberated from an engagement, into which I was rather led by circumstances than choice; and with joy I see that Laura is far better calculated to form Lord St. Albert's felicity, than I am. She has not spirits broken by

426           EARL OSRIC.

unsought misfortunes, nor a heart wound-
ed, by witnessing calamities she was 
powerless to relieve; such has been my
fate, and alife of tranquillity is now my
most ardent wish."

  " Canst thou then expect Almina,"said
the EArl with a half smile--" to be suffer-
ed to indulge that wish  No, many are
the adventurous Knights who would think
thoe not less dangerous or interesting in
this thy pale and pensive mood, than
when blooming in beauty, I beheld thee
for the first time at the feet of thy sove-
reign.
  " Ah! never to be forgotten day," ex-
claimed he, in strong emotion, " yet even
then-lovely as thou went, far dearer went
thou to this heart as memory brings thee
to my view, when pallid,harrassed, and
in tattered garb I beheld thee Prostarte on
the ground, in the woods of Osric; for 
then, blessed-thrice blesed remem-
brance! thou hadst saved my child!"             EARL OSRIC.          427

  The emotions of the Earl now nearly
overcame him; he had seized the hand of
Almina, and wildly pressed it to his lips
and bosom.

  Trembling, agitated, and confused, she
would have withdrawn it, and by the
action seemed to recall him to recollec-
tion.  " Pardon me, dear Almina," said
he, " and if I am forgiven, meet me with
unaltered manners, in the Queen's apart-           ments this evening."  So saying, he rapid-
ly disappeared;  leaving Almina over-
whelmed with surprise, pleasure, and 
confusion.

  The Queen was to have a private party
in the evening, and the parting words of
Osric gave her to understand, that he also
was to be present.  With more than usual
trepidation and anxiety, she prepared
again to meet him; and accompanied by 
Lady Laura, proceeded in the evening to
the Queen's apartment' where, as usual,
a gay and brilliant company was assem-
bled.  Amongst them all, Earl Osric
428              EARL OSRIC.

shone pre-eminent, yet pensiveness and
gravity sat on his brow. The king who
joined them for a short time, noticed it,
as leaning on the arm of his earliest favo-
rite, he approached Almina. "I am 
reproaching our friend Osric," said he,
"with that air of melancholy which be-
fits not the circles of gaity. Help me,
Lady, I conjure thee, to banish it from 
his bosom, as well as his countenance.
Fain would I recompense him for past
sorrows, by present happiness. Tell me,
Lady, thou who hast long known him,
how this can be best effected."

   "Your Majesty's favour,"said Almina,
with somewhat more than her usual
hesitation, "is sure the best recompense
the Earl can receive." "That," said he 
King, " he knows he amply possesses,
but I shrewdly suspect Lady, that more 
is requisite, to perfect his felicity; and 
so truly do I wish it," added he, in a
lower tone, " that if the brightest gem,
that graces our Court can contribute to                     EARL OSRIC.          429

it, willingly as far as my power extends,
would I bestow it on him. Consult thine
own heart, Lady, and solve my mean-
ing." So saying, he walked on, and
left Almina in a tumult of surprise so
great, that unable to take part in the
general gaity around her, she made an
excuse to retire early. The King no-
ticed her departure, and as she took her
leave, again approached her, saying in
a low tone, "If I have discomposed thee,
fair Lady, grant me thy pardon, if not
in my own person, in that of my friend,
whom I commission to attend thee;" and
as he spoke, he gave her hand to Earl
Osric, who received it with glistening
eyes; and relinquished it not, till his
fate was decided by the lips of Almina,
who, after years of silent suffering, and
virtuous efforts to repel a passion inimical
to her ideas of right, found herself the
chosen of that heart, more precious to
her, than any gift the world could be-
stow.430           EARL OSRIC.

   The same day that united Lady Laura
of Rosamonf, to the Earl of St. Albert,
witnessed the nuptials of Altima of 
Fitz-Oscar, and the great--the good--
Earl Osric.  The former took up their abode at Castle St. Albert, and the latter 
at Castle Rosamond ; whenever their
Royal Patrons would allow of their 
absence from Court. But though the 
abodes of the cousins and their Lords
were nominally different, they usually
formed one family; making an alternate
residence at each seat.

   The Countess Dowager of St. Albert
lived to behold her son's wedded happi-
ness;--the secret wish of her heart had 
long been, to see Almina united to Earl 
Osric; thus was she doubly gratified.

   When the duties of war compelled
the two Earls to quit the domestic cir-
cle, their Ladies were consigned to her
charge; and in the seclusion of St.
Albert they passed the time, till their
Lord's return.              EARL OSRIC.           431

   Sir Orlando and the lively Lady de
Mowbray were frequently their happy 
guets; and in return, the Castle of de
Mowbray was the scene of social friend-
ship.

   The Baron and Baroness Fitz-Oswald
only survived Earl Osric's second mar-
riage a year; but they were convinced, 
by unequivocal testimony, of the Earl's
exemplary conduct to their daughter,
and of the amiable exertions of Almina.
The latter herself, conveyed the little
Hector to the maternal arms of the
Baroness; with whom, during her life, 
he was suffered chiefly to reside, and
afterwards placed wholly under the care
Almina, be shared with her own off-
spring all her affection and attention.
One heart, one mind--actuated Osric
and Almina; the latter possessed a strength of understanding, which nature
had denied to the gentle Eleanora; the
former was consequently better calcu-432             EARLY OSRIC.

lated for one, whose mental powers,
like those of Earl Osric, rose superior
to the ignorance and superstition of the 
times. Equally and fondly attached,
they found in each other a recompense 
for every former woe, and were quoted
as models of conjugal felicity.

    Sir Edwin de Mowbray cured of his
passion for solitude, often with his 
sprightly smiling Bertha, found a hos-
pitable reception from Almina and her
Lord; and the elopement of Lady Janet
de Monthermer, with a Knight of infe-
rior rank who afterwards forsook her, 
gave Bertha an opportunity of showing
the goodness of her heart to her former
rival. She receive and succoured the
penitent Lady Janet, and finally pro-
cured her admission at the Priory of
St. Margaret, where she took the veil.
The pious Alicia and the excellent Dame 
Madelina, alike rejoiced in the happi-
ness of Almina, who made an annual
            EARL OSRIC.       433

visit to the monastery, where her ap-
pearance was always the signal for joy
and congratulation. The wretched Sir
Ethelred performed his pilgrimage to
the Holy Land, but ere he reached it,
was seized with a lingering disease; and
after long and severe bodily suffering, lie
terminated bis miserable existence in a
foreign country; an alien to his friends
and despised by all.

  The abandoned Isabel, forsaken by
him who had lavished his wealth on her,
was reduced to poverty and wretched-
ness, till Almina hearing of her piti-
able situation sought her out; and
placing her under the care of Dame
Maddelina at the Priory, finally con-
verted her to penitence.

  Valentine and Mabel were married,
and remained attached to the household
of Osric.
  
  The good Lady de Mornay and Dame
Janetta, cach retained their respective

  VOL. III.	    U
434           EARL OSRIC.

station, and presided with matronly affec-
tion and fidelity, over the rising nurse-
ries of Rosamond Castle, and St. Albert.
Frequently during the winter months the
Preceptresses and Pupils formed one
party, and it was a delight to the parents
to behold their Ruclcnt friends employed
in rearing to virtue another generation.
 
  Dame Janetta, whose intellects con-
tinued unimpaired to a great age, was a
source of constant entertainment to the
young people in their hours of recreation,
by her facility in relating tales, at once
calculated to improve and instruct.

  When her pupils were of an age to
understand the precepts to be extracted
from the history of their parents, the
incidents contained in the foregoing
pages, were faithfully detailed by the
aged historian; and when, with unwea-
ried attention her little hearers had
listened to the long narrative, she thus
concluded :-
         EARL OSRIC.       435

" When I am no move, my children,
let me hope that you will all have bene-
fited from the warnings and examples
contained in the recital you have heard.
In the great and good Earl Osric, we
see the brightest model of the warrior,
the man, and the Christian. Pious,
humane, and brave, his soul disdained
alike mean revenge, or tame submis-
sion ; to the former he was a stranger,
and the latter he only practised towards
Heaven.

  In the contrasted diameters of Al-
mina, and Adeliza, we have a fine
example, and an aweful warning ; the
former, virtuous from principle, strug-
gled with a passion which had grown
with her growth, and finally conquer-
ed ; while the latter, weakly yielding,
fell into an abyss of misery, and was
overwhelmed by the torrent.

  May the lesson be salutary, my
children, may your most vigourous ef-

              U 2436                EARL OSRIC.

forts, be directed against the internal
enemy, and remember that no conquest
is more glorious, than that which we
obtain over our own hearts."

                  THE END.Novels, Romances, and Tales

  PUBLISHED

  BY C. CHAPPLE

  Royal Subscription Library, Pall-Mall

  Now in the Press.

THE ITALIAN DON JUAN; or, Memoirs of the Devil
Sacripanti, the Bandit of the Appennines, a Romance, freely
translated from the Italian. By Henry Mordaunt Milner,
Author of "Barmecide," "Jew of Lubeck." Idiot Hier," &c. &c

THE YOUNG COUNTESS, a Tale of Instruction and
Amusement. By the Authorless of the "Blind Child."

THE HANGMAN OF BLOIS; or, the Family of Claren-
ville, a St. Domingo Tale, from the French

SKETCHES from REAL LIFE. By a Lady of Fashion. 3 vols.

  Published.

ADELAIDE DE GRAMMONT, a Romance of the Fif-
teenth Century. 12m price as, boards.

CRAIGH-MELROSE PRIORY, involving Memoirs of the
Mount-Linton Family. By a Lady. 4 vols. 12mo, price 24s
boards.

DANGERS of INFIDELITY, interspersed with His-
tory of Constantia Pierrepont; dedicated by permission to
Lady Owen, of Orielton. By Mrs. Ventuin. 3 vols, 12mo.
price 18s. boards. Second Edition
Novels, Romances, and Tales, Published by
          C. Chapple, Pall-Mall.

 EARL OSRIC; or, the Legend of Rosamond, a Romance.
By Mrs. Isaacs. 4 vols. 12mo, price 24s. boards.

 EASTERN TALES; or, Modern Allegories, Illustrative
of the Manners and Customs of Oriental Nations. 12mo
price 5s, boards.

 EDWY and ELGIVA, an Historical Romance of the Tenth
Century. By John Agg, Author of "Mac Dermot," &c.-
4 vols price 20s, boards.

 "We hope the author of Mae Dermot will not be dis-
pleased with us for not recollerting him by that pa-
rticular designation; the present work, neverthless,
whether it will increase or not, his literacy celeb-
rity, indicates respectable talents of the kind." 
British Crisic.
 
 EFFUSIONS OF LOVE, from  chatelar to Mary Queen of
Seats. Translated from a Gaelic Ms. In the Scotch 
College at paris. By W.H: Ireland. With a neat fron-
tispiece.- Price 5s. boards.

 ELLA Sr. LAURENCE; or, the Village of Selwood and
its Inbabitants. By Mrs. Isaacs. 4 vols. l%mo. 
price 22s, boards.

 EUSTON, a Novel. By G. Courlency, Etq. 2 vols.
price 9s, boards.

  "Sure on our birth some friendly plant shone,
  And, as our souls, our horoscope was one." Dryden.

  "There is some ingenuity of contrivance in these volumes, and they are better written than most productions of the kind; Euston's character in well drawn and supported,  and so it that of matilda."                         British Critic.

  "The commencement of this Novel is singular, and not prepossessing; it seems to have been written by a man strong sense, of some feeling, and a scholar. The work, perhaps, contains more argument
than will be amusing to those readers who are impatient of every interruption of the story; but the language has the merit of being nervous and polished in an unusual degree; when it is impassi-
oned, it is not inflammatory; and where it is inq-
uisitorial, it escapes being dull." Monthly Review

  EXILE ov POLAND; or,  the Vow of Celibaey, a novel, from the French. By Mrs. Richardson, & vols, 12mo. price 16s, 6d, boards.

  FRIENDS AND LOVERS, a Novel, Interspersed with 
occasional Verse. By Mr. D____, 3 vols. 12mo, price 10s,  boards.

  
 
Novels, Romances, and Tales, published by 
C. Chapple, Pall-Mall.

The only well-printed and embellished Edition of TOM JONES  and JOSEPH ANDREWS, ever yet offered to the Public, complete in 18 numbers, price 2, each, furming 6 vols. in a small octave.

FIELDING'S TOM JONES, AND JOSEPH ANDREWS.

The Publisher of these admired Novels deems it proper to
state, that they are, for the first time, decorated in a man-
ner every way worthy of their distinguished Author, as the mere mention of the names of the Artists employed will suf-
ficiently prove. The designs are by Devis, Owen, Stothard, 
Westail, and uwins : -- and the engravings are made by Engleheart, Heath, Rhodes, Schiavonetti, Scriven, Smith, and Warren. The plates are all printed on French paper, with peculiar care, by Dicon, so that the impressions are pe-
culiarly choice. May be had of all Booksellers. The re-pub-
lication of this Work, in weekly parts, commenced on Satur-
day the 30th of Oct. 1819, to be continued every scceeding
Saturday.


GOTHA: or, Memoirs of the Wartzburg Family, founded on Facts. By  Mrs. Streatfield. 2 vols. 12 mo, price 13s. boards.

THE GOOD AUNT, including the Story of Signior Alder-
sonini and his Son. By Harriet Fenlum. Price 3 s. Gd. BB -
bound.

HENRY HOOKA, in the manner of Tom Jones. By the
late Charles Dibdin. 3 vols. 12 mo. price 15s. boards.

"I CAN'T AFFORD IT," and other Tales. By Mrs.
Hamilton. 2 vols. 12 mo. price 10s. boards

LOST VEIL; or, Lake of Swans, a popular Tale, and the
SAIOLOR'S RETURN, a fragment. By Madame De Monto-
lien. 12 mos. 3s. 6d. boards.

MALVINA. By Miss Gunning. From the French of 
Madame Cortin. 4 vols. 2ls. boards.

MELECHSALA; or the Language of Flowers. By Madame De Montolieu. 12 mo. price 3s. 6d boards.

MEMOIRS OF OLIVER CROMWELL AND HIS CHIL-
DREN, supposed to be written by himself, with a Preface and Notes Historical and Explanatory, by Mr. B. Dedicated 
to His Majesty's Ministers, By R.H. 3 vols. 12mo. 
price 18s. boards.

MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF MRS. SUMBEL, (late Wells.) of the Theatres Royal, Drury-Lane, Covent-garden, and
Haymarket ; written by Herself, and including her Corres-
pondence with various persons. These volumes are published solely for the benefit of the much-injured Athoress. Price Novels, Romances, and Tales, Published by
          C. Chapple, Pall-Mall.

  MONTOLIEU'S TALES; containing Pricess Una; or,
the Talisman's being the continuation and conclusion of the Thousand and One Arabian Night's Eutertainments-the Sailor's Return-the Lost Veil; or, Lake of Swans-and Melcehsal; or, the Language of Flowers. 3 vols. 12mo. 10s. bd. boards.

  MONTOLIEU'S SENTIMENTAL ANECDOTES; con-
sisting of four Tales, viz. Eliza and Albert-Marcel; or, the Cobler of the Cottage-Sophia; or, the bliad Girl-and Eleonore; or, the Beautiful Eyes. Translated from the French, by Mrs. Plunkett, formerly Miss Gunning. Z vols. 13mo 7s boards.

  PEEP AT THE THEATRES, and Bird's-eye View of Men:
Satirical, Critieal, and Moral. 3 vols. 12mo. price 1Hs. Boards.

  PHILANTHROPIST; or, Memoirs of the villars Family.
By Harriet Walter Weeks. 3 vols. 12mo. 18s. boards.

  PRINCESS UNA; or, the Talismnns, being the continuation and conclusion of the Thousand and One Arabiau Nights Entertainments. By Madame de Montolieu, 18mo, 3s 6d-boards.

  Sr.LEONARD'S FOREST; or, the Child of Chance, a
Novel. By W.H.Hitchener, of the surrey Theatre, Author of "The Towers of Ravenswold; or, Days of Ironside."-

  "Our actions are our heralds, and they fix,
  Beyond the dates of tombs and epitaphs,
  Renown and infamy."                     Tobin.

  2. vols. 12mo. price 10s. 6d. boards.

  TALES OF TO-DAY; containing, The Heivess of Rivers-dale-Juliet-and, The Sisters. By Mrs. Isaacs. 3 vols. 12mo. price 24s, boards,

  TOWERS OF RAVENWOLD; Or, Days of Ironside. By
W.H. Hitehener. 2 vols. 12mo. price 10s. 6d boards.

  TRUTH IN THE GARB OF FICTION, By a Disciple of
the Old School. 4 vols. 12mo. 24s. boards.

  WANDERINGS OF FANCY; Miscellaneous Pieces in
Prose and Verse. By Mrs. Isaacs, Authoress of " Ella St. Laurence," &e. 8vo. price 10s. 6d. extra boards.

  WOOD NYMPH. By Mrs. Isaccs. 3 vols. 12mo. price
15s. boards.

