Eleanor: or, The spectre of St. Michael's: a romantic tale
N
CHAPTER I.
*r-+r+r-r
rr*-r**++t
How fearful— — — — — — And dizzy 'tis to cast one's eyes so low! Tho crows and choughs, that wing the midway air, Shew scarce so gross as beetles Half-way down Hd-ngs one that gathers samphire—dreadful trade! Methinks he seems no bigger than bis head; The fishermen that walk upon the beach, Appear like mice— — — — — — — — — —The murmuring surge, That on the unnumber'd idle pebbles chafes, Cdnnot be heard so high. I'll look no more, Lest my brain turn. Shakespeare. If there is an hereafter—and that there is, Conscience, uninfluenced, tells every m«n-^- Their must it be an awful thing to die; More horrid yet to die by one's own hand. .— — — — — —Self-murder J Name it not—our island's shame. Blair. JLHE morning sun had gilded the horizon * with his cheering rays, and '"already pro-< K VOL. I. B
claimed the pleasing prospect of a fine day; a gentle breeze was heard to mur¬ mur, and echoed. the distant sound of a merry peal of bells, which issued from the towers of St. Michael's church, and vi¬ brated, in lengthened accents, on the shores of Scotland's wide domains; the strain was calculated to inspire all hearts with the most lively sensations, save that of one, who alone appeared incapable of feeling a sentiment of joy—amidst the generality of mirthful countenances which surrounded the church and adjacent Castle of St. Mi¬ chael's, one appeared, alone and unobserved, to droop in dark despair. A' young and interesting female issued from a retired cottage in the glen ; her whole demeanour bespoke the extreme agitation of her mind; her eyes were cast upwards, and settled in calm despair, but which too plainly evinced the vacuity of her thoughts: the melan¬ choly softness of her features might have excited the warmest commiseration in the breast of a stoic, and have insured her tlie
balmy blessing of sympathy in her misfor¬ tunes ; unheeded, however, passed on this hapless child of sorrow—no one observed her distracted demeanour, as with slow and silent steps she left her abode for the last time; the disorder of her dress, the wildness of her air—all conspired to ren¬ der her an object of solicitude to any be¬ holder; but, alas! no one was near to stretch forth a saving hand, or to save her from that fate which, with all the delirium of insanity, she had already premeditated. Cautiously she bent her course towards the domains of St. Michael's Castle, which superb edifice arose in a romantic spot 'midst Scotia's glens; at its extremity ran the sea, the waves of which dashed in ma¬ jestic currency against the massy stones which supported tlie vast structure. On approaching this spot, the lovely sufferer stopped, and for some minutes gazed sted- fastly on it. At this instant the bells broke forth v ith redoubled clamour, the length¬ ened peals ran on the clear surface of the ii 2
sea, and gave a softened mellifluous sound to the lively strain. It caught the atten- tion of the mourner; she looked towards the steeple from whence the sound pro-. t ceeded,.an hysterical laugh burst from her lips, and for a while she seemed.lost to. all sense of feeling, save tlxo.se. dreadful ones., which,had dep>riy;ed t .her 0 of, reason. fj Aj. length she rushed onwards o towards., the,. church door, at which stood a bridal equi-.^ page^ which "had j ust'.arrivedi, fro. m .the ad-, jacent 'castle-'J Feaiful of. being seen by. ; the'attendants, with'all .'the cunning ,of mental.derapgement, i ,.she. i reta'eated. i . t to a.. private entrance,' at which she paused.—-^ " The hour is then arrived," she exclaimed,,, " whichjstairi£s my^^stin^i.w^njLe.then^ that period ,w r hich^ I have. ,so Jong, ^ntjei^, pated! I^ush,jy^ '^^nSjPfjo^—be, silent, or else charlee thy tones to that of a fune- ral- knell; yes, let -the happy bridal, pair ; hear a strain like that, let them reflect,.on what they must come to as well.as f J. Bu]t,! 5 ' ^he ^continued, with increased wi|d- t
ness, " I can once more behold him —for ' the last time gaze on those features which how cause agony to my soul." i She then cautiously entered the.church, and proceeded down the side aisle; she beheld the choicest flowers scattered on the around, which had evidently been thrown before the bridal pair. She con- cealed herself behind a pillar which sup¬ ported the ancient structure of St. Mi¬ chael's, and clasping Her hands together, appeared for some moments lost to despair. At the'altar stood a youthful arid "ele¬ gant couple, in tlie act of phghting their mutual faith; a venerable priest was al¬ ready placing the ring upon the finger of the bride; on each side they were sur¬ rounded by t!h'eir friencls, oh whose cbun- tenances appeafecl the stamp 6f satisfaction. The [bride and bridegroom were not the Yeast interesting of the group;, the former was a female of extreme elegance and beauty; her countenance might perhaps have been deemed faultless, had it not ex-
hibited a strong expression of haughtiness; her black and piercing eyes darted scorn around, and bespoke the general hauteur of her soul, which was greatly contrasted - by the countenance of the gentleman, which was tinctured by the glow of affa¬ bility; his features were dark and hand¬ some, but unaccompanied by those traits of pride which shone so conspicuously in his bride's; it was evident that he pos¬ sessed great gaiety at heart, but, on the present occasion, it was visible that his mind was ill at ease; deep-drawn sighs issued from his bosom, and dejection marked his countenance. The unhappy unknown observer, start¬ ing from her reverie, closely scrutinized his face.—" He is not happy," she cried, " nor will he ever be. Can his once-noble and generous heart be united to pride? will that suffice for the horrible sacrifice- will that avail in lieu of the life of a fellow-creature? But see—already are their hands joined. Can I have more sa-
tisfaction than this?" she added, with an hysterical laugh. At this instant she heard the priest in an audible voice pronounce them to be " man and wife." A loud and convulsive scream burst from her lips, as, rushing in¬ stantaneously from the church, she gained the outside without discovery; with in¬ creased wildness she ran precipitately across the glens, till she gained the sea side, about a mile distant from the Castle of St. Mi¬ chael's. This spot was a place well cal¬ culated to horrors; high and almost im¬ passable rocks projected from the sea, which human footsteps had scarcely ever surmounted. Unheedful of the danger, the frantic female climbed this stupendous work of nature; her feet were torn and cut with the sharp and pointed fragments of the rock. The sea dashed its foaming billows against the sides, which echoed in dismal accents upon the ear of the wretch¬ ed wanderer, who, nearly exhausted, at length arrived at the summit of the rock
—a j height at which any other individual would have shuddered to ; attain. For jsome-few minutes she viewed the scene around her in calm despair, when again the breeze, gently murmuring, brought with it the distant sounds of the bells. fThe wretched maniac listened attentively, and^then sinking on her knees, raised her diands in devotion.—" If such a wretched tbeing as myself darepray," she exclaimed, « do thou, oh Heaven! receive my dast supplications: first, 'to forgive the cruel, yet still iloved author of ^my woes, ss I do •at >this awful moment—imay^every happi- mess ?be Ms on eauth! -and next, receive •my humble solicitations in behalf ^of Uhat innocent being, who, unconscious of its sorrows, reposes in peace. My aged pa¬ rent too—oh God! pour the balm of peace and consolation in his troubled breast— grant him fortitude and resignation! And now dare I add a prayer in behalf of my own wretched, guilty bosom? Ah, no! I cannot pray for myself—my mind is a
chaos—all, all is madness; I dare not look up with hope—my hopes lie there," she added, pointing towards the sea, " 'tis there I look for peace." She arose from her kneeling posture; she approached the edge of the rock, and uttering a piercing scream, leaped from the craggy point to the bosom of the sea. The rolling waves received their willing victim; she struggled for some little time, when another wave arose, and eventually covered the hapless sufterer, who thus, unbidden, plunged herself into eternity.
b3
CHAPTER II. To be good, is to bo happy: angels Are hnppier thnu men, because they're better. Guilt is the source of sorrow—'tis the fiend, Th' avenging fiend, that follows us behind With whips and sting-s. Ruwt.
A wife !—Heaven's last, best gift. Cowley. The festivities which were taking place in the Castle of St. Michael's were occa¬ sioned by the union of lord Arthur Glen¬ dinning with lady Georgina Lenox. Both were descended from high and wealthy Scottish families. Lord Arthur was the only son of the earl Campbell, whose hopes and whole pride were centered in him, as the last remaining branch of his family. The earl had beefi left a widower, with two children, a girl and a boy; the eldest,
lady Frances Glendinning, had early dis¬ covered a disposition and amiable man¬ ners resembling her departed mother, to which she added a strength and firmness of mind beyond her years; and as she ad¬ vanced towards womanhood, she displayed a countenance of extreme loveliness; her figure was elegant, though extremely de¬ licate, and in her face the lily and the rose vied with each other to add a sweetness to her fair complexion. Lord Arthur, only a year younger than his sister, was also an object of general admiration: his person was a regular mould of manly beauty, to which he added the most graceful and fas¬ cinating manners that ever distinguished his sex. The elegant lord Arthur and his lovely sister were universally beloved and admired, and not a chieftain in Scotland but what would have been proud of an alliance in their family with the heirs of Campbell, The tenderest regard subsisted between the brother and sister; their amuse¬ ments were shared together, and their dis-
positions were so truly congenial, that they never formed a wish in which they did not mutually partake. The earl ex¬ ulted in his children; he felt their worth, and determined they should fill that sta¬ tion of life to which they were born; to the highest degree already did his proud heart bf at with ambitious delight, at the prospects which he had in contemplation for their future aggrandizement; and so fully bent was he on his own private de¬ termination, that the idea of failure in his intentions never entered his head. The earliest friend of earl Campbell had been the right honourable lord Lenox, who was united to a lady of high rank; lady Lenox was the daughter of a duke, and inherited a considerable share of fa¬ mily pride; and Lenox House was the seat of grandeur, wealth, and splendour. Amongst a numerous offspring, two only survived—a son and a daughter—the ho¬ nourable Charles Lenox, and lady Georgi¬ na, who inherited a title in right of her
mother. With this family earl Campbell had kept upon very intimate terms, arid the young people were jui/ehiie compa¬ nions, and passed much time together, their residence not being far distant. The first interruption to their mutual intercourse was occasioned 4 by lord Lenox removing with his family to England, where they intended remaining for a couple of years, at the expiration^ of which period they were to return again td Scot¬ land. It was during their absence that the earl, as he beheld the opening graces* of his children, first anticipated the idea of a double union taking place between the two families; and so fixed Was he up¬ on this design, that he c6ntinualiy up¬ braided himself with Ms" neglect in hot having earlier intihiated his wisn'es to lord Lenox, fearing, dturing Ms absence, he might form .other connexions for his fa¬ mily; and in great anxiety^ of mind fie 1 awaited their return to ScotlafidV At the end of the tirne prescribed ford 5
Lenox returned, and the earl took the earliest opportunity to visit his friend, who expressed his pleasure in seeing him in the warmest terms, and immediately conducted him to lady Lenox, where he also beheld the two objects of his secret solicitude—Charles Lenox and lady Geor¬ gma, and he viewed with inward pleasure the improvement manifest in their persons during this absence. Charles was indeed a fine young man; his countenance was in¬ telligent, and beamed with good-humour, while his mind was replete with sense and information. Lady Georgina was also a most captivating figure; but the earl be¬ held the visible pride and hauteur in her ladyship, which sitting so forcibly in her countenance, checked the admiration which a first glance had excited; he could not, of course, on this first visit, speak on the subject next his heart, and departed there¬ fore, with the promise of dining with them the next day, accompanied by lady Frances and lord Arthur.
On his return home, he was profuse in his praises of the Lenox family, and both his son and daughter expressed their im¬ patience to behold their old companions, and anxiously awaited until the succeed¬ ing day, when they proceeded to Lenox House; and on being ushered into the drawing-room, soon found themselves in the arms of their young friends. Lady Georgina embraced lady Frances with warmth, and while welcoming her to her heart, appeared to throw aside all traces of her natural pride. Lord Arthur then ad¬ vanced towards her, and taking her hand, gallantly pressed it to his lips. She was much agitated; she turned pale, and seemed near fainting; but soon recovering herself, she asserted that the pleasure of meeting her old friends had been almost too much for her feelings. " And I can assure you," cried lord Ar¬ thur, " that pleasure has been reciprocal in the bosoms of all." Lady Georgina looked at him with
marked expression, but remained silent, while Charles Lenox was expressing his delight at this happy meeting td lady Frances, with whom he appeared quite enraptured, and paid her the most visible attention. After the little party became more com¬ posed, £hey passed a most agreeable ddy ; while lady Georgina, recovering her viva¬ city, again appeared as the scornful beau¬ ty. Lord Arthur observed the pride of her heart, which evinced itself in her conversation; and it was evideni that lady Lenox encouraged the arrb|*arice of her daughter. Lord Arthur, ever a lover of that softness arid pleasing humility iri a female', beheld this unfavourable trait in her ladyship's character with sentiments bordering on disgust; and beiri£ resblved not to be the instrument of dddixig an¬ other" feather'to her towering pluma'ge, he oehaved tdwards her with the greatest coldness. The day af length pasVeflf over, and they
returned to St. MichaelY Castle, with in¬ vitations on both sides. Theearl entered into a warm eulogium on'the'agreeable Charles, in which 1 he was joined by both; and lady 'Frances spoke of him in the most affectionate terms. The earl was de¬ lighted, and turning to his'son, expatiated on the beauty and accomplishments of lady'Georgina. " True," replied lord Arthur; « c but there is one'gem of which her ladyship is >not 'in possession, and which, in -my opi¬ nion, constitutes every chdrm. w '"What is 1 that?" said'Che'earl/in-a voice 'df-alarm. "^Humility 'and affability," "'he replied. " Your lordship must We observed the visible hauteur of her countenance:" « Why true," returned the J earl, biting his lip, "lady'Georgina certainly possesses some pride; but when you consider her ! high descent, yoirwill make some allow¬ ance ; and I trust it is more 'the result J o'f education than arising from her heart."
This was in reality the truth; lady < Georgina had been brought up under the entire guidance of her mother, who had early impressed on the mind of her daugh¬ ter the superiority of her descent, and lady Georgina soon considered herself as an object of universal admiration; she was taught to look on her inferiors with dis¬ dain, and encouraged in those ebullitions of pride which early broke forth, and which were deemed, by the misguided lady Lenox, as expressions of dignity and consciousness of birth. Lady Georgina had been left independent by her grand¬ father the duke, and a fortune of thirty thousand pounds, at her own disposal, had greatly added to the proud spirit of lady Georgina; she, however, was not devoid of feeling or humanity, and her heart had frequently been known to melt at the woes of another: but her ladyship pos¬ sessed no common soul, for seldom could her real sentiments be defined, and what¬ ever were her private feelings, they were
always concealed beneath the scornful brow, which completely awed all in¬ truders. During her residence in England, her captivating figure had gained her many conquests; her hand had been sought by the first and noblest families; lord Lenox had approved, but lady Georgina had re¬ mained inflexible, and without deigning to assign any reason, had dismissed all her suitors. In this state had she returned to Scotland, and the earl Campbell took the earliest opportunity of speaking to lord Lenox on the subject of his projected al¬ liance; his lordship received the proposal with pleasure, but added, that he had no control over his daughter whatever; but that he would propose it immediately to Charles and lady Georgina; however, as she had already refused so many offers, he much feared her rejection. Lord Lenox kept his word—he men¬ tioned the subject to his family. Charles joyfully acceded, and owned he felt the
'tadst impkssidhed regard'for'lady Frances, %hose hand would be the summit of his wishes. Lady Georgina was then called upon for her answer; 1 she turned extreme¬ ly pale.—" Does lord Arthur coincide in 'the wishes of his father in this alliance ?" she at length demanded. " No doubt," replied lord Lenox—" all iparties are agreeable to the premeditated 'union, if it meets with your ladyship's ap¬ probation; and for your answer I J now wait." Lady Georgina arose with great dignity. w- w A v son' of the earl Campbell," she cried, "certainly is entitled to some attention; nor will I refuse to bestow my hand on him, if it meets with the wishes of my family." Lord and lady Lenox were delighted with her unexpected compliance, and a favourable answer was returned to the overjoyed/ earl, w'ho had now to break his commands to lady Frances and lord Ar¬ thur Glendinning; this he did without
delay, to_their mutual surprise,,as,neither had ever entertained the most distant,idea of the kind. Lady Frances .frankly de¬ clared that she both admired,and t esteemed Charles Lenox, but had no sentiments of, love towards him, though she did not pre¬ fer any one else. With this avowal .the earl, waq, quite. satisfied, an ( d he insisted upon the privilege,of ,returning j a^aypur^, able answer to Charies. La^ly (f Frances gave , a reluctant, consent; she wished ^ oblige s her, father, but felt she .was, acting only.in compliance to his.wishes^ and, T not ir in-unison wither own.he^rt^ The earl then turned towar^s..hi5.jSop, K who had been. silently pacing,, the, ,ropm ever,since,the proposal made ( by { ,the f earl„ w^io now.,exclaimed-—«?, WeU, s A^t^ur^I A nqw, f wait for your r answer, ; if,you/ineari ri to favour me, with one at all" * Lord t Ai;thur, started.—*',!^ reaspn.for^, remaining silent," he at length exclaimed " was 0 because I must. disappoint,'-your lordship's, wishes—I cannot.comply^with^ the 0 hon I o.ur / yqu jn^enjl me."
The earl looked severely at him.—" You cannot!" he repeated; " and pray what are your objections then ?" " Can you wish me to unite myself to pride and arrogance ?" he replied. *'* Ridiculous !" interrupted the earl; " you forget the high descent of lady Georgina, and mistake that conscious dig¬ nity of birth which distinguishes her, for a mere empty pride. But beware, sir," he added, with a severe countenance, " how you raise trifling and frivolous reasons to mar my plans; I am resolved on this union, which will reflect such glittering honours on our family." " But, my lord," cried lord Arthur, " I am not inclined at present to marry; a wife was the last of my thoughts, much less' lady Georgina, who, though, 1 ow r n, accomplished and beautiful to the ex-' treme, is not the object I would make my choice." " I do not wish to hasten you into ma¬ trimony," returned the earl, " sooner than you like yourself;'only give me your pro-
mise that you will, at any future period you shall name, comply with my wish in uniting yourself to lady Georgina: con¬ sider her high descent, the noble dignity of her conduct; and, above all, after hav¬ ing obtained her consent to bestow her hand on you, would you give her the mortification of a refusal? Gallantry for¬ bid a son of mine should act such a part! beside, I am convinced it would be thei means of breaking that friendship which has subsisted so long between lord Lenox and myself, who would not forgive so gross an insult." Lord Arthur again took a few turns across the apartment; the earl continued to use threats and entreaties, till at last, unable longer to withstand them, lord Arthur gave a reluctant promise to wed lady Georgina, on condition that he might be allowed his liberty for two years, during which time he should wish to travel. To this the earl assented, at the same time ex¬ pressing his satisfaction at his compliance.
"-Lhave, my lord," said lord Arthur, " complied with? your, wishes, .and merely so, as I avow I.have not ,the least inclina¬ tion to^this marriage; and should it even¬ tually prove an unhappy s one, ,you must thank yourself abne for the misery which you have brought on my head." The earl half shuddered at this speech; butforcing a smile into his face, he replied thatiheiWas .willing to run the, risk of all sorrow*productive in,an union between? lord Arthur-and lady Georgina Lenox.-
CHAPTER nr.
Can love bo cotitrollVi by adiice? Will Cupid his mother obey ? Gav. Earl Campbell had now attained the summit of his wishes—he had obtained the promise he so much desired from his children; 'twas true, it was indeed reluc¬ tantly granted from each, but that did not in the least disturb his repose, while the minds of lady Frances and lord Arthur laboured under great uneasiness on the occasion; to each other they owned their repugnance to the projected alliance, but particularly on the part of lord Arthur, who dreaded the haughty disposition of lady Georgina. Lady Frances had no fears of this kind, for in Charies Lenox she beheld every virtue combined; and with a zeal that marked the sincerity of vol. i. c
ELEANOR.
affection which he felt for her,, he hastened to her, and poured out those vows which were sanctioned by his friends and ap¬ proved by his-own heart. Lady Frances, in compliance with her promise to her father, received him with modest sweet¬ ness ; and though he could nbt obtain an avowal of tenderness in his favour, yet he contented himself with her acquiescence ( to the wishes of all parties. . Lords Arthur had also an embarrassing scene- to go through, to address lady Geor- ginai without feeling any affection for her, save that of friendship; yet on hisi first interview with her after, the proposed alli- arice,< he was struck with the dignity of manners with which she received him, and he half forgave her pride, in consideration of : her<hoble demeanour: lord Arthur was not without pride himself. Lady Georgi¬ na was 'every where the admiration of all circles; her beauty, her rank, and fortune, made, her every where an object of eager desire;.-all this was to be in the possession of lord Arthur, and he soon reconciled
himself to the thoughts of their union; preparations were, however, made for his departure, as he still expressed his wish to travel previous to yielding his liberty. Lady Georgina Jieard the proposal in si¬ lence; lord Arthur never consulted her wishes on the subject, and she was too proud, unasked, to express her feelings on the occasion. As the time now drew near for lord Arthur quitting them, they projected many little parties of pleasure to enjoy his company, among which v/as a short excursion on the water; and on a lovely summer's evening they proceeded, in -a large awned barge belonging to the earl, accompanied by a band of music, down the clear stream, which appeared to £tuy the roughness of its waves to give a beauty to the scene. Charles Lenox, in the so- ciet3 r of lady Frances, was completely hap¬ py ; and leaning*with her near the edge of the vessel, pointed out to her the pleasing prospects which surrounded them. c 2
. On their return, just previous to their landing, the attention of lady Frances was directed towards a young man who stood on the shore near them: his attitude was that of deep contemplation; a melancholy pervaded his countenance, which was re¬ gularly handsome, while his dress and figure bespoke the gentleman. Lady Frances pointed him out to Charles, ob¬ serving how deeply he appeared fixed in thought, and expressed her wonder at his abstracted appearance. He cast his eyes towards the stranger, while at the same moment the barge, making towards the shore, suddenly gave a violent jerk against a bank, which instantly precipitated lady Frances, who was standing in a bending posture, into the sea. The effect was so instantaneous, that for a minute no one appeared sensible of the dreadful calamity: but in an instant all was horror; the la¬ dies screamed; Charles Lenox was pre¬ paring to plunge in to her rescue, but in a moment he heard the splashing of the water; the stranger whom they had ob-
served leaped in, and soon bore lady Fran¬ ces in his arms above the waves. Charles* Lenox received her lifeless form with transport; all crowded around to render assistance, and with anxious solicitude watched for a return of animation^ Hap¬ pily the poor sufferer had not been long enough under the water to endanger her life, and they soon beheld the colour re¬ visit her cheeks: she opened her eyes, while all the party, now landing, bore her towards her home. During the first minutes of confusion they had been unmindful of her brave preserver, when lady Georgina reminding them of their vast obligation, they turned to tender him their thanks; but he had disappeared, and was no where to be seen. This circumstance caused them all the greatest alarm, in the idea of not having poured forth their gratitude to their un¬ known friend. Lord Arthur immediately proceeded along the shore, hoping to over¬ take him, while the rest conveyed lady Frances to her own abode, where she was
instantly put into a warm bed, and in a •^short time she recovered her senses suffi¬ ciently to inquire the particulars of her preservation. Upon being informed that it wqs the stranger who had so attracted her attention that had preserved her, she expressed her warmest gratitude to him, and earnestly prayed that she might be ^able to return him her personal thanks; in this she was, however, disappointed; lord Arthur returned unsuccessful—he could no where find tlie object of his search, who, it was evident, had thus re¬ treated, to avoid the thanks of all parties. " What a noble fellow!" cried lord Ar¬ thur; " I would give half i possess to know to whom it is we are thus indebted; at any rate, I will use every means in my power to find him out." " Heaven grant you may be successful, my dear brother!" replied lady Frances— ** my heart beats to ease itself of the vast debt I owe him; there was something that insensibly attracted my attention to¬ wards him previous to the unfortunate
accident, and now I long again to behold him, to tell him how grateful I feel." J Charles Lenox beheld the glowing cheek of lady Frances with an eye of jealousy, and he secretly hoped the stranger might not be found out, lest he should prove the disturber of his repose. His wishes were propitious, as neither earl Campbell or-his- son could gain any intelligence concerning him. While lady Frances cherished the most uneasy, though secret sensations concern¬ ing the unknown preserver of her life, her ladyship soon recovered from the effect j of her accident, and her feelings were called in question on another occasion; this was the departure of her brother, from whom she had never before been separated; and so attached were they together, that both felt it severely. Previous to his departure, lord Arthur had a long conversation with lady Georgi¬ na, and in the most graceful and fascinat¬ ing manner, if not in impassioned terms, thanked her for the honour she had con-
ferred on him by the promise of becoming his, and begged that, at the expiration of two years, during which he meant to tra¬ vel, she would receive him on those terms so wished by all parties, and that she would not forget her engagement with him. In this address lord Arthur was only- actuated by the sentiments of honour; he felt he did not love, but he could not look on the lovely object before him without admiration. Lady Georgina for a moment dropped her eyes in soft confusion; he thought he never saw her look so truly beautiful; a tear started in her eye, but struggling with herself, her countenance resumed its usual haughtiness, as in a firm tone she- replied—" I am not accustomed, my lord, to break my word; when it is once passed, I hold it sacred; and rest assured, at the period of your return, you will find me the same as you leave me. And now, my lord, permit me to retire, as this interview is painful to both, as I believe we are each repressing the natural sentiments of our
hearts, though unfortunately not in uni¬ son." Lord Arthur caught her hand.—" Ex¬ plain your meaning," he cried; " I do not understand you." " I know you do not" was her answer,. as she again made towards the door; " nor would I have you," she continued; " oil' your return, perhaps I may be more ex¬ plicit; and rest assured, my lord, that the- honour and promise of lady Georgina Le¬ nox are sacred, and, likewise recollect, are not to be trifled with on your part." Lord Arthur, rather surprised at her expressions, pressed her to become more- explicit; he knew not what to think, but possessing great generosity of heart, he likewise renewed his sacred promise to fulfil his engagement with her at his re¬ turn. With great emotion she again wished him adieu, and then hurried from him,> to conceal those feelings which over¬ powered her; the meaning of which lord Arthur could scarcely define, as he enter-, c 3
tained a decided opinion that every senti¬ ment of hers arose in consequence of some ebullition of fancied dignity, which he de¬ nominated by the title of pride. . This was the last interview between them, and lord Arthur commenced his torn His intention was first to visit Eng~- land, from which place he was to write them; and lady Georgina had condescend¬ ed to promise to correspond with him. The families of Campbell and Lenox bialh experienced great sorrow and anxiety during the absence of lord Arthur, and lady Georgina passed the greatest portion of her time w r ith her brother and lady- Frances. It was soon observable that this young lady had lost much of her natural vivacity, a deep melancholy appeared to overpower her, and' it was deemed by her friends to have arisen in consequence of the departure of a brother she so tenderly loved. Charles Lenox, with unremitting assiduity, endeavoured to assuage her evi¬ dent grief; but his tenderness only ap-
peared to add to her distress, and a general (doom took place on all countenances. At length letters were brought them from lord Arthur, in which he gave them jrood accounts of himself; he stilted? he was then on his way to England, where he intended to remain some time. He had addressed lady Georgina also, and though not in an impassioned strain, yet its lan¬ guage was fraught with politeness; and lady Georgina answered him, as he had requested her to do so. For the first twelve months he was regular in his cor¬ respondence, but at length the letters of his family, and even lady Georgina's^ re¬ mained unanswered for some time; for which he at length excused himself, by alleging that, in consequence of his tra¬ velling about from place to place, it ren¬ dered a regular correspondence impossible. It was also about tins* period that a total reversion of affairs took place in the fami¬ lies of Campbell and Lenox. The increasing dejection of lady Frances drew forth the attention of her anxious
friends; Charles Lenox beheld with pain the evident alteration in her whole beha¬ viour—she shunned his society and court¬ ed solitude; he was greatly distressed at her conduct, and strove with unremitting tenderness to gain her confidence and esteem; he loved her with unabated ar¬ dour, and, unable any longer to endure the uncertainty in which he remained, he sought an audience with the earl,, and to him expressed his fears that lady Frances was averse to the projected alliance. The earl immediately assured him that he was mistaken, as his daughter had never made the least objection; and added, that he was certain lady Frances would be willing, at any time, to ratify her engagement. With all the eagerness of a lover Charles. caught at this assertion, by proposing that their nuptials should immediately take place, and not delav his happiness, as was originally intended, until the uncertain return of lord Arthur. To this the earl consented, and took upon himself the task of speaking to his daughter on the subject,
and added his belief of her compliance. Charles expressed his hopes that he might prove propitious in his undertaking, and hastened from the castle, while the earl re¬ paired to his daughter's apartment, where, after some little preparatoiy conversation, he informed her of the purport of his visit, and begged her to receive Charles as her husband in as short a time as possible. The varying countenance of lady Fran¬ ces betrayed her agitation; but endeavour¬ ing to collect herself, she replied—" This is a subject, my lord, on which I have long wished to speak, but apprehension has -*ept me silent; yet I am sorry, very sorry that I have so long suffered both you and Charles Lenox to dwell on hopes which I cannot realize. To be plain, my lord, I cannot marry Charles." " What P exclaimed the earl, while his features were distorted with rage and sur¬ prise, " sure I cannot hear you right— you never can be so base of soul as thus to wish to cancel, engagements so solemnly, entered into."
» Indeed, my lord," cried lady Prances, " I have spoken the sentiments of my heart; and thougli it is painful to me thus to disappoint your wishes, yet, I repeat, it is totally impossible for me to unite my¬ self to Charles." " Your reason," exclaimed the earl, in a voice of rage—" give me your reason for* this extraordinary conduct, and why you refuse to ratify those engagements in which you are bound." " Because, my lord, I love another," re¬ plied lady Frances, in a firm voice, " which renders it totally impossible for me to com¬ ply with your wishes; my vows are given to the object of my affections, I have re¬ ceived his, and no power on earth can part us." To describe the rage of the earl at this unreserved declaration is impossible—he vented the most bitter invectives on her Iiead; she, however, remained firm, till at length he demanded, in the most violent terms, the name of her favoured lover— " Tell me who he is," he cried, " that has
thus dared to alienate you from your duty;- give me up the author of your disgrace, that I may wreak my vengeance on his- devoted head; by Heaven I swear he shall" feel the revenge he merits! Tell me, I say, who is the daring intruder ?" <( Never? replied lady Frances; •** after the declaration you have'just made^ I will never give up the beloved object of my affections to your unjustifiable rage; oiv me alone shall your anger fall, but he shall escape your reproaches. I am aware, my lord, I have forfeited your good opinion, perhaps for ever; but even that cannot now alter my future destiny." The earl was enraged almost to madness at her calm declaration ; he upbraided her in the bitterest terms, and concluded by vowing she should be close confined, lest she should disgrace her family by uniting herself to one who was no doubt below her. Lady Frances forbore to complain, and patiently submitted to the commands of* her father, who actually put his threats in-
to force, by locking her up in her own room, in hopes by this method to force her into compliance, though he well knew the firmness of her disposition, which made him fear she would never recant from what she had so strenuously asserted. Her con¬ duct was a blow to all his hopes, as he dreaded lest he should be totally disap¬ pointed in his wishes of uniting his house to that of the proud and lofty one of Lenox.
CHAPTER IV.
" Why should I indiscreetly tell The iiiime my heait has kept so well?"
" To be nlwnys erring is tiie weakness of humanity; to be- nhviiys repenting, its punishment. Alas ! could we learn wisdom without expeiience, mankind would perhaps be too happy." According to the commands of the earl, lady Frances remained confined to her apartment, her own maid waiting on her with her meals; it was in vain the carl offered her liberty, on condition of her re¬ vealing the name of her concealed lover; she remained inflexible, and continued firm in her refusal of Charles. The earl was mortified almost to madness in having to convey such an unfavourable report to Charles, and knew not how to assert the rejection of lady Frances, fearing lest lord Lenox should consider it as an affront of-
fered to his family; this task was, however, spared him, as lady Frances addressed a letter to Charles, and in the most eloquent language confessed her attachment to an¬ other object; and concluded by throwing herself upon his mercy and generosity. This letter was conveyed to Mr. Lenox through the medium of lady Frances's maid, and in some surprise he broke the seal. Upon the perusal of it his feelings may readily be conceived, and for some minutes he remained in a sort of stupor; the disappointment of all iiis hopes and Wishes almost overcame him, yet his rea¬ son told him he should have prepared him¬ self for such a blow, as he had of late too plainty perceived that lady Frances did not regard him with the eyes of love; all the noblest passions of his soul arose in his bosom, disappointment and anger gave way to pity and generosity, and he re¬ solved to convince lady Frances how ten¬ derly he loved her, by preferring her hap¬ piness to his own. He therefore took his pen, and in the most affecting terms wrote
an answer to lady Frances, in which he resigned all his claims to her hand; though, he added, in so doing he gave up all hopes of earthly happiness, as he was convinced he should never fix his affections, on any other female. On the conclusion of his letter he sought his sister, lady Georgina, and informed her of the cruel blow which he had just sus¬ tained in the rejection of lady Frances. She was much hurt at the sorrow of her brother, though, with a generosity only equalled by his own, she pleaded in the behalf of her friend lady Frances, alleging how totally impossible it was to control y the feelings of the human heart. Charles replied, by shewing her the letter he had written to lady Frances. She attentively perused it.—" Now you are my brother," she cried; " continue to encourage these noble sentiments, and you will soon find the reward arising from honourable reso¬ lutions. Alas!" she continued, " perhaps, ere long, I may have occasion to put in
practice the theory which I now preach to you." " Heaven forbid, my dear Georgina, that you should ever experience the sor¬ row I now feel! nor can I comprehend why you harbour sentiments so injurious to yourself. Lord Arthur has voluntarily promised to unite himself to you on his return, and no doubt he will remain firm to his word, and confer happiness on my sister." Lady Georgina looked earnestly at him for a minute.—" Heavens!" she cried, " what a sentence is this! Though I part¬ ly drew it on myself by my incautious expression, yet believe me, Charles, I am not yet in so abject a state as patiently to await the decision of lord Arthur in my favour; tis very probable I may yet refuse him; my hand must be earnestly sought before I bestow it, and even lord Arthur must return more the lover than he left me, before I consent to become his wife " Charles saw he had unintentionally
touched a chord in her ladyship's heart, which, of all others, was the most unfa¬ vourable, namely* that pride which reigned with such powerful dominion in her bo¬ som as to absorb every other noble pas¬ sion ; he therefore pursued the subject no farther, but quitting her presence, and giving his letter for lady Frances to a ser¬ vant, he retired, and shutting himself in his own apartment, gave way to those feelings which his disappointment had oc¬ casioned, and which, notwithstanding his boasted heroism, nearly overpowered him. It was soon understood by the two no¬ ble families that the engagement was can¬ celled between lady Frances and Charles, and the earl had the pleasure of finding lord Lenox not in the least diminished in his friendship towards him on the account of his daughter's conduct; while Charles, with a generosity which did credit to his heart, even pleaded in behalf of lady Fran¬ ces, to whom the earl still continued unre¬ lenting, and treated her with the greatest severity. She was much affected with the
noble behaviour of Charles, for whom she felt the greatest admiration, thougli it was totally impossible for her to extend that sentiment any farther. - Meantime the earl secretly flattered himself that she would eventually be tired of confinement, and make concessions for her liberty; in this he was, however, to¬ tally disappointed, for in a very short time lady Frances effected her escape; her own maid was likewise missing, and it was evi¬ dent had accompanied her in her flight. All search proved ineffectual—no traces of the fugitives could be gained, and earl Campbell was at length obliged to give up all hopes of discovery. He entertained not a doubt in his own mind that she had eloped with her unknown lover; and so great was his fear iest he should prove her inferior, that he soon reconciled himself to her flight, preferring that she should re¬ main in obscurity, rather than openly dis¬ grace herself by avowing her marriage with some one much below her in point of birth and fortune.
Months passed on, and no tidings were gained respecting lady Frances, while Charles Lenox endeavoured to exert all liis fortitude to recover the shock he had sustained: he somewhat succeeded in re¬ gaining his spirits, though he had mentally received a blow which he feared he should never recover. Lady Georgina was assi¬ duously attentive, and proved a true and kind sister to him in affliction; he was "rateful to her, and in return obtained her confidence respecting her own private feel¬ ings, which, to every one else, were re¬ served and secret. During this period of time no letters ever arrived from lord Arthur, and all be¬ gan to be in serious alarm respecting him, as no one knew where to address him. At length, after nearly a twelvemonth, a packet arrived, addressed to the earl—it was from lord Arthur, in which he begged his excuse for his long silonce, alleging his uncertain ramblings as the cause: it was dated from England, at a small village'no great distance from London; at which
place, he added, he was so well pleased, that he intended to remain there some time longer. - He had not written a line to lady Geor¬ gina, and merely desired his remembrances, without even glancing at his engagements. The earl was much displeased with this want of politeness, and immediately, with all the policy of a Scotch courtier, endea¬ voured to make amends for this deficiency in his son by instantly waiting on lady Georgina; and after informing her that he had heard .from lord Arthur, added a long message of his own composing, which he asserted had been dictated by his son. Lady Georgina received it rather cold¬ ly ; and on being asked by the earl if she would write a letter to him in return, as he was going to forward an answer to him immediately, she replied by saying, that as lord Arthur had only sent her a verbal message, the same return was only neces¬ sary. The earl, mentally much displeased with lord Arthur, wrote him directly, com*;
manding him, in peremptory terms, to return without delay, and' fulfil his en¬ gagements with lady Georgina', adding, that certain unpleasing circumstances hav¬ ing transpired in his family, rendered it necessary that he should hasten his return, which was even now extended' much be¬ yond the limited time. The earl carefully' avoided mentioning the hame of lady Frances, or her 1 elopement, fearing lest the letter might 1 fall intoother hands; and so* tenacious was he of the honour df his family, that' he kept'the subjects secret as possible. The pride of lady Georgina' was again roused by the neglect of her lover,, which the earl observed with chagrin and pain; indeed he was in a situation which might be said to be a pitiable one; he had sacrV ficed in a 1 manner the happiness of his children-in commanding this'alliance, to f which he well knew they had both been averse, and he now saw himself in danger 4 of losirfg all his* promised schemes of'great- vol. I. d
ness; on lord Arthur all his hopes were now centered, and he remained in a state, of agitation almost beyond endurance, wishing, yet dreading the return of lord -Arthur. In this state of suspense he was kept much longer than he expected, when at length one day, without any previous in¬ timation, lord Arthur was announced. The earl, in a transport of joy, rushed to him x and embraced him, while his son stammered out something of an apology for his abrupt return; his air was hurried, and his whole frame agitated; his counte¬ nance was dejected, and bespoke a mind ill at ease. He inquired for his sister, lady Frances; the earl replied she was then ab¬ sent, and they would converse on her here¬ after. In a confused voice lord Arthur then mentioned lord Lenox and family, while the earl, making a suitable reply, ordered refreshments for his son; and after giving necessary orders, and the servants being withdrawn, he resolved to sound lord Arthur on the .subject so near his
heart. He began by remarking that lady Georgina was even, if possible, improved in beauty; and, after a long eulogium in her praise, concluded by congratulating his son on his prospects of uniting himself to such a lovely woman as lady Georgina. The earl almost gasped for breath, as he awaited an answer; his whole hopes now appeared to rest on the words of lord Ar¬ thur, who was evidently much agitated, and in a faltering voice replied—" I had not intended thus early, my lord, to speak on this important subject; yet as you have thus addressed me, I must be explicit, as it would be a cruelty in me longer to de¬ ceive you or lady Georgina with false hopes, with whom, I now positively affirm, I cannot unite myself." This dreaded sentence had no sooner escaped his lips than the earl sunk back in his chair; he could not speak—rage and disappointment overcame him. Lord Arthur was astonished at the violence of his feelings, and endeavoured to sooth D 2
him,—« It is in vain," at length cried the earl, " thus to address me; you know not what I feel at this culpable conduct ot yours—to have my long-cherished hopes thus annihilated by a boy, who is not wor¬ thy the honour intended him. You well know I had centered all my hopes in unit¬ ing our ancient house with that of Lenox, and to be thus totally disappointed—it is agony insupportable." " But, my lord," interrupted lord Ar¬ thur, " you will not entirely fail in your hopes; 'tis the conviction, of this which makes me thus endeavour to lay aside my engagements, as the alliance between my sister and Charles Lenox will join the two houses in those ties for which you are 1 so desirous." The earl, on hearing this speech, was quite overcome—he actually burst into tears, and taking the hand of lord Arthur, exclaimed—"Alas! you have yet to learn the disgrace which has fallen upon our house. Frances- has quitted my protec¬ tion; I have no longer a daughter—she
has basely fled from her engagements— she has wounded my honour, which was sta]ked for her; and scarcely have 1 reco¬ vered the shock, when my son, on whom I had placed my whole dependence to re¬ gain that honour which I have partly lost through her disobedience, returns only to wound it farther, by plunging me still deeper in the violation of my heart's dear¬ est treasure^— that honour which I never forfeited but through my children." ' . " Hold, my lord," cried lord Arthur, ** for mercy's sake, explain this dreadful intelligence! Oh! where is this dear, this unfortunate Frances ?" " I know not," replied the earl, " nor do I ever wish; she has disgraced herself, and she is no longer my daughter." He then gave lord Arthur an account of her attachment to her unknown lover, and her eventually eloping, and his inability to trace her steps. " In this state of dis¬ traction," continued the earl, " I have re¬ mained, but still cheered myself with the hope that I had yet a son to retrieve my
sinking honour, and who would glory in nobly fulfilling his sacred word. But, alas! he is also degenerate and fallen. But go on—pursue the path you have chosen— behold thy father spurned by lord Lenox, see his long-ficquired honours expiring at his feet; and when you have glutted your eyes, then repeat, with inward satisfaction —* I have completed the task begun by lady Frances—I have struck the dagger to the heart of my father." Lord Arthur beheld the agony of his father with horror; this was a blow for which he v/as not prepared; the honour of his family was dear to him as life, he saw the unpleasing situation in which his father was plunged, and whatever were his own private reasons for wishing to avoid an union with lady Georgina, he resolved to sacrifice every feeling of his own to save his father. As was his usual custom when any thing disturbed him, he took a few turns across the room, and then stopping before the earl, exclaimed—" To preserve the sacred honour of my father I
will make every sacrifice; your son shall yet fulfil your hopes—he will retrieve the sinking honour of your house." The earl caught his hand—this sudden gleam of hope again gave him new life; he could only exclaim—" Arthur, do not deceive me." " No, my lord," he replied; " every other consideration sinks in comparison with your sufferings. Frances! unfortu¬ nate girl!" he added, with a sigh, " may your happiness be permanent, as thy bro¬ ther sacrifices all his hopes to retrieve thy misconduct! yes, I now again pledge my irrevocable word to unite myself to lady Georgina." " My son," exclaimed the delighted earl, " thou art again my promised dependence; honour once more resumes her place in thy breast, and may the blessing of thy father fall on thy head!" Lord Arthur was affected with his fa¬ ther's joy, and felt at that moment he would give up every thing to ensure his happiness; his own heart was the seat of
generosity, and to that sentiment he yield¬ ed himself a willing victim. He now re¬ quested permission to retire in order to compose himself, while the overjoyed earl - sent off an express to Lepox House, to inform them of the arrival of lord Arthur Glendinning.
CHAPTER V.
You took her up a little tender flower, Just sprouted on a bank which the next frost Hacl nipt, and, with a careful loving hand, Transplanted her into your own fair garden, Where the sun always shines— — — __ __ — —There long she flourish'd, Grew sweet to sense and lovely to the cjo. Otway. The instant the intelligence was received at Lenox House, Charles; with all the warmth of a sincere'friend, immediately hastened to St. Michael's Castle, to give the welcome to lord Arthur, who received him likewise with every mark of esteem and cordiality; both were much agitated; in the bosom of Charles it revived all his sufferings in the loss of lady Frances, while lord Arthur, overpowered with com¬ bined feelings, could scarcely speak; but* d3
at length ventured to articulate something respecting the mysterious flight of his sister. " She is lost to me for ever," sighed Charles; " but here she still reigns with triumphant sway, and no other object shall ever efface her image from my bo¬ som. But," he added, looking earnestly at lord Arthur, " we may yet be brothers; lady Georgina remains firm to her engage¬ ments." Lord Arthur was affected, and at that moment felt how impossible it would have been for him to have broken his word.— " True," he replied, with quickness, " hap¬ piness awaits me in the possession of your r lovely sister, whom I am impatient to be¬ hold; and believe me, Charles, the plea¬ sure of my engagements will be doubly enhanced hy being able to call you bro- v ther." Lord Arthur here spoke the sentiments of his heart; generosity was his ruling passion, and while under the influence of
that power, he would have sacrificed every consideration of his own. Charles appeared pleased with the warmth of his friend, and offered to conduct him to Lenox House, and introduce him to lady Georgina. Lord Arthur resolved to persevere in the resolution he had taken, and therefore instantly acquiesced,- and delighted the earl by his readiness to visit lady Georgina, who now once more pro¬ mised himself the accomplishment of alL his wishes. Lady Georgina had heard,, with much secret emotion, the return 1 of lord Arthur; and on being informed, of his arrival at Lenox House, she endeavoured to collect her agitated spirits,, and throwing the na¬ tural haughtiness of her disposition into ■ her face, she repaired to the drawing-room to meet him. She had previously deter¬ mined to- receive him. coldly, in conse¬ quence of his visible neglect during his absence, whilst lord Arthur flew towards her, and seizing her hand, poured forth- every fond, expression. The dignity of.
her manners, the improved beauty of her person, again called forth his admiration, and almost enslaved his soul; and from that moment he resolve^ to bury all past -tender recollections for ever in oblivion, ancl to devote himself to lady Georgina. His soft attentions won upon that lady, and she relaxed in a trifling degree from her usual haughty demeanour. After this visit all parties appeared sa¬ tisfied, and in compliance with the wishes of earl Campbell, their union was to take place as early as possible: in the interme¬ diate time, lord Arthur was punctual in his visits to lady Georgina, who continued on good terms; and thougli that sweet reciprocity of mutual affection had not yet escaped their lips, they were, for fan shionable lovers, happy. But as the time approached which was to celebrate their nuptials, lord Arthur grew thoughtful and reserved, and sometimes very inattentive to lady Georgina, which did not escape the observation of her penetrating ladyship; but the proceedings had now gone too far
to retract, and both parties appeared to await the result as a matter of course. Lord Arthur had tried various means to gain intelligence of lady Frances, but in vain; while earl Campbell, contented that his son would fulfil his hopes, gave himself no farther trouble about her; he considered she had disgraced herself and family, and therefore was no longer worthy of his soli¬ citude or regard. Frequently did the ab¬ stracted manners of lord Arthur attract his attention, for which he always account¬ ed, by asserting that he was reflecting on the flight and loss of his sister. Lady Georgina frequently heard these excuses, but whether she believed them or not, re¬ mained confined within the limits of her own bosom, as she never condescended to communicate her opinions to any one, particularly respecting lord Arthur. At length the morning was ushered in with every demonstration of joy that was to unite the noble heirs of the two most ancient houses in Scotland. Lord Arthur arose, after a sleepless night, and repairing
to his dressing-room, summoned his valet; he almost involuntarily opened a box which stood on his toilet, out of which he took a ring composed of hair; he placed it on his finger, and in a transport of joy raised it to his lips, and imprinted on the insensible circle the most impassioned kisses; but suddenly stopping, he with¬ drew it from his finger, and striking his' hand against his forehead, remained for a minute lost in thought, unheedful of the presence of his valet, who having entered the room at the moment of his masters fervent rhapsodies, naturally imagined they were of course directed towards some- token of his destined bride's, and therefore did not wonder at his master's actions, who at length starting from his reverie,- and carefully locking up his treasure, sur¬ rendered himself to the hands of his man. The bells of St. Michael's tower now broke upon his ear, the lively strain of which ap^ peared to have no other effect than that of plunging him into a profound melancholy, from which he at last aroused himself with
a desperate effort, and instantly repaired to the earl, who received him with every mark of delight. The carriage waited to convey them to^ Lenox House, where an elegant breakfast- was prepared. Lord Arthur received the congratulations of his friends with that elegance which so distinguished him, and forcing his spirits, inquired for his lovely bride, who had not yet left her toilet. At length, like a beauteous rose just burstinp* from its transient covering, bloom- ing forth in native loveliness and perfec¬ tion, to charm the eye and delight the sense so arrayed, in conscious dignity ap¬ peared lady Georgina; a blush of modesty pervaded her countenance as she met the eyes of the company; for a few minutes she appeared embarrassed, but recovering herself, and calling forth her usual assist¬ ant to her aid, namely that pride which was her constant attendant, she attained her usual composure and dignity of man¬ ners. Lord Arthur almost went beyond himself
in his endeavours to express his delight at her appearance, and repeated softly in her ear his raptures at the pleasing idea, that in a short time he should be the possessor of that hand for which so many had sighed in vain. Lady Georgina fixed her penetrating eyes full upon him.—" No more, my lord," she cried; " compliments but ill accord with the sentiments of my heart, which scorns such flimsy effusions; sincerity, my lord, is tlie immediate jewel of our souls, and for that I would rather prize you than all else beside. Can you bear my scru¬ tiny?" Lord Arthur appeared confused at this pointed address.— " Why should you doubt my sincerity V he replied. " Can that man be insincere who professes the most ardent admiration for the loveliest figure nature ever formed ?" " Forbear, my lord, and speak the dic¬ tates of your heart." " On my soul / dor he replied; " to say / admire you beyond expression, is
.indeed the spontaneous effusion of my heart. And now, my charming monitor, will you be as candid in owning the feel¬ ings of your heart ?" Lady Georgina blushed excessively.—- <v That is a scrutiny which you, my lord, have never yet thought fit to make," she cried; " when I see you worthy its confi¬ dence, I will unfold to you its inmost thoughts and failings." A tear dimmed the lustre of her lovely eye as she spoke. Lord Arthur was af¬ fected; he took her hand, but was pre¬ vented making a reply, by the carriages being announced which were to convey them to the church. A bridal procession was arranged to pro¬ ceed before them; and on alighting at St. Michael's, young girls, in white, strewed flowers before the bridal pair. The cere¬ mony "w as read by the earl's chaplain, a ve¬ nerable old man; lord Arthur and Charles Lenci appeared the most melancholy of the party, as the latter forcibly dwelt on tlvi recollection of his disappointment;
lady Georgina conducted herself with her usual dignity; and the ceremony drew near to a conclusion, when they were- in¬ terrupted by a loud scream, which vibrated along the arched and vaulted aisles of the church. All endeavoured to fathom the cause—no one was to be seen from whence the sound proceeded. Lord Arthur in¬ voluntarily shuddered, his cheeks turned pale, and a trembling seized his whole frame; he appeared to fix his eyes, as if expecting the appearance of some one; but all remained silent; ancl after a short pause occasioned by the interruption, the ceremony was concluded. Lord Arthur, who now appeared the image of inward grief and horror, silently took the hand of his bride, and led her back to the carriage, in order to convey her to St. Michael's Castle, one wing of which had been fitted up in the utmost splendour to receive lady Georgina, it bc- inef the earl's wish that lord Arthur and his lady should fix their residence there, and thus keep up the usual splendour and
hospitality of that noble mansion. Lady Georgina had condescended to agree to this proposal, and had superintended the arrangement and improvement of the va¬ rious rooms designed for her ladyship's use. On their entering the castle, every mark of joy resounded throughout the walls, the bells of the tower kept up a successive peal, while the white favours worn by the domestics announced the joyful occasion. The earl beheld the completion of all his earthly hopes with inward exultation, he felt as if he trod on air, though the gloomy countenance of his son in a great measure damped the joy of his heart. Lady Georgina having retired to her dressinsc-room in order to throw off a beautiful hat and veil, was informed by her own maid, that a basket had arrived at the castle, directed to lady Glendinning. " To me!" replied her ladyship, in a tone of surprise; " from whom can it come, and what can it contain ?" " I don't know indeed, my lady; a
stranger delivered it, saying it required no answer * and I wait your ladyship's or¬ ders to unpack it, as it is directed for no one else to open it." " It is very strange," replied lady Geor¬ gina. " Bring it hither directly." Her attendant left the room, and soon returned, bearing in her arms a clean wick¬ er basket: it Was weighty, and she gladly set it on the table before her lady, who, with increased astonishment, beheld it di¬ rected to herself, and to be opened by her only. As this was, however, a piece of business not consistent for lady Georgina to perform, she ordered her maid to cut the cords which bound it together; which command she was not long in obeying, as a certain powerful passion, denominated by some curiosity, or designated by others under the more softened term of a very natural longing, had taken possession of her soul. w I dare say, my lady," she cried, as she cut the first cord, '* it is some beautiful wedding present—perhaps from lord Ar-
thur himself, who intends you this agree¬ able surprise." Lady Georgina shook her head incre¬ dulously, as the basket lid was opened; she cast her eyes on its contents, with her own fair hand she withdrew a white cover¬ ing, and beheld—not indeed a bridal pre¬ sent, as her maid had anticipated—not a rich display of costly jewels suitable to the occasion, or a glittering glare of dia¬ monds; it indeed contained a jewel, for in it was deposited the lovely gem of in¬ nocence—in a sweet sleep lay a beautiful infant, a rosy smile dimpled on its cheeks, which were adorned with the stamp of health ancl beauty. Lady Georgina uttered a loud and pier¬ cing scream at this unexpected sight, whilst her maid, following the example of her lady, shrieked aloud,-which reaching the ears of lord Arthur and Charles Lenox, who were conversing in a. room at no - great distance, they immediately! hastened • to the scene of* confusion, where their sur¬ prise was increased by-*the. explanation*
which lady Georgina, trembling violently, attempted to give. Lord Arthur appeared hardly capable of supporting himself, as he took a view of the still-sleeping infant. A paper was. pinned to its breast, addressed to lady Glendinning, which ran as follows: " If ever humanity touched your breast—if the sweet impulse of pity and compassion dwells within your heart— oh! then in mercy extend it to my help¬ less child; at such a moment as this, on which perhaps hangs your destiny, refuse not to protect this little unfortunate, who supplicates through me for your protec¬ tion. Oh! let her not plead in vain; fos¬ ter her as your own, and supply the place of her wretched mother, who now sleeps for ever in eternal rest; past all farther earthly sorrows, her spirit reposes—she is no more. To your hands she commits the wretched pledge of her unfortunate love to its perjured father; disdain her not— her birth is high, her family good; she is
three months old, and her name is Ele¬ anor" Lady Georgina dropped the paper from her hands, as lord Arthur, in extreme agi¬ tation, involuntarily uttered an exclama¬ tion of horror, as, raising the child, he gazed earnestly at it. His pressure awa¬ kened the infant, who opening its eyes, discovered a pair of lovely blue. Lady Georgina turned towards lord Ar¬ thur; she plainly saw his emotion,,and in a tremulous tone exclaimed—" What am I to do ?" " To do!" replied lord Arthur, violent¬ ly ; " have not nature and compassion al¬ ready pleaded in thy bosom ? Can you ask how to act, when you are already en¬ joined what steps to pursue?" " Do you expect, my lord," she cried, " that I shall adopt this child, so forced upon me?" " I not only expect," he retorted, *« but ' insist on your immediately protecting this little innocent. She shall be sheltered."
" You insist!" replied lady Georgina, while the glow of pride mounted in her cheeks; " is this a language to be directed to me?" Lord Arthur still held the child w his arms, who now began to utter a plaintive cry.—" I beg your pardon," he cried; " my compassion for this child led me beyond myself. I request then y6u will coincide with mc in affording our protec¬ tion to this helpless babe." " For Heaven's sake!" cried Charles Lenox, in a voice of extren-e agitation, " let not this circumstance thus early cause a dissension between my dear brother and sister. For my part, I own myself greatly interested for this little Eleanor; for, if I mistake not, she has claims upon us ail. Look at her features ;.do they not forcibly remind you of——*" " Of whose?" vehemently demanded lord Arthur. " Of one, iny-lord," he replied; " whom I shall never forget, and whom I now again behold'in this infant. Need I say
bhe is the exact copy < of lady Frances? Yes, my heart tells rae she is the unfortu-> nate mother. Qh! let us then protect her child: I will adopt it." Lord Arthur appeared to revive at this declaration, and seconded the sup^sitiony while lady Georgina shook her head doubt¬ fully, and fixed" heroes' upon lord Arthur, who now again entreated that she would receive the child; Charles Lenox also pleaded for her compassion, till at length her ladyship agreed to receive it. She could not deny the resemblance it bore to lady Frances, but she did not appear to believe it to be her child, as, she added, in a tone of sarcasm, there were other rea¬ sons to be assigned for her likeness, which were more probable. Lord Arthur confusedlv asked those reasons. " I dare say, my lord, your own heart can answer you that question," was her reply; " and, if not, I choose to bury my ideas for ever in the oblivion of my own VOL. i. E
bosom: suffice it to say, she shall be taken care of, and I will protect her, let her be whose child she will; yes," she added, with energy, " the first action of my mar¬ ried life shall be that of shewing you that I rise superior to a contemptible preju¬ dice ; and however I may feel the pangs- of suspicion, I will adopt the unfortunate Eleanor,"
CHAPTER VI.
VI hare is there faith and honour to he found ? Ve sods, that guard the innocent and guide The wpak, protect and take me to your care; For, oli, I love himl—there's the rock will wreck me. Whv was I tnade niih all my sex's softness? ~~ — — — —Vet, to conceal its f lilies, I'll be a true woman—rail, protest my wrongs, fiefroUe to hate him, aad yet love him still. Otway, The important and mysterious event of the new-found infant greatly interrupted the tranquillity of the wedding-day; it was evident lord Arthur took great in¬ terest in its fate, and certainly he was vi- sibly gratified at kdy Georgina's consent¬ ing to receive it; but it had caused the most unpleasing sensations in the bosoms of those whom it appeared most to con¬ cern; lord Arthur was particularly agi¬ tated, inasmuch that, during tne remain- £ 2
der of the day, he was so dejected and ab¬ stracted, that it called forth the attention of every one; and he would have rather appeared as a chief mourner at a funeral, than a happy bridegroom/in the posses¬ sion of beauty, wealth, and splendour. Lady Georgina watched his every look; the most uneasy sensations were passing in her mind also; while Charles Lenox openly avowed his emotion at the opinion he had formed respecting the little Elea¬ nor, as it so forcibly brought the image of lady Frances to his imagination; and lord Arthur so strenuously asserted i his' belief in the opinion of Charles, that he acknow¬ ledged how much his spirits were shaken on the occasion; " for," added- he, " does not this senseless paper express that its unfortunate mother is no more ? and the conviction of this torments me beyond endurance—her clay-cold form rises before my eyes, and drives me to madness." ,He paused, and striking his forehead with his hand, appeared - almost convulsed with agony.
The earl, who was now present, and had been made acquainted with the strange appearance of the infant, expresoed his disapprobation of lord Arthur's conduct. __" Is the remembrance of lady Frances's error ever-to be a drawback to our happi- siess?'Mie exclaimed. " For shame, Ar¬ thur! is' this a time to indulge such a weakness as this? Your feelings are, at most, excited merely on supposition— you only imagine this child related to you, and have suffered your ideas to lead you beyond yourself." " Indeed, my lord," cried lady Georgina " I must own I think lord Arthur's emo¬ tion very natural, as this unfortunate babe has doubtless claims of the strongest na¬ ture on him, as likewise to your lordship." The earl started.—" Do you believe then that she is the child of lady Fran¬ ces?" he inquired,—Lady Georgina paus¬ ed, as the earl proceeded^—" Does your ladyship think seriously that this little object, forced upon your bounty, is really my grandchild'?"
" I do indeed, my lord/' f quickly replied lady Georgina; " I would stake my life upon her affinity to you." ? *^ - » 1 Lord Arthur started from hiss reverie, -and fixed his eyes upon his lady, while the earl, struggling i with > his feelings, which arose at the call .of, nature, and pleaded for his lost* daughter, but sup¬ pressed by pride, exclaimed—'* If that is indeed your ladyship's f opinion, and to which I certainly pay all due deference, I must in that case, I suppose, receive,this litde outcast, and place her under my pro¬ tection ; though the world must not know our private thoughts concerning her." " Pardon me, my lord," interrupted lady Georgina, with great warmth, " this helpless babe has been sent by its unfor¬ tunate mother to me. How far she may have been culpable is not for me to judge; I can only pity her sufferings, and drop a tear at the idea of her misfortunes." . > ^ . Lord Arthur here arose, and taking the hand of his bride, gazed at .her with s inde¬ finable expression, whilst her ladyship,
casting a■:; look of full meaning on hi m, thus proceeded:—"This-innocent pledge of her guilty intercourse with its unknown father she ^has 'bequeathed' to my protec¬ tion, I have already said I will receive % andt your lordship must pardon me when I say she sliall remain under my immedi¬ ate: guidance; nor will : I relinquish the right: bestowed on me by her mother; and in this L know I meet-the wishes of lord Arthur.":^ -v^nj- : : J*:v.: v ■^■■i:^ ■■■.;y-:-.^- ; ;; il-fv" You do indeed,^'he quickly replied; .fv.arid'rl must thank a your, ladyship for your acquiescence to my will, and express my /admiration at your .sentiments*, which, aslfar as, related to the wretched .mother, supposing her to be the unfortunate Frari. ces, does credit to your heart, and exalts you in my estimation" ■ ^ i " Indeed, hiy lord, : then," interrupted her ladyship,*;"' Iam not desirous of gain¬ ing i your r good; opinion only through the channel-of ;:my compassion to the mother of Eleanor, who, for ought 1 know, may be arir object of. reprehension rather than
pity. Doubtless your lordship..can, best define that question.'' i .-..,,*, ;; .' She cast a look so expressive jon> lord Arthur, that, he could, not .misunderstand . - her; the glow which mantled on his, face gave evident, proof of his quick concep¬ tion. Lady Georgina read Ms .feelings; she felt a giant in strength, who in a mo¬ ment could crush the worm before her; she turned from him with an expression of haughtiness which stung him to the soul, and he mentally exclaimed— *f I will never be a woman's slave; she shall yet learn that I was not born to wear the gall¬ ing chains of pride and disdain.. Oh! why am I thus married? Alas! could I but have followed the dictates of my heart, how different now would have been my feelings! As it is, united -to such a wo¬ man as lady Georgina*r~r' ! . , ■ . Lord Arthur here checked \he progress of his thoughts, and sinking ori his chair, reflected that he was wronging lady Geor¬ gina. She had that day, evinced a noble¬ ness of sentiment which increased his ad-
miration* andhe felt dissatisfied with him* self; for, strange as itmay appear, though he acknowledged the superiority of his bride's /understanding, and admired her exalted and noble expressions, which she had poured forth in the instance of the little Eleanor, yet he did not love- and all liis future prospects appeared as a blank. Lady Georgina had given the most li- * beral orders respecting the helpless babe, who, she affirmed, should have a proper nurse provided for her, and be brought up under her own eye. Both lord and lady Lenox had been much disconcerted at their daughter's having had such an unpleasing event forced upon her at such a time as this, and much chagrined at the visible dejection of lord Arthur; nor was earl Campbell less uneasy on the occasion —every, circumstance appeared to combine to thwart his long-cherished hopes; his son had irrevocably acceded to his wishes, but his whole behaviour during the day was so replete with discontent and wretch-. E3
edness/ that > the earl was a.'preyt'fo the most uneasy sensations, and heavily passed on the time. < "* * *«: ■ ^ The attention of lord Arthur -was en¬ tirely devoted towards Eleanor,, while'ihis bride almost appeared -neglected, and her presence unheeded by him who ought to have been the most alive to all those ex¬ quisite feelings of the lover and husband. This behaviour was not lost upon lady Georgina, and, as it may be supposed; suited not with" her ideas of superiority; accustomed ever to the most flattering attention of both sexes, and universally courted and admired by the gentlemen, how was her pride awakened by the con¬ viction that he, on whom she had conde¬ scended to bestow her hand, was cold, and even wanting in common politeness to¬ wards her! Sensations of the acutest kind were thus early impressed, even on l her wedding-day, and the result proved exact¬ ly as might have been expected. Lord Arthur and his kdy were merely united by the ceremony of the church, and lady
- Glendinning,' stung to the heart by his neglect,'adopted a reserve and haughtiness of manner, which unfortunately operated ori lord Arthur with the most poignant dislike. 1 ;- r '•; 'i '• * ." ' >• Lady Glendinning,-true to her promise;. bestowed a great share of her attention towards the little Eleanor, who flourished under<the protection-of her benefactress; and'a few 'months made a visible altera¬ tion in the'little infant, who grew apace, and continued'improving-in beauty and strength. Lady Glendinning was herself much attached to her protegee, but she was- unhappily the innocent cause of all that lady's sorrow, for she beheld with-in¬ ward agony the interest which lord Arthur took in her fate;, the little Eleanor was his whole delight; frequently would he pass hours in caressing her; the. company of lady-Glendinning' was slighted for- Elea¬ nor. .Oftendid'her ladyship behold him 1 sazinjr on its features with rapture and enttiusiasm;"and> then press the most ar¬ dent' 1 kisses on its innocentvcheck; it/was 1 .
at such times as these that lady Georgina, unable to conceal her feelings, would ad¬ dress him in tones of sarcasm bordering on reproach..—" Were it not, my lord," she one day exclaimed, " for the affection. you bestow on this child, I should almost think you void of all those feelings of the heart which are incidental to human na-j ture—feelings which, since our weddings day, have appeared entirely to be absorbed in your own abstru&e reflections. How¬ ever, I see you can call forth the senti-. ments of affection where your heart is in¬ terested, as in tlie instance of this child, who is so fortunate as to engross the whole of your attention." " Certainly," replied lord Arthur, in a tone of warmth. " Can you suppose this child must not be dear to me ? Her doubt¬ less affinity renders her doubly so; my sister stands before me in her, and for her unfortunate mother's, sake I almost dote on her." " No doubt," interrupted her ladyship; i( but the motiwr dwells most forcibly an,
your imagination.: , Ah,, my, dord! my lord! when you first parted "with since¬ rity, you sunk yourself below your fellow- creatures, and reduced yourself to an ob* jeet of compassion;, yes, my lord, justly offended as I am, still I pity you." Lord Arthur started up, and v casting a look of anger on her, exclaimed—" This is a language to which. I have not been accustomed, nor will I suffer it,to be di? rected towards me, even by j your ladyship; the haughty presuming spirit of # woman was ever my utter abhorrence, while gen«r tleness and humility had power to capti¬ vate" my soul. You, madam, are, now in possession of my sentiments on that head, and it lies in your own power to insure my future approbation,' or to, create total indifference, by pursuing ,a mode of con¬ duct with mei which, < though it may sue* ceed in awing! a lover, will never :gain you the affections, of a. husband, who is„resolved to preserve the prerogative,of this rights "v . Lord Arthur proceeded to,the.door, and hastily left the room. >• Lady Glendinning
gazed ^silently > after him for some time her cheek became flushed,- the starting tear glistened in her eye, and for a few minutes she gave way to her emotion, fiom which she was roused by the infan¬ tine caresses of the little Eleanor, whom lord Arthur had left in the room. Lady Georgina gazed on it with increased agi¬ tation—" Alas!" she cried, " thou inno¬ cent cause of all my secret grief, thou little knoWest the daggers thou art daily destined to plunge in this unhappy bosom! Sad ,task for me to fulfil! Could thy mo¬ ther know my feelings, even she would pity me. -Oh ! why did I ever marry ? ? '- ■ <• As she uttered this last sentence, earl Campbell entered the apartment,*, and im¬ mediately enquired into the nature of her present griefs .Her ladyship endeavoured as much iis a (possible to conceal^ the real cause, but the earl was convinced it was occasioned { by r the behaviour of > his son,' whorfivhe immediately sought' out, and warmly'^remonstrated 'with "him- on -his unkind* treatment*to ladysGeorgina; who,
he added, was now in a situation to call forth his tenderest concern, and who, in all probability, would soon confirm their hopes, by giving an heir to their house. Lord Arthur was somewhat softened, and on his next meeting with his lady he conducted himself with more tenderness towards her than he had done since their marriage. The earl was overjoyed, and he once more flattered himself that their union would yet prove an auspicious one. Lady Georgina soon fulfilled the wishes of her family, in giving birth to a son; and, in justice to lord Arthur, we must avow he received the precious gift with all the transporting feelings of a fa¬ ther. This circumstance appeared to have wrought a change in his sensations to¬ wards his lady, and for some years they lived in a state of harmony. Her lady¬ ship bore him two more infants, both girls, which comprised their family, whcf grew up endowed with every promised qualification. Robert Glendinning, their- son, - early
displayed a nobleness and ingenuousness of disposition which endeared him to every one; his person was the counterpart of his father's, and the handsome features of lord Arthur were visible in the face of his son. His next sister,. Georgina, was also a most lovely girl; her disposition was good, though tinctured with some traits of her mother's pride, to which she united a dis¬ position of such extreme liveliness, that rendered her absolutely giddy and vola¬ tile. The youngest, who had been named Frances, after her unfortunate aunt, had early exhibited strong symptoms of de¬ cline; and although every advice was pro¬ cured, the distracted parents beheld her consigned, at the early period of twelve years, to the tomb. This distressing event caused the most painful sensations in the bosoms of all, and in none more so than in the breast of the affectionate Eleanor, whom, though we have not yet noticed, was not the least interesting of the juve¬ nile group at St. Michael's. She had watched with unremitting zeal the crisis
of the little sufferer's fate, and beheld with acute agony the painful termination; she received the last sigh of Frances on her bosom, and repressing"with Jieroic forti¬ tude the grief of lier own heart, she en¬ deavoured to pour comfort into the wound¬ ed minds of lord Arthur ancl his lady; while the former, after gazing on her with looks of admiration, and taking her hand, exclaimed—" I am not indeed bereft of all—I have yet a treasure left me; yes, my Eleanor, thou art still preserved to me. Thy efforts to sooth my. mind shall not be in vain; from this moment; sweet girl, thou art doubly endeared to me, and never will I forget the mild and winning condolence uttered to me, in ^the^ moment of distress, by my heroic Eleanor." <
.. .-:-vl ■ f >i:-r-,>XHA-PTER-:-yiI^-:..v .-«: ' >■ . v Beauteous was she, as the beam ■ \-.\\ ■• . Of eve on Derwent's stilly laUe— Pure as th* unsullied 'parent'stream, -' ■'■'■•..';■ 'That glitters to' the' par : tiat gleam,": :■-.'.:; iFrom mountain's, top or flow'ry brake., ■ ■ ; . ■ .. Uer neck as fancy's pictures fair, : ' • ■ •.;;;: And o'er that neck her waving hair 1 ''"' Fl6w'ilJbriglit,"'lu*tirious,''like tlie shroud '::'■■ •: 'Of morn on suramer's loveliest cloud;? <■..,-,,.;. pf.deepdelicjous blue, her eye,., ; ' ; ■ ,^ Mock'd■ night's serencst,.clearest sky. _ Wrnz above/elegant lines were truly appli¬ cable to ouriyoiing heroine, who united to a person of bewitching loveliness a dispo¬ sition attuned to sweetness and amicabi¬ lity. Eleanor, at the above-mentioned period, had attained her seventeenth year; she had been brought up under the eyes of her protectors—lord Arthur and lady Glendinning had spared no pains in the
cultivation of her mind, and she had shared in all the accomplishments bestowed on Robert and Georgina Glendinning. Her quick capacity in receiving her instructions gained her universal admiration, whilst the urbanity of her manners, and disposition so peculiarly fascinating, rendered her an object of enthusiastic regard; her mind was softened with all those genuine marks of feeling which so truly adorn the female character, to which she united a firmness and courage almost beyond her years; in short, Eleanor was every where the uni¬ versal magnet of attraction; and lady Glendinning beheld, with some degree of chagrin, the superiority which tslie at¬ tained over her own daughter, whose gid¬ dy disposition rendered her merely a plea¬ sant companion for a moment, as the vo¬ latile ebullitions which flowed from her heart were too flimsy to retain attention from her auditors. Lady Glendinning fre¬ quently looked on Eleanor with sensations of pain; a harsh expression would some¬ times escape her lips towards the innocent
disturber of her impose, which, if in the hearing of lord Arthur, generally termir nated in dissension between themselves. Jjord and? lady Lenox had always ex¬ pressed their disapprobation of the little intruder,; as they styled Eleanor; arid the injudicious mother was ever inflaming the breast of "lady (Georgina, by her remarks and disapprobation of lord Arthur's evi¬ dent partiahty towards Eleanor. A violent dispute had arisen in the fa¬ milies respecting the name Eleanor should bear; it was necessary she should have some appellation to distinguish her, and lord Arthur gave it as his opinion, that as she was supposed to be the daughter of lady Frances, it was right she should be called Miss Glendinning. To this lady Georgina at first strongly objected, as she conceived it putting her too much on a level with lier own daughter. - Charles Lenox, who had ever been a staunch friend to Eleanor, coincided in the opinion of lord Arthur, as he firmly believed her to be the child of lady Frances,
as her surprising likeness to that lady and lord Arthur grew daily more observable. On hearing of the dispute* he, however, with much native generosity, desired she might bear his name—" I 1 intend her td be my child by adoption," he exclaimed'; " let her therefore adopt the name of Le¬ nox, and I will take care she shall possess the means to support that name with the dignity due to our noble house." Lady Lenox and lady Glendinning heard this proposal with greater anger than the first; that a poor dependent, forced on her daughter's bounty, should bear their ancient name, filled the haugh¬ ty soul of lady Lenox with inward rage, and she warmly expressed her disappro¬ bation; while lady Glendinning, after a few minutes' Consideration, exclaimed-^ " There is no necessity for this subject to bear farther discussion; I have certainly the greatest right, in regard tc this unfor¬ tunate child—a right which her dying mother, as it appears, bequeathed to me. It would have been rny wish to have
Called her f by some name irrelevant to our families; but as it is the wish of lord Ar¬ thur that she should be designated by the appellation of Glendinning, I yield to his better judgment, and agree with him, that she has doubtless the greatest claims to that name," Her ladyship here cast her expressive eyes on lord Arthur, who fully understood her real meaning; but seeming not to no^ tice it, he merely thanked her ladyship for her acquiescence to his wishes. This little affair thus settled, Eleanor had been taught to call herself Glendin¬ ning; and as she grew up, a faint outline of her supposed affinity to lord Arthur had been related to her, while the bosom of poor Eleanor frequently cherished an uneasy sensation, in the idea that some mysterv attended her birth; and as reason unfolded itself over her expanded mind, she frequently sighed to herself—" Alas! who were my parents ? If I am indeed the offspring of the unfortunate lady Fran¬ ces, and who is thought to be no more,
who then is my father ? does he also sleep in death? or,? if not/ .why does he not claim his child, who would pant to receive a father's embrace ?" ■ j Eleanor would sometimes sink under these painful ideas; but (recovering her¬ self, she would reflect on the kindness of lord Arthur, who behaved towards her as a father, and she loved as such. To lady Glendinning she also bore the sentiments of affection; but the coldness with which that lady always treated sher prevented her natural ebullitions of esteem, and she could only treat lady Glendinning with respect, not with love. Earl Campbell was also cold and repelling to her, and the haughty lady Lenox seldom condescended to notice her at all. With lord Arthur and Charles Lenox she was a universal favour¬ ite, and in their regard and favour she felt happy. Eleanor was also greatly attached to het young friends, with whom she was per¬ mitted to associate; nor was a single in^ dulgence bestowed by lady Glendinning
on her own 1 children in. which Eleanor did not partake; and her ladyship truly fulfilled the trust reposed higher, in regard to the morals and education *of her prote* gee; she indeed.appeared to evince a de¬ termination to convince the world how much pains' she bestowed in the welfare of the unknown Eleanor, while lord Ar¬ thur plainly shewed how much satisfac¬ tion he took in her improvement; nor did he regard even his*own children with more- affection and delight; the little Frances had ever been a great favourite with her father—long sufferings and patient for¬ bearance had endeared her to every one,! and it was with feelings of the acutest na-' ture that lord Arthur beheld her consigned to the tomb. Ever since her decease a melancholy appeared to pervade his mind, from which nothing had power to rouse him but the kind attentions of Eleanor; frequently did.he wander to the church of St. Mi¬ chael's, and proceeding to the spot where the little Frances had beeri interred, he
would often indulge in his meditations. It was one evening ,that, in the exercise of his favourite custom, he entered the sacred building, and proceeding down the vaulted aisle, reached the silent tomb of liis daughter; the evening was far ad¬ vanced, and the moon, rising in majestic splendour, darted her chaste beams through the Gothic windows of jthe church; the scene was at once solemn and consonant to the mind of lord Arthur, who, folding his arms, stood for some, time in the atti¬ tude of deep thought; the striking ele¬ gance of his person, and the visible traits of gaiety which his features had evidently once..exhibited, formed a contrast to his now sad and melancholy demeanour.— With an eye moistened by a tear of affec¬ tion, lord Arthur bent over,the marble urn which was erected, and with parental love perused the inscription; he then took a book jfrom,his pocket, and recollecting a beautiful passage from a poem by Rogers, as peculiarly applicable to his feelings, he r^ad ( alpu4 the following liues^-r- VOL. i. E
"At length the father, vain his power to snve, Follows his child in silence to the grave— That child how cherish'd ! whom he would not give, Sleeping the sleep of death, for tdl that live — - Takes ti lust look, when not unheard the spade v Scatters the earth, as * dust to dust* is said— Takes a last look, and goes; his best relief, Consoling others in that hour of grief; And with sweet tears and gentle words infusing T , The holy calm that leads to heave-dy musing." At the conclusion of this sentence lord Arthur paused; a sweet and religious awe appeared to steal over his frame; he re¬ flected on the alteration a few years had made in his own disposition—he who had in youth been one of nature's gayest vota¬ ries, was now become, through private sorrows, which were confined within his own bosom, a melancholy personification -of grief. A deep-drawn sigh burst from his lips, as he again leant over the tomb: iit was immediately answered. Lord Ar¬ thur, in violent agitation, started up: no one was to be seen, or a sound to be heardj yet he was convinced the sigh was re -sponded. He listened with silent appre* hension, but all remaining quiet, he en-
deavoured to persuade himself that it must only have been the wind murmuring through the vaulted aisle. His thoughts reverted to the morning of his ma-riage, when all had been alarmed by the piercing scream which had broke upon their ears, tlie cause of which had never been ascer¬ tained.—" Strange spot of mystery!" lie involuntarily exclaimed, " how forcibly does the recollection of that hour dwell upon my memory! Oh, fatal day! oh, inauspicious union!—Could I but recall the past actions of my life!—Oh I if I had been but permitted to make restitution to that injured form, what a weight of grief would have been removed from this guilty bosom! Dear sainted shade!" he conti¬ nued, sinking on his knee, " if thou couldst witness the contrition of this heart, thou wouldst at least own that some atonement had been made for thy wrongs—thou wouldst evert pity thy cruel destroyer." He paused, as a convulsive sob of agony burst from the lips of some hidden form. Lord, Arthur arose, and trembling with f %
horror, demanded, in faltering accents, who thus participated in his grief? No answer was returned him, and in great apprehension of who might have heard his unguarded expressions he remained for some moments. The shiides of night were fast taking place, and lord Arthur felt a superetitious fear assail him, which he in vain endea¬ voured to shake off; the solemnity of the .scene, the tomb of his child—all conspired to render it awfully terrific Ashamed of his own weakness, lord Arthur determined ^to 1 leave the place, ^vhen a voice, with great solemnity, pronounced the name of « Arthur!" His lordship, 1 with sensations of frenzy, turned from whence the sound proceeded; J but who'can describe his horror on be¬ holding J a figure retreating behind his ^daughter's tomb ? Her form was' enve¬ loped in sable garments, and'along black veil was partially-thrown over her face. -Lord Arthur uttered'a groan* of horror— i«*' Merciful Heaven 1" ho cried, ^ do* my
senses deceive me? Thai form-:-----Oh! speak to me, and say it is not delusion." The figure waved its arms in-silence, and slowly retreated. A mist seemed to overpower the sight of lord Arthur; he staggered a few paces — his head grew giddy—he paused; when again casting a fearful look, he found the figure had-va T nished, and he was alone, His feelings were roused f almost to madness; he rushed vehemently down the aisle, he searched every aperture, but nothing was to bo seen or heard; and after remaining for nearly an hour in fruitless search, he re¬ turned to the castle. Lady Glendinning was out at a party, and lord Arthur proceeded to the drawing- room, where Eleanor was seated alone* The wildness of his air, the disorder of his dress, and, above all, the agony of his fea¬ tures, attracted the attention of Eleanor, who, in a voice of kind alarm, inquired if he was not well. .Lord Arthur threw himself on achair, aiid seizing her hand, gazed on herwith.a
look of horror that terrified the affrighted Eleanor.—" You are ill, my lord," sl^e cried; " permit me to get' you. some ad¬ vice, or at least inform me of the nature of your complaint." " " Tis here, Eleanor," he replied, violent¬ ly striking his breast—? 'tis in my heart, in my head, in my very soul; my brain's on fire." " Pray, my lord, compose yourself," in¬ terrupted Eleanor; " you terrify me." " Terrify youT exclaimed lord Arthur; " talk not you of terror, 'tis I alone who have witnessed cause for terror; for, oh, Eleanor! I have seen thy------" He stopped short, and leaning his head upon her - shoulder, actually burst into tears. This in some measure relieved him, while Eleanor repeatedly inquired what he had seen ? Lord Arthur recollecting his folly, ndw endeavoured to persuade her it was only the disorder of his spirits, which had been depressed by remaining too long at his daughter's tomb, and charged her, upon
,- \ J the forfeit of his favour, never to disclose to any one his wild expressions, or ever again to question him on "the subject. Eleanor promised to comply with his wishes, and lord Arthur enforcing it on her mind, i^tired to his chamber for the night, while Eleanor remained alone, ru¬ minating in silent wonder and horror at the agony evinced:by lord Arthur. :i , _ \
1 'AnU'tnelniicliolymarUdhim for her"own. G'b'aV. The preceding- circumstance hadmade so deep an impression on the mind of lord Arthur, and so completely disordered his nerves, that a severe fit of illness succeed¬ ed. Lady Glendinning, in ignorance of the state of mind in which lord Arthur had returned home, supposed it only to be the effects of n fever incidental to the human frame; not so Eleanor, who was convinced that his lordship's indisposition arose from no common cause, though she dared not to reveal her secret opinion to any; his incoherent sentence of—" Oh, Eleanor! I have seen thy------" still vi¬ brated on her ear, and raised a powerful sensation in her mind. He hud owned he had been at the tomb of Frances, but how
could that apply as relative to her? Fran¬ ces was the name of her supposed mother, who likewise, as it was believed, rested also in peace; had she broken through the confines of the grave, and revealed herself to lord Arthur ? This idea Eleanor instantly banished, as too weak and super¬ stitious to be for a moment encouraged; yet the effect was such that she deter¬ mined, on the first opportunity, to visit the tomb alone, and at least endeavour to find out the recent cause of lord Arthur's alarm. His lingering illness, however, made it impossible to effect her wish, as she was his constant companion and, nurse while on the bed of sickness. On the first of his confinement lady Glendinning had constantly attended in his chamber; she listened with wonder and horror at the many wild and incohe¬ rent sentences uttered by him in the height of his delirium, which always in* creased in the presence of the earl, who> frequently visited him; lord Arthur always i F 3
addressed him with upbraidings, accusing him of forcing him into a marriage he ab¬ horred. These sentences were not lost up¬ on lady Glendinning, who heard them with sensations of agony and disappointed pride; still she remained his kind attend¬ ant, until one night, having declared her intention of remaining by his side during the whole of the night, lord Arthur vio¬ lently started up, declaring lie would have no one but Eleanor with him. This asser¬ tion was enough for lady Glendinning; she quitted the room, and hastening to her own, she burst into tears: the proud spirit of her ladyship was at length sub¬ dued, and for a while she indulged in the weakness of her sex; but again her pride returning to her aid, she recovered herself, and from that moment gdve a new turn to her feelings, and in a short time lady Glen¬ dinning appeared quite an altered woman —her ladyship sought in the vortex of dissipation for that pleasure which her ©wn domestic ills prevented her from en¬ joying.
Lord Arthur continued long on the bed of sickness, during which time t Eleanor was his constant companion; nor did he appear to taste any happiness but in her society., Lady Glendinning seldom now visited him; she daily made inquiries as to the state of his health, but never made a second proposition of remaining by his side, while lord Arthur appeared perfectly contented with her absence. His daughter Georgina was of too giddy a tender to allow her to be an inmate in a ock room, and with her mother she flew lo scenes of dissipation, to which she was e^rly intro¬ duced. Robert Glendinning, with unremitting assiduity,, attended on his father, and sit¬ ting by the side of Eleanor, exerted his efforts to amuse. Every action, every word of Eleanor's, appeared to convey pleasure to both father and son. Robert, verging, fast into manhood, and only a year younger than Eleanor, beheld this lovely object with eyes of affection; his heart was formed in nature's softest mould,,
eleaStorv' tb- wrnih'liie^^ctrfefi;i refinement 6f temper wfii^A l ^eyite.n'eai , ala's !• to plunge' hini in> to miiny "ef ifs ; . MeMoi: loved him 1 : with - trieafTectibii of c. sister/ and uhdonscioiis of. the' faM; pasaioii which was rising' iri the bpso]^ Gf Kobeffc, sYie' bestowed on liini' the most 'Every' marks of her regard'. The sick- iSaKiber Of lord Affhur had beeri.the nursery of love, for Robert had been a' close rtttendant there, because' ; Efe a^hor >vas its. inmate* Lord Arthur at IehglJi rsc'overed from his ilmesS;' bi>t how-' differeTpit wa's iiow liis appearance! I-Iic spints were absorbed in a deep. melancho^, from which no efforts could arouse hini, arid no one would have believed the once gay - aiid elegant idrd Arthur to be the same emaeiatdd arid p* hsive; misarithrbp'e. Eleanor s"aw with pain the fatal change in Ker beloved behe^ factor;: she was fully aware* that a secret pang assailed his bosorii, but all her efforts tb gaih a'Hy knowledge of the c^iise wes'e iherle'ctual, as he carefully avoided revert¬ ing to trie higlit of his •visit tb the tomb
of Frances. Eleanor still sighed for ans opportunity to repair to it herself, but her close attendance on lord Arthur prevented her; uor was it until some months after his- illness that an opportunity offered itself.^ It was now in the height of summer, and Eleanor, with Robert, had drawn lord Arthur to the Window, in order to breathe the fresh air; the evening wds lovely and serene, and calculated to inspire the bo¬ soms Of this susceptible trio with the most exquisite sensations. Lord Arthur fixed his eyeS on Eleanor, and viewed her at¬ tentively; and at length remarked that she had lost some of the native bloom of her cheek, and tenderly inquired if she Were riot well? She replied in the affir¬ mative, While Robert suggested the pro* bability of her long confinement having hurt her health, by having been deprived of her accustomed exercise. Lord Arthur coincided in this opinion, and begged her to take advantage of the present time, by taking a short ramble in the grounds. Robert instantly offered toustompany
her;-but Eleanor wishing to be alone,, begged him to remain with his father, who would doubtless find himself dull without a companion. Robert turned an anxious eye upon his- father, who, con¬ trary to his expectation, and to his great chagrin, requested him to remain with him. Eleanor therefore departed alone. This was the moment for which she so* long had sighed;, and with a quick step, and a heart beating with apprehension, she entered at a private door to the church of St Michael's. Though possessing a heart naturally courageous and firm, she could not divest herself of a secret dread which assailed her. With a slow and si¬ lent step she proceeded down the^aisle which contained the tomb; she stopped,, as she thought she heard a human^voice;, a trembling seized her frame, and she leaned for aid against a huge pillar which supported, the massy structure; she scarce¬ ly allowed herself to breathe,, lest she should discover herself to the cause of her alarnr juira&in an instant she heard a voice
in pathetic wildness sing the following verse of Queen Mary's Lamentation*:— <• I si»h and lament me in vain, ' ' " ' T ' These walls do but echo my moan; ,; Alas! it increases my pain, - , , When I think on the days that are gone." Eleanor was almost transfixed to the spot with surprise; yet recovering herself,, she resolved to approach the tomb, from x whence it was evident the sound proceed¬ ed. With cautious steps she approached, and beheld a figure leaning over the tomb; its hand was extended towards the top of the marble.' Eleanor gave a faint shriek; the figure wrapped its veil closely over its face, and instantly disappeared.. "Oh stay, thou fleeting vision!" cried Eleanor—" Oh! in pity to my feelings, reveal this mystery—say what art thou, and why dost thou wander over this con¬ secrated spot ?" " 'Tis a fond mother lamenting over the bitterness of her fate, in being torn from her child—from her beloved offspring," replied a hollow voice..
1 " : Aniazement!" ejaculated' Eleanor. Could it be lady Glendinning mourning over the tomb of her child ? was her first idea; but the voice, she was convinced, was not her ladyship's. She now advanced to the tomb, and beheld a paper lying on the top; a faded rose was placed on it, to which were affixed the following lines:—
« THE ROSE. Addressed to Lord Arthur. M In the sunshine of youth, when henrt's-ease was mine, And my breast was, attun'd to repose, I cull'd a bouquet of sweet eglantine, But my garden produe'd not a rose. I sigh'd for a rose. «' My nosegay I view'd with delight and with pain, Such sweets did its fragrance disclose; « How perfect!' I cried, ' could 1 but obtain Tiie odoriferous scent of the rose ! It wants but the rose.' K Not long did I sigh ; iny lament was o'eiheard; For, ah ! the truth I iiow must disclose; Tlie youth that I lov'd before me appear'd, And bore in his hand a fresh rose; Yes, 'twas ,the sweet rose.
«Tinsflowefi'-he'excTaimM, 1 ^ a short 'ti'trie will flourish^-v . .How sweet is thescerttitbestbws! /. ;-J | ;: ;'. _- : [ In thy bosom then place it, and love with it nourish; For I love thee, I swear by this'rosei' I-sighM as he^ave'iric 1 tbe roSeU "1'he roise^preser'v'd with affection and'care^- Sad'emblem'of sorr'6\v"ancl wbes! Ah! : why did I smile on' the cruel betfayer,; ^ . , ; > Who stungras he gave mc .the. rose.? His truth'wTtHeVdTast with' the"rosev " Yet still I have given it a place in my breast; I have watch'd the decay of' its blobni; Tis an emblem of love which once thou profess'd,' But now'tis consign'd to the tomb, ; . And faded, alas!' is the rose. «' Then weep o'er-thy child, weep oyer this ilower. And weep in rcniorse o'er my woes"; Oh!' thiitkl oh the time} reflect on:tlie hbur,'i When thou gav'st-me-a tlio'rn- with the-rose-: * ■ r Ah! remember the rose." To describe the'surprise of ElVariOr,- oh the perusal' of the above lines, is ; impot£ sible, and: she remained with 1 them ; in her hand, doubtful hb# to proceed j w'H'eh : the' sarhe hollow' vbice again exclaimed-- ""Eleanor, bediscreet^-bei silertt; the time shall come when thou shalt know more;
be thine the task to convey that scroll to lord Arthur. Farewell, sweet girl! we shall meet again." Eleanor sav/ a form flit along the vault¬ ed arch, and vanish at the farther end; she almost doubted the whole scene, and thought it the effects of illusion; but the paper and the faded rose which she held in her hand convinced her of its reality, and she resolved to convey them to lord Arthur. With feelings of the keenest nature she slowly left the church; the mysterious figure occupied the whole of her thoughts, she appeared uncommonly interested in her fate, and would have given worlds, had she possessed them, to have elucidated this mystery. Doubtless it was this same form that had so alarmed lord Arthur. She again thought on his strange excla¬ mation towards herself. Was it possible this awful figure had any connexion with herself? could it be tlie lost lady Frances? This was a doubt which Eleanor could not answer, and lier senses were so disordered
that she could hardly think it was an earthly being she had seen. '"- ' ' In a perturbed state of mind she reached the castle; she dreaded the task she had to perform, in presenting to lord-Arthur the paper containing the rose. He was preparing to retire for the night, and on her return, after inquiring if her walk had benefited her, he bid her adieu, and re¬ paired to his chamber. Eleanor had not the courage to speak on her mission that nigh'c, and therefore wishing him a farewell, withdrew to the drawing-room. Lady Glendinning and her daughter were, as usual, both out, and she sat herself down to ruminate on her strange adventure, when Robert entered the room, and taking her hand, tenderly inquired how she found herself, and ex¬ pressed his regret at not having been able to accompany her in her walk, which, he added, would have given him such plea¬ sure. " You had a greater pleasure afforded you than that," replied Eleanor; "for you
had thesweet task of affording amusement to a parent." ..;■ , tc True," cried Robert; " yet, believe rae, 1 my dear Eleanor, nothing, can give mefsuchffelicity as being in>your society*. such pleasure* it is to be with those we loveL!' He' 1 gazed? tenderly on her, with a look so f full of expression that; Eleanor could not but understand him; she felt dis¬ tressed' and 1 confused, and endeavouring tO' turn the conversation, she pleaded^ a Violent headache as an excuse for retiring to her own room; while Robert, with un¬ feigned^ arixiety^ expressed his fears for her health; and^ pressing her hand between his own, tenderly wished her a-good-night
CHAPTER IX.
*' Thue was a time," he said, in niild Henrt-humblcd toucb, " beloved child, i , When young, and haply,pure as thou, I look'd and pray'd like thee; but now------" He hung liis head; each nobler aim, And hope, mid feeljug, vyhich had slept Tiom boyhood's hour, that instant came Iresh o'er him, and he wept—ho wept. •iLalla Rookh. The next morning Eleanor, with a.pal¬ pitating heart, repaired-to the chamber of lord Arthur, :>s was herusual'icustom,'in order to inquire »into the .state, of his health; ske found him<absorbed,, as usual, in melancholy contemplations, from which her presence *only aroused * him. f -Ke-cast a pensive ^mileoniher—■a-smilesoJexpres- •sive-of tenderness, that it deeply affectdd her. Conscious of the nature- of 'her* mis¬ sion to'hinvshevfeltso^extremely agitated
tYiat her voice trembled as she addressed him. He saw her visible emotion, and taking her hand, tenderly inquired the cause- Eleanor still hesitated—she knew not now to address him; when his lord¬ ship again demanded the reason of her evident agitation. " I am agitated, I own, my lord," she at length falteringly replied, " because I have to speak to your lordship on a sub¬ ject which will, I fear, give you pain; it is the conviction of this that renders me thus weak, and almost unable to proceed." " You surprise me, Eleanor, by this preface," cried lord Arthur; " what can you have to impart > to me, that should cause so much emotion ? But, be it what it will, speak freely; I am well attuned to misery; therefore, should you give me ever such pain in your communication, fear me not; I will hear all; you cannot wound a heart already probed with wounds keener than you can give. Speak on then without fear." " It is the conviction of your lord-
ship's mental sufferings," returned Eleanor, " which makes me thus hesitate to inflict a pang on your mind; yet, Heaven knows, I am made a reluctant messenger to you; but I dare not disobey commands given to me in so awful a manner." " What is it you mean?" interrupted lord Arthur; " speak, I say, and keep me no longer in suspense." Eleanor bowed her head, and proceeded —" I last night, my lord, paid a visit to ihe spot which has claims to me in the cause of affection and regret; it was to the tomb of our lamented Frances." " To the tomb of Frances!" reiterated lord Arthur, while his whole frame under¬ went a total change. " Ah! then," he continued, " I see the cause of your fatal preface; you are now aware, I suppose, of all—Yet, what am I saying ? Go on; tell me instantly all I have to hear." Eleanor, terrified at his violence, related, in trembling accents, the particulars of the mysterious form, and concluded by pre¬ senting the rose and the paper to lord
Arthur. He snatched them from her hand, and in extreme agitation read the verses, on the conclusion of whjch he threw him- . self op a chair, and clasping the rose in his , hands, exclaimed—" Too well I remember thee, thou pledge of ill-fated love! 0\\, rEleanor! .Eleanor!" he continued, " why ,hast thou inflicted such u torture as this on my already-shaken frame ?" ^"Indeed, my lord," cried Eleanor, "I .would not willingly have added a ,pang to your sorrows; but how could I avoid obeying a mandate so awfully given ?" <4 I did not accuse you? .replied lord Arthur-^"il did not say you tortured me." " You repeated my,name,,my lord," she cried: •" I thought you addressed me." " True," 0 he cried,' "J did repeat your name. Oh, J$leanor!Jook on me well; I am, the veriest wretch in existence. Pre- pare to hear* wonders. That form which you last night.,saw,«and which I have so ,long .believed, numbered with the, dead, i( fWho^^niyMjpjrd?" demanded Eleanor,
as his lordship made a deep pause, and struck his forehead with his hand. She knew not why, but her own fate appeared; to hang upon his answer; her feelings were roused to agony, as she repeated her question of-—" Who, my lord ?" " Do not ask me, Eleanor," he replied; " why should I unfold to you the know¬ ledge of that which will make you hate me? A fatal secret weighs heavy npon iny mind, but I cannot yet divulge it; the time may come when I shall unfold it to your view. Eleanor," he added, af¬ fectionately pressing her hand, *' I think you love me. I have, I trust, fulfilled my duty by you. You possess my best affec¬ tions ; yes, child of mystery, when over¬ powered by painful reflections, 1 have looked on thee, and amidst the most agonizing sensations I have found com¬ fort in your smiles. I could not then bear to think you despised rae." His lordship paused; he struggled with his weakness, but nature uncontrolled vol. i. o .
overpowered him, and he actually burst into tears. Eleanor supported his head on her shoulder—lier own dewy drops mingled with his.—" Compose yourself, my lord," she cried; " could I be so un¬ grateful as to despise my benefactor, my friend, my more than father ?" Lord Arthur looked mournfully in her face—" How ill do I deserve that name!" he replied. " Eleanor, you no doubt think me a strange being; but if, as you assert, I have been kind to you, bear these my inconsistencies with patience; pity those sufferings at which you in secret wonder, and sooth my distracted state of mind when you see me oppressed beyond my .strength; but, above all, conceal from every eye the knowledge of that myste¬ rious form, and reveal to no one the cause ■of my misery; on your discretion I rely. And now I would request that you would desist from your visits to the fatal tomb; yet I- know not why I ask it, for nature 'will have.,-way; therefore use your own discretion, only promise me inviolable sc-
crecy to all you may see and know; assure me of this, and you are at liberty to act as you please." Eleanor sunk on her knees before him —" I solemnly promise to remain for ever silent on this subject," she cried; " ard should your lordship ever think me wor¬ thy of your confidence), I will repose it in the inmost recesses of my heart, till which time I will cheerfully exert my simple ef¬ forts to draw your mind from its wonted gloom. Command my actions, limit my loiiffue to vour own wishes—I will be all to you; for, oh, my lord! something at this moment pleads at my heart—I feel I am allied to you by some close tie. For¬ give my presumption; but you have ever given me reason to suppose I am the child of yourisister, your affectionate niece. Oh then refuse not the ebullitions of my heart, which overflows in gratitude and, love!" " My Eleanor!"my dearest child!" ex¬ claimed lord Arthur, as he clasped her iu his embrace. g 2
Eleanor was agitated to the extreme-^ she sobbed aloud, as the door opened, and lady Glendinning made her appearance; Lord Arthur hastily concealed the paper and the rose; Eleanor, in great confusion; arose from her knees, while lady Glendin¬ ning looked at each in silence. Lord Ar¬ thur walked up and down the room in evident dismay, when her ladyship, break¬ ing the silence, cried—" I was not aware your lordship was engaged, or that I should have intruded at such ah affectino; moment; I came, my lord, merely to speak to you on affairs.of consequence, little supposing that my visit would have proved so ill timed. Over your lordship's actions I pretend to have no concern; I have long since ceased to disturb you with my inquiries or solicitations; you j my lord, are therefore master of your own actions; but over you, Eleanor, I feel I have some authority. From the moment you were committed to my care^ it be¬ came my duty to watch over your actions; and I will do you the justice to say, your
conduct has been uniformly correct; but, in the present instance, I feel myself jus¬ tified in calling upon you for an explana¬ tion of a scene to which I have been an unintentional witness." ** Oh, madam," exclaimed Eleanor, " you have a right over every action and thought of mine—your kindness to a poor outcast orphan, like myself, demands my utmost gratitude and obedience; yet, in the pre¬ sent instance, I fear I shall lay myself open to your indignation, as I cannot ex¬ plain a scene no doubt much misjudged by your ladyship. Yet, oh think not too harshly of me! indeed, indeed it was re¬ flections of the most painful nature which reduced me to the situation in which your ladyship found me." The tears flowed so fast from the eyes of Eleanor that she could not proceed. Lord Arthur saw the agitation of her soul, he knew the real cause, and resolved to release her.—'* Eetire, Eleanor," he cried, " and compose yourself; I will ex*
plain all there is to explain to lady Glen¬ dinning." Glad of this permission, Eleanor turned a timid glance on her ladyship, and curt¬ seying respectfully, withdrew, while lord A* thur, turning to his lady, exclaimed— " You appear, madam, to have strangely misinterpreted this late scene, which had, on its commencement, the most pure and innocent intentions." " Your lordship is mistaken," replied lady Glendinning; " I have as yet put no constructions on your conduct, I only in¬ quired of Eleanor upon what sentiments she thus prostrated herself before yoiu Rut, my lord, you have dismissed her from my presence: it is evident you wish the inquiry avoided. You arc the best judge of your own conduct, and be as¬ sured, my lord, I will not stoop to a se¬ cond inquiry, nor will I endeavour to gain the confidence of any one who would not willingly and voluntarily repose it in me. I came, my lord, to speak on a subject of
importance respecting my daughter; but as your lordship appears not in a very fit state to give me the necessary attention which the subject demands, I wiil retire for the present, and await your leisure." ' " I will attend on your ladyship in the drawing-room," cried lord Arthur, " as soon as I leave my chamber, when I shall certainly give a willing hearing to all that concerns Georgina, or that your ladyship may think proper to unfold." Lady Glendinning bowed her head with an expression of haughtiness, and with¬ drew ; while lord Arthur, left to himself reflected in mental agony on the foregoing scene-—his feelings appeared roused to madness. The mysterious rose and lines were again viewed, and alternately pressed to his lips; too well he knew the fatal allusion contained in the verses—he alone understood their real meaning; and he remained best part of the morning in re¬ flecting over the mysterious transaction, until at length recollecting his promise to
lady Glendinning, he endeavoured to com¬ pose himself, in order to join her. The communication which her ladyship had to unfold to him, was that where the dignity of her family was concerned, and in which she was obeying the proud and lofty commands of lady Lenox, whose whole concern was that of keeping up the. ancient greatness of her house—her whole soul was .wrapped up in the idea of dig¬ nity; and as soon as the two heirs of Glendinning were verging into years of maturity, she began to reflect in her own mind who would be proper objects fop them in a matrimonial alliance. She had already frequently consulted lady Glen¬ dinning on the subject, who, though anxi¬ ous to see the dignity of her noble house still supported by her descendants, had not as yet troubled herself with these thoughts, alleging the youth of her son and/daughter as a reason, who had not, she believed, yet formed any attachment of the heart.
ELEANOR. " It was* for this very reason, lady Lenox replied, that proper means should be taken in order to direct them to pursue a right path, before any foolish prepossession might arise in favour of any one below them. For Robert, she proceeded to say, she had not found any object yet on whom he might bestow his hand ancl for¬ tune ; but for Georgina she had such pro¬ posals offered to her acceptance as could not be rejected by any of her family. Amongst the few whom the aspiring soul of lady Lenox had condescended to; rank among the number of her friends, was lady Cecilia Gray, a maiden lady, whose similarity of disposition hacl gained' her a place in the esteem of lady Lenox: both were tenacious of their family ho¬ nours and pride, and considered all below them in rank as too inferior to issociatcr with. Lady Cecilia resided with her bro¬ ther, on a beautiful estate in Scotland..' The right honourable the marquis of B, ------was many years younger than his,
sister, and at an early period having had the misfortune to lose an amiable wife, he had invited lady Cecilia to become'his in¬ mate, to which she had readily consented. The marquis had one offspring, a lovely boy, who was the darling of his heart, as likewise the delight of his aunt, who watched with unremitting zeal over his youthful years: nor were her care and at¬ tention ill bestowed; the young lord Montalban had, from his childhood, dis¬ played a disposition adorned with every virtue that could grace his sex; his heart was open, generous, and sincere, while his mind was attuned to sensibility and soft¬ ness, vet possessing the utmost cheerful¬ ness and gaiety of temper. His person was a counterpart of his good qualities, and in his sparkling black eyes you might read the vivacity of his soul; he was in¬ deed a true pupil of Lavater, as his coun¬ tenance was a real index of his mind. Such was lord IMontalban as he advanced into manhood—free from all the vices and follies of some of our young men of fa-
shion, as to his natural gaiety of disposi¬ tion he added the gems of wisdom and discretion. The marquis and lady Cecilia liad only parted with him for a short period, for the improvement of his studies; but as he was now approaching his one-and-twen- tieth year, the marquis had sent to the university at which he was, to desire his return home; and' lord Montalban was quickly expected in Scotland. Lady Cecilia, whose whole hopes were centered in her darling nephew, whom' she had declared the heir to her vast pos¬ sessions, had set her mind to work in or¬ der to find out an alliance worthy his" acceptance; and this in confidence she* mentioned to her friend lady Lenox, who immediately suggested the idea of her 1 granddaughter becoming lady Montalban, as their fortunes and high rank in life were every way so suitable. Lady Cecilia was delighted with the proposal; lady Lenox, she considered, was the daughter' of a duke, and her descendants were con-
sequently of great importance; and the two young, people were therefore in a manner betrothed together by these ambi¬ tious matchmakers, who never considered unity of hearts as being of any conse-- quence. Lady Lenox undertook to gain the acquiescence of her family, while lady Cecilia hinted she possessed too much power over the marquis and his son to fear any objection on their part. The ladies, therefore, mutually pleased with the prospect of their high alliance, parted; and lady Lenox took an early opportunity of informing lady Glendin¬ ning and her daughter of the proposed union. Lady Glendinning, whose own heart was ever alive to the dignity of hev. family, approved of the alliance, wliile the. giddy Georgina, unacquainted with any of those soft and exquisite sensations so. necessary to render the marriage state happy, only declared her delight at hav¬ ing so elegant a young lord as he was de¬ scribed to be, in her train. , Lady Lenox expressed her approbation...
at her granddaughter's conduct, and de¬ clared nothing now should prevent the match, as she was certain that lord Mont¬ alban would be sensible of the honour con¬ ferred on him in receiving the hand of a descendant of the house of Lenox. -It was in consequence of the above in¬ formation that lady Glendinning paid her mala-propos visit to lord Arthur, to ac¬ quaint him with the proposals made for his daughter; and on his lordship joining her in the drawing-room, she repeated them to him. Lord Arthur, whose whole mind was occupied on other subjects, heard it with indifference, and merely replied, that of course he should ever feel anxious for the welfare of Georgina, nor could he object to such an alliance; he theieforc left it entirely to her ladyship to use her own discretion, as, for his own part, he added, he had long ceased to set any value on grandeur and ambition, since they were both so totally unconnected with real hap¬ piness.
" True, my lord," "replied her ladyship; w I' coincide in your opinion; I have for some years now found their fallacy. Yet though my own once-brilliant prospects were early blighted, still >my children's aggrandizements are dear to my soul, and I look forward with hope to that time when the heirs of Glendinning shall shine forth with that dignity with which their mother was once possessed; and oh may their virtues, as well as their high descent, grace the proud and ancient houses of Lenox and Glendinning!"
> 3 <> ! I ' " i < y ) ' " v . ' )/ '. ..'. * ^ CHAPTERS. - Delightful task! to rear the infiii.t mind, '- And teach the young idea how to shoot. Thomson*.
An habitation, giddy and unsure, Until he that buildetll on the "Vulgar hcait.' Shakespeare. Eleanor had retired to her own room, glad of the permission given her by lord- Arthur to quit a scene in which she had made so awkward a figure; and she almost dreaded to meet the penetrating glance of lady Glendinning, who she w'as fearful- might misconstrue her behaviour' to lord Arthur; and, should her ladyship again question her on the subject, she knew not how to answer her, as she had promised lord Arthur to bury the fatal cause of their mutual embarrassment in her own bosom;
and she was resolved, let what would be the consequence, never to betray him. She reflected on the strange events which had transpired at the tomb, and could not divest herself of the idea that she was in some way connected with the mysterious female. A vague idea crossed her mind that it was lady Frances; she was then doubtless her mother: her heart beat at this surmise. Had she then been in the presence of a parent ? " If so," she men¬ tally exclaimed, " why does my mother fly from her child ? oh! why docs she not bless her EleaUor with a maternal em* brace?" Again she checked the wildness of her thoughts. The language of the verses crossed her recollection; were they such as a sister would address to lord Ar¬ thur? Too surely riot—it was the^ com¬ plaint of slighted'love; and oni the per¬ usal of it lord Arthur had evinced, by his. agitation, that he had rightly ^understood^ their hidden meaning. Eleanor therefore' dropped the idea her imagination had led her to form, and <sighed, as she reflected;
she could Hot fix her wandering thoughts- in a right channel. She continued in her own room the re¬ mainder of the morning, dreading the hour of dinner, when that would bring her to the presence of lady Glendinning: her fears on that head, however, proved groundless, as that lady took no farther notice of what had passed, but behaved towards her with her usual demeanour. Eleanor also found herself somewhat re¬ lieved by* finding a family party present^ consisting of earl Campbell, lord and lady Lenox, and Charles., - Lord Arthur had' previously promised to^make his first appearance,' since his ill¬ ness, in the dining-parlour, and the'above party had agreed to meet him, iu order to offer their congratulations on his recovery. Lord Arthur was compelled to make his appearance,, but the incident of the morn¬ ing had' again so shaken his nerves, that he could scarcely support himself at table," Eleanor .beheld. the agitation of his mind,, and his abstracted manners and de^
meanour, with silent wonder; his melan¬ choly communicated itself to fhoiy and in silence she continued during the meal. It was* true, Robert, who was by her side, attentively watched her, and endeavoured to draW'her into conversation, as by all the rest she was unnoticed and disregard¬ ed, Charles Lenox excepted, who ever be¬ haved towards her with the utmost kind¬ ness. The conversation chiefly ran on the ex¬ pected return of lord Montalban;- and Georgina, laughing violently at the praise bestowed on him by lady Lenox, declared she longed 'to see such a paragon as he was described to be; and added, he 'must indeed be all perfection, or she should be greatly disappointed. * ' ■ " I have no fears of that kind," replied lady Lenox; ** my friend, lady Cecilia, speaks of him in the t highest terms. ,»I have not seen hmv since he was a boy, but he then promisedto be )anv ornament to his noble house;' and I assure you, Georgina, I cannot give hihva higher
proof of rny approbation, than by consent¬ ing to his alliance; with a descendant of mine; and I expect, when you are intro¬ duced to him, you will receive him with the, dignity, due to your family;" ; ■-,■■, ; s e " Oh never fear me, gmndmammai'- she replied; *' I will summon up all: the pride of your ancient house into <my coun¬ tenance, which ishall serve as.a memento mori, to remind him that I am the great granddaughter of a dukej and consequent¬ ly not . to.' bei approached without all due respect."; ■ - .'■/■■•fci :-.:'.-■.• W.i.\i : '.'? ; Lord Arthur, who had hitherto kept a profound silence.during N the above 'disser-. tation, now first broke it^? by replying Ito his daughter's giddyjspeech;-r-;" I should hope, Georgina;" he ; criedj^.if;you?per ? ceive lord Montalban is reaily the amiable character which,he is described to be, you will receive him: with that modest dignity so pleasing?in a female.: Trust me,;Geor¬ gina, pride,-though sometimes a necessary evily;will never captivate /a man of sense; i^: you wisk forvhappinessi ? thereforeiid"
the married state, banish all traits of that unamiable quality from your bosom; the woman who treats her lover with haugh¬ tiness, will find that he, when transformed into a husband, will r resent the indignity offered to his understanding."' He turned his eyes on lady Glendin¬ ning, who fully understood his allusion; she, 'however^ remained silent on the sub* ject, while earl Campbell, with his usual policy, gave a turn to the conversation, fearing lest any unpleasant- discussions should take place. - On dinner being ended, it was with some difficulty that lord-Arthur was pre¬ vailed on to remain with the gentlemen, as his mind was in a state of distraction; and the earl was convinced that some pri¬ vate cause of'sbrrow dwelt in his son's bo¬ som, though of what nature he knewnot; he was aware that' his union with lady Glendinning had not'contributed" to his happiness, still lie saw no cause why he should so evidently v give himself' Up to melancholy; unless he had indeed some-
private source of uneasiness; this lie could not ascertain; he was therefore compelled ta~confine his ideavS to his bosomi and he endeavoured, though in vain, to arouse his son from his dejection—lord Arthur remained silent and abstracted; it was true, he was profuse in drinking glad ac¬ knowledgments to, his wine^ and with which he kept supplying .his guests, but it was plain he endeavoured to drown his own thoughts in the glass. The ladies, on retiring to the drawing- room, had entered into their own conver¬ sation,- in which Eleanor had no interest; indeed, in the presence of lady Lenox, she always felt restrained; lady Glendin¬ ning always paid great attention to her mother, and the subject of their discourse again being lord Montalban, Eleanor had ho share m it J She stood for some time at 'the .window, contemplating -on, the beauty of the evenings and reflecting how much slie had, of late, been deprived of en¬ joying her ^favourite exercise in visiting tlie neighbouring village, which.place,was
the seat" of her bounty; from her earliest childhood she had sought out the poor, who by her hand had been relieved from many distresses; and as reason had guided her iri her charitable purposes, it had prompted her to an act which had already benefited many a child of poverty. ' Ele* anor had observed the number of children, who,, through the poverty aud careless¬ ness, of their parents, were brought up in a total state of ignorance, unacquainted with the least rudiments of education, or, what wat, still worse, without the least sense of religion; a plan, therefore, en¬ tered her 'head * to save her little fellow- creatures from this distressing fate, and she had quickly communicated her inten¬ tions to-lord Arthur and his lady, who had both applauded i her generous motive. Her proposals were, to arrange a school for their daily instruction, and at'her own expence to provide able assistants to teach her little flock, who were likev/ise to meet every ; Suiiday to attend on divine 1 service. Lord Arthur had always liberally 'supplied
her with money, and the generous heart of Eleanor felt no pleasure equal to that of appropriating it to the use of the poor; lord Arthur had also given her a large house in the village for her benevolent purpose, and here, under the guidance of a proper governess, had Eleanor beheld many a child of ignorance trained up in the paths of religion and instruction. Lady Glendinning had also contributed her year¬ ly subscription ,to this institution,i and it was carried on in a .flourishing state. Eleanor used daily to repair to the schoolhouse, and, inquiring into the me¬ rits of her infant train, reward them ac¬ cording to, their deserts; it afforded a sweet gratification, to her heart to see a number of youthful countenances beam¬ ing on her with delight, while their pa¬ rents, as she passed along the village, would t bless their patroness, and hail her a* their guardian angel. Of this pleasure Eleanor had, of la^e been deprived—her long and close attendance on lord Arthur
had prevented her from her visits to the schoolhouse; but this present evening ap¬ peared to be a renewed opportunity; her presence, she saw, could be easily dis- pensed with; she therefore turned to kdy Glendinning, and expressed her wishes to that effect. " Certainly, Eleanor," replied her lady¬ ship; " I never wish to prevent your cha¬ ritable intentions; therefore bring me word how your young flock improves, and any comfort I can procure them shall not he withheld." Eleanor gratefully courtseyed, and with¬ drew; and tying on her hat, proceeded to¬ wards the village. On her first setting out, the church of St. Michael's had crossed her ideas; she almost felt tempted again to enter it; she paused. Should she en¬ counter any fresh horrors, it would only prove a source of fresh misery to lord Arthur; and why should she wish to tor¬ ture his already-harassed mind ? She was tlierefore resolved for that night to avoid
it, and she bent her course towards the village, which was nearly the distance of a mile from the castle. On arriving at the place of her bounty, her approach was witnessed with pleasure;. old and young welcomed her with un¬ feigned delight and gratitude. She re¬ ceived their honest praise, with that mo¬ desty, with that sweetness which so dis¬ tinguished her, and hastened her steps to the schoolhouse, where she found her little nock assembled; their daily tasks were over, and, under the care of their kind mistress, they were indulging in their childish sports. On the entrance of Ele¬ anor, each little heart evinced its joy at her appearance, and all crowded round to display some marks of,their industry. Eleanor applauded their zeal, and turning to their governess, made her inquiries as to their proceedings during her long ab¬ sence. A very good account was rendered to her of their industry,. and Eleanor de¬ clared they should be rewarded for their VOL. I. H
application, and proposed a treat for their good behaviour; it was nearly the third anniversary of her charitable institution, and she signified her intention of giving them on that day a little festival, and in the evening a dance on the green, at which she would herself attend; and de¬ sired that all the young people of tho vil¬ lage would assemble, while the aged should be made comfortable within their own dwellings. This proposal was received with. rapture, and all promised to deserve the intended treat. '* I assure you, madam," cried their go¬ verness, " my little flock is highly fa¬ voured by all around; for, during your absence, we have also had a most charm¬ ing lady frequently to visit them, who has bestowed marks of her favour, by pre¬ senting them with trifling but useful gifts." . ..; : '«.Indeed l'\ replied Eleanor; " and who is this kind visitor?" . "There lies the wonder, madam," re¬ turned the governess; " no one knows
who she is, nor does she reveal herself. She appears, I think, greatly dejected, but a more lovely figure I never beheld, and she is a welcome visitor to our school; but who she is, or what she is, I cannot tell, and there appears such a sort of me¬ lancholy tenderness in her behaviour, as forbids all attempts at rude inquiries. I have been tokl she lives in this village, but it is in so retired a way, that no one knows any thing of her. On her first coming here, she inquired into this insti¬ tution, and expressed her regret that her means would not permit her to add to their stores. I informed her of the bounty of lord and lady Glendinning, and of your liberality, who had first raised the idea. I thought she appeared much agitated as she cried—' Heaven will bless the virtuous Eleanor; she wiil find her reward.' I co¬ incided in her opinion, and she soon after withdrew; since which time she has occa¬ sionally repeated her visits." Eleanor expressed her surprise at this H 2
Strange account, but desired that no idle curiosity should prompt any of them to inquire into her private sorrows, which were, and ought to remain, sacred to her own bosom. She then, telling them all to prepare for the approaching treat, and giving a sum of money for all to appear in a neat new frock, departed, amidst the blessings of the objects of her bounty. As she had been absent some time from the castle, she now hastened her steps, as she was aware that the tea-table would be waiting her presence. She was crossing the high road, in order to turn down a lane which led to the sequestered spot of St, Michael's, when her ears were assailed by violent screams, which were repeated with such rapidity, that Eleanor remained for a minute terrorstruck; yet recovering her alarm, the idea of some accident hav¬ ing happened to a fellow-creature passed her mind, and she instantly returned to the road, and at a little distance beheld a postchaise broken down, from whence it was evident the screams proceeded. Ele-
anor quickly advanced; no one was near save herself, it being a retired part of the road, and no habitation nearer than the castle: as she approached, she saw a dash¬ ing young man, who, between exclama¬ tions of pain, was violently swearing at the postboy for having such a shattered chaise, which, he said, he was sure could not again carry them on their journey. " Oh dear! oh dear!" cried a female voice, " what are we to do ? I am sure I shall be kitted? " Not so bad as that, my dear, neither,'* said the gentleman: " let me assist you out, and we must endeavour to find some abode till we can proceed." " If there's any where that's genteel,"* replied the lady, " I shall be very glad to go; but I know I slialldie" Eleanor now made her inquiries, and tendered her services, at the same time hoping they had met with no serious hurt. « Why no, ma'am," returned the gen¬ tleman—" only the fright, I believe—-ex¬ cepting slight bruise on my arm. But
I should be much obliged to you, if you could inform me of any habitation to which we can repair." i " Ah! do, Miss," cried the lady, who was now released from the broken vehicle —>' do tell us whether there is any place near that is at all genteel, for I can't en¬ dure to go amongst vulgar people," > Eleanor was almost ready to smile at this address, while the gentleman, in more polished language, repeated his inquiries, alleging that his arm grew seriously pain- " At a short distance, sir," replied Eleanor, '« stands the Castle,of St. Mi¬ chael's, at which place I reside; and I am sure lord Arthur Glendinning, its master, will willingly extend his hospitality to persons in distress. If you think tiie lady can walk there, I will conduct you." " Oh yes, Miss;" cried the lady, " I will walk to any where that's genteel; and to be sure, as you say that it's a lord's house, why it must be the height of gentility. Therefore, my dear," she continued, turn-
in<r to her husband, " let us go as quickly as possible." The gentleman, now addressing Elea¬ nor, exclaimed—" I cannot, ma'am, ex¬ press my thanks sufficiently for your kindness, but for which I know not what we should have done; and you must at¬ tribute Mrs. Conway's wild expressions to the agitation of her mind, occasioned by the fright she has sustained. And now may 1 be favoured with the knowledge of our kind preserver's name? , I presume it is a part of lord Arthur's family I have now the honour of addressing ?". *' Glendinning is my name, sir," replied Eleanor; while Mrs. Conway, looking at lier with a smile of complacency, cried— " Well, this is lucky, that we have fallen into such genteel hands." Eleanor now. begged they would pro¬ ceed towards the castle; and directing the postboy to the village, Mr. Conway de¬ sired him to lead his horses ancl find a lodging for himself, at the same time ge¬ nerously putting some money in his hand;
.152
and, telling him to inquire the next day at the castle for him, noAv turned to his lady, who, in a voice of assumed conse¬ quence, cried—" Yes, you will hear of us at lord Arthur GlendinningV As Mr. Conway assisted his lady along, Eleanor took a view of her figure, which was extremely vulgar, inclined to en bon point, and short in stature. Her dress was shewy to the extreme, and had it not consisted entirely of white materials, would have been ridiculously fine. A large hat, ornamented with an immense plume of ostrich feathers, almost concealed her face, on which nature had not set her most lovely stamp. Eleanor looked with some wonder on her companions, whom she thought but ill matched, as Mr. Conway was rather elegant in his person and mmners, though too much the appearance of a dashing buck. He was evidently younger than his lady, and Eleanor could not help thinking he felt ashamed of her behaviour, as, though she kept expressing her wishes
in favour of every thing genteel, Eleanor was convinced she was far from it herself, and that money perhaps alone constituted her consequence. She kept ^complaining of the fright and hurts she had received, and it was with great difficulty that, sup¬ ported between Mr. Conway and Eleanor, she arrived at St, Michael's Castle.
H&
CHAPTER XI. Most potent, grave, and reverend sigiriors, My very noble and npprov'd good masters, That I ha\e ta'en a«ny this old inttn'b daughter, It is most true—•true, I have married her; The very head and front of tny oflbndmg Hath this extent—no moie. Rude am I in speech, And therefore little shall I grace my cause In speaking for myself; yet, by your p^ttetice, I will a rouiui unvaintsh'd tale deliver Of my whole course of lo\e. Shakespeare. On arriving at the castle, Eleanor con¬ ducted her companions to a private room, and then leaving them, repaired to the drawing-room, where she found all the gentlemen assembled: they had joined the ladies, and tea was just announced as Eleanor entered. She immediately in¬ formed lady Glendinning of the scene to which she had been witness, and her hav¬ ing offered Mr. and,Mrs. Conway an asy-
lum in the castle; for which, she hoped, she should have the excuse of lord Arthur and his lady, who had ever readily granted their hospitality to persons in distress. " Undoubtedly so," replied her lady¬ ship ; " I will give orders for a room to, be prepared for them." " Upon my word, Miss," cried lady Le¬ nox, in a sarcastic tone, " you were very fortunate in your excursion to-night, in giving you an opportunity to display your benevolent disposition; but if you were to extend your compassion to all who- meet with travelling accidents, I fancy you would fill even the spacious castle of lord Arthur with objects of distress." " And if she did, madam," interrupted lord Arthur, " I would forgive her; when motives of pure pity and unostentatious compassion direct the heart, Heaven for¬ bid that I should check its divine im¬ pulse!" " Oh, my lord!" cried her ladyship, " I am aware that Eleanor's actions must be right in your eyes; but I certainly should.
think propriety demands the knowledge of who those persons are, thus intruded within my daughter's walls." Poor Eleanor timidly cast her eyes around —" I am very sorry," she ex¬ claimed, -* c that I should have been the cause of this unpleasant discussion; in of¬ fering an asylum to Mr. and Mrs. Con¬ way, I thought J should only have ful¬ filled the wishes of lord and lady Glendin¬ ning; had I known it would have offend¬ ed, I would not have taken the liberty." " You have not offended, Eleanor," cried lady Glendinning, who pitied her confusion. " I will see your new ac¬ quaintance, and then I shall form a better v opinion how to accommodate them." Eleanor gratefully bowed to her lady¬ ship for her unexpected approbation, and led the way to the parlour, where she had left Mr. and Mrs. Conway, and introduced them to lady Glendinning, who in an in¬ stant ran her eyes over the vulgar figure of Mrs. Conway, who making, as she thought, a very profound curtsey, thanked
her ladyship for the genteel treatment with which they had met. Mr. Conway, wishing to stop the torrent of her tongue, gracefully turned to lady Glendinning, and in an elegant manner repeated his thanks, alleging their unpleasant accident as the cause for their intrusion; adding, they were using all expedition to return to London, having lately taken a trip from there. Lady Glendinning had penetration enough immediately to discover the wide difference between this couple i Mr. Con¬ way, she was convinced, was really the gentleman, while his lady was evidently the reverse. Her ladyship recollecting to have met with a sir Henry Conway when she herself had visited England previous to her marriage, now inquired of Mr. Con¬ way if he was any part of that gentleman's family. « I have the honour to be his nephew," he replied; " and it affords me some plea¬ sure in knowing your ladyship is acquaint¬ ed with my family, as that circumstance
may perhaps impel your ladyship the more readily to excuse our unseasonable intru- sion." Lady Glendinning expressed her plea¬ sure in affording any service to sir Henry's relations, from whom, she added, she had received many civilities when in England; and hoped he was still living, and well. Mr. Conway replied in the affirma¬ tive, while his lady exclaimed—" Only to think now, that your ladyship should know any part of our family! But gen¬ teel people always know each other; and it is so pleasant to be amongst those we know!" Lady Glendinning could scarcely refrain from smiling, but Eleanor observed it was the smile of contempt which mantled on her cheek rather than that of approbation; her ladyship, however, politely invited them to join their tea party; to which they assented, Mrs. Conway making a hundred apologies respecting her dress. Lady Glendinning introduced them to the drawing-room, and added her know-
ledge of Mr. Conway's family. Lord and lady Lenox recollected visiting sir Henry when in England; and all much wondered to see his elegant nephew wedded to a woman like his lady. Mr. Conway's arm continuing in pain, they dispatched a servant for a surgeon, who, on arriving, pronounced it a violent bruise, which required much rest. Mrs. Conway also declared one of her fingers was much hurt, ancl that she suffered a martyrdom of pain; though, she added, she .had kept it to herself, as she would not distress her dear Mr. Conway, who, she knew, was distracted on her account. No one, however, beheld any of that con¬ cern she asserted, though Mr. Conway was polite and attentive to her. Lord Arthur and lady Glendinning both desired they would make their house their home until they were recovered; to which they readily agreed, and a room was pre¬ pared for their reception; and after they retired, the giddy Georgina broke into a violent laugh at poor Mrs. Conway's ex-
pence* lady Lenox expressed her utter contempt of her, while lady Glendinning considered her almost below her remarks, though she desired she might be treated with civility while their inmate. The party soon after broke up, and Ele¬ anor retired to her pillow, with the pleas¬ ing reflection of having that day contri¬ buted to the relief and assistance of her fellow-creatures. The next morning Mr. and Mrs. Con- way attended at the breakfast-table, the latter still attired in pure white drapery. Many conjectures had been formed respect¬ ing their journey to> Scotland, unaccompa¬ nied, and even unattended; as they had not explained their motive, lady Glendin¬ ning purposely turned the conversation, during breakfast, to this effect, and in¬ quired if they had been long in Scotland. «' Only a few days," replied Mr. Con¬ way, smiling. " Perhaps your ladyship can guess the motive of our journey." The simpering looks of Mrs. Conway, and her affected confusion, revealed #ie
truth, which had already been suspected; and lady Glendinning, smiling, wished them much joy. " Why, to be sure, my lady," cried Mrs. Conway, " the truth will out; and we needn't mind telling your ladyship the truth, as it would be very ungenteel to keep any thing from you; and now we needn't mind who knows it; besides, these things are done by many genteel people —stolen matches are quite the go." " Our expedition has been a matrimo¬ nial one," exclaimed Mr. Conway, " and I trust our peculiar situation will excuse my not instantly revealing it to your lady¬ ship ; but if it will not intrude too much on your ladyship's patience, I will, in a few words, reveal our little history; and in setting forth my own follies, I shall portray the generous qualifications of Mrs. Conway." . Lady Glendinning replied she should feel much gratified by his communication; and Mr. Conway began his little history. A£ there were, however, some points which
he could not truly discuss, we shall give it in our own words. He was, as he stated, the nephew of sir Henry Conway, who had brought him up -' from a child. ' His father, the younger brother of sir Henry, had been left, as younger brothers frequently are, nearly portionless, and had been obliged to choose a profession for support. He united him¬ self to a lady without fortune, who, in giving birth, to a son, died at an early pe¬ riod. Mr. Conway, who truly loved his wife, never recovered her loss, and a few years consigned him also to the silent tomb. On his deathbed he had begged the pro¬ tection of sir Henry for his helpless- boy, who promised to rear him with his own son, and to provide for him during his life; to-which promise he strictly adhered, by first giving him a most liberal educa¬ tion, and as soon as he arrived at a proper age he gave him his own choice of a pro¬ fession, by which means he might honour* ably support himself, in which he would
assist him all in his power. , Edward thanked his uncle, and immediately .fixed on the study of the law, as most congenial to his mind. ' Sir Henry approved.of his choice; at which he was in some surprise, as he had with uneasiness beheld that his nephew's, disposition was much too^gay, to which he added an extravagance of temper which gave him serious concern. He was therefore no less surprised, than pleased at his making choice of so serious a study as the law-, which, he trusted, wotiiu iOhd i« a great • degree to fix his wildness and curb his extravagance. Sir Henry now sought out for some professional man to whom he could article his nephew, and was soon recommended to Mr. Reynolds, of. Lincoln's Inn, who was in want of a* young student. Sir Henry's application was immediately ac¬ cepted, and Edward Conway was articled to Mr. Reynolds, with a very handsome premium, who was very proud of having such a respectable youth in his chambers;
for Mr. Reynolds, though, at this period, he had realized a largo fortune by his pro¬ fession, had arisen from obscurity, and was consequently the more ambitious in his desires. He had one only daughter, who, on the death of her mother, was placed at a board¬ ing-school in the country, where it unfor¬ tunately happened neither her morals nor her education were much attended to. At the age of sixteen she was recalled to town, for the purpose of residing with her mater¬ nal uncle, who kept a large retail shop in the city, and where it was thought she would be of great use, he being a bachelor; it was well known he was immensely rich, and little doubt remained of his making his niece his heiress. She therefore con¬ sented to living with him; and accord-, ingly Miss Maria was placed behind his counter. Here, amidst ignorance and vul¬ garity, she imbibed all those pernicious errors which such an example gave, yet at the same time looking forward to that
period when she should be able to enjoy her uncle's riches, and launch out as the fine lady. To this family was the young and ele¬ gant Edward placed, which to him then appeared of no consequence, so long as he was ably instructed in his profession; and for a short time, while it had the advan¬ tages of novelty to recommend it, he was most studious in its pursuit. But, alas! the natural gaiety of his temper too soon overcame his serious attention; the law he found was a dry study, and he .soon wished he had made choice of any other. Company was the only relaxation to which he could fly, and Edward was soon consi¬ dered as the most dashing buck about Lincoln's Inn. Sir Henry had made him an allowance equal with his own son, which enabled him to support the charac¬ ter of a gentleman. Here had it stopped, ali might have been well; but his extra¬ vagance increased to such an unbounded height, that it ga\ e his uncle serious alarm, and he threatened to lessen his uicome, if
he did not retrench in his expences. Ed¬ ward promised a reformation, and again attended to the law; with Mr. Reynolds he managed to keep on good terms, who, though frequently obliged to reprimand him on account of his inattention to busi¬ ness, was always won over by his promises of amendment. It was at this period that an alteration took place in Mr. Reynolds's family: the uncle of Maria died, and she soon found herself in-possession of twenty thousand pounds in money, besides many freehold estates. After a residence of above a do¬ zen years, Maria emerged from her obscu¬ rity, with a determination to launch put as the fine lady; and as she had so long been confined to the unwholesome air of the city, she now determined to enjoy the breezes of the country; but as she was to preside at her father's table, a short dis¬ tance was arranged for their residence, in order for Mr. Reynolds to attend daily at Lincoln's Inn. As his town house was now despised by Maria, an elegant cottage
was taken in the beautiful vicinity of Cam¬ berwell Grove; and here Miss Reynolds began her reJgn of grandeur. She sought out the most genteel people, as she called them, of the neighbourhood; but, though they returned her visits, her society was not courted, as her vulgar manners were a continual drawback to all association with the more polite circles. Mr. Reynolds, who was proud of his daughter and his country house, took the first opportunity of inviting Edward Con¬ way there, which was accepted by him, and he repaired there, accompanied by Mr. Reynolds, to dinner. His pleasing person and agreeable manners made a deep impression on the heart of Miss, Reynolds, who thought him a prodigy of elegance; she therefore behaved to him* with the utmost complaisance, and cer¬ tainly gave him indisputable marks of her favour. He saw in a moment the weak and vulgar mind of his new acquaintance, but though he mentally laughed at her ignorance, yet she was a female, and that
alone ensured her his attention; he there¬ fore paid her the most flattering compli¬ ments, which were taken by lier as the sentiments of his heart, and she readily persuaded herself that the same feelings warmed his bosom as her own; and on his retiring at night, she pressed him so warmly to repeat his visit, that he could not do otherwise than express the pleasure he should feel in availing himself of her permission. After his departure she was profuse in his praise, while her father commented on his extravagances, which were again rising to a dangerous height; for, to return to him, he had of late adopted a mode of conduct which had given his uncle the most serious concern; this was, resorting often to the billiard-tables, at which he lost considerable sums; his lawful debts were in consequence unpaid, and his cre¬ ditors grew pressing; sir Henry refused to answer their demands, and young Con¬ way was in a most unpleasing situation; still he did not retrench his expences, but
daily plunged deeper into the vortex of dissipation. The frequent interviews which he had with Miss Reynolds gave rise to many ideas in his mind; he plainly saw the pre¬ ference which she gave him, and he was convinced he might make himself master of hei* fortune, if he chose. Situated as he was, this was } certainly a great inducement, though he Could hardly reconcile himself to marrying a woman of so inferior a mind and education; he, however, behaved to¬ wards her with so much gallantry, that she was satisfied that his affections were her own, and that modesty alone prevented his making an open avowal. Old Reynolds at length fearing that his daughter's partiality increased too far, be- £an to look cool upon Edward when he made his visits to Camberwell, as the idea of his daughter's throwing herself away Upon a ruined spendthrift was not to be borne; and he tock every opportunity of repeating his extravagance to Maria, who VOL. I.' i
inwardly liked him the better for his spi¬ rit, as she styled it. At length Edward became of age; his debts were immense, and sir Henry, with a view to punish his folly, refused all far¬ ther assistance. His son had frequently assisted his cousin Edward out of his own private purse, but sir Henry now insisted on his not advancing him a shilling. Ed¬ ward, seriously alarmed, plunged deeper into scenes of gaiety, in order to drive away his own reflections; his profession was neglected, Mr. Reynolds was enraged, and, with sir Henry, gave him severe chas¬ tisement. At length an impatient creditor actually arrested him, and the elegant Con¬ way had no resource left but going to a lock-up-house, where he remained a few days, in all the horrors of suspense and torment: his uncle was inexorable, ancl no relief appeared attainable. - He now began to wish he had taken advantage of Miss Reynolds's kindness, which might have prevented his present disgrace; but now he supposed she would
also despise him for his conduct. The loss of liberty began to be very irksome- and he felt that even the society of Miss Reynolds would be very acceptable; it was true, he had no violent passion of love for her, but he had of late been much ac¬ customed to her; and habit often does more for us than affection. Thus it was in the present instance: he had paid her so much attention, and said so many pretty things to her, that he almost persuaded himself he had really meant that which had, only a short time since, been the mere dictates of gallantry. These reflections became the stronger as the time of his confinement lengthened, when, towards the close of the fifth day, he was informed a lady wished to see him. He immediately drew but one conclusion as to who was his visitor, and was in no surprise when Miss Reynolds was an¬ nounced. He felt embarrassed at her pre¬ sence under his present disgrace, while, after a short preface, Miss Reynolds began 12
by condoling with him in his misfortunes, and at length congratulating him that the present cause of trouble was removed, and begged he would immediately quit that nasty, vulgar, and ungenteel house, which, she added, was dreadful to her feelings to enter. This speech, of course, excited the sur¬ prise of Conway; he begged for an expla¬ nation, and at length found, from her own lips, that she had generously set him free. Hei* behaviour plainly shewed him the > reward she expected—a reward which he considered almost villanous to offer; yet what was to be done ? He took her hand —he poured forth the effusions of his gra¬ titude—he besought her to accept his love, though, he added, he knew not how to offer his hand in his present embarrassed situation. Miss Reynolds was overjoyed; she loved him to excess, and entered into schemes for their future happiness. She doubted not, she said, that if sir Henry heard of their union, he would doubtless be so well
pleased that he would relent, ancl restore his nephew to his favour. With her father, she added, she should be sure to get into displeasure; but added, she was her own mistress, and at liberty to dispose of her money as she thought proper. Conway was now no longer backward, and it was finally agreed to set of? imme¬ diately to Gretna Green, before it was known he was liberated, as, Miss Rey¬ nolds added, it would cut a dash to make an elopement, as she liked to do things genteelly. Accordingly all was arranged, and the next day the lovers repaired in a post- chaise, unaccompanied by any one, to the land of liberty, without any one suspect¬ ing their flight. Maria betrayed symp¬ toms of great generosity of disposition, which could not fail of inspiring Conway with gratitude, and he firmly resolved ever to treat with kindness the woman who had thus given up all to him. It was on their return from the land of Hymen, where their hands had been irre-
vocably joined, that they had met with the accident from which Eleanor had res¬ cued them, and which gave to the delight¬ ed Mrs. Conway an introduction to the family of lord Arthur Glendinning.
CHAPTER XII.
Love calls for love; not all the piide of beauty— Those eyes that tell us what the sun is made of— Those lips, whoj>e touch is to be bought with life— Those hills of drnen snow, which seen, ate felt— All these posses&'d, are nought hut as they are The proof, tne substance of an inward passion, And the rich plunc'cr of a taken heart. Young.
Heard ye that voice ? Sure 'twas the voice of Heav*n; In mild majestic strains it piere'd my ear. — — — — — — — What ail'd thee, That thou didst tremble ? Ilcy. The foregoing story had been partially related by Mi: Conway, who, however, did justice to the generosity of his lady, while their auditors again congratulated them on their hymeneal excursion. Mrs. Conway, pleased at an opportunity to talk on her greatness, was profuse in her praises of her delightful cottage at Camberwell, at which place she meant to make her
chief residence; and concluded by saying she hoped the present company would some time or other visit London, and honour her, by their making a stay at her cottage; as, she added, she should always be proud to do every thing in her power to return the genteel treatment with which they had met. Lady Glendinning bowed her thanks, while lord Arthur, who was present, re¬ plied, that it was most probable he should never more visit London, unless any thing very particular occurred to induce him to make such a journey. He sighed as he spoke, and Eleanor observed the dejection of his countenance. Mr.. Conway now asked the advice of ,lord Arthur as to what steps it were best to pursue with respect to his uncle and Mr. Reynolds, the latter of whom would no doubt be under great anxiety for his daughter; and to his uncle's favour, he added, he wished to be restored, and he resolved in future to merit it. Lord Arthur, with great kindness, took
upon himself the task of writing to both parties, informing them of the steps taken, and the present residence of Mr. and Mrs. Conway, and begging that each might be received with pardon by sir Henry and Mr. "Reynolds, and requesting, on their arrival in London, alL differences might subside. JMrs. Conway was enraptured at his lordship's condescension, as, she said, she was sure her father would not hesitate a minute,, when he found such great people interested themselves in their welfare. Lord Arthur, therefore, retired after breakfast to write the letters. Lady Glen¬ dinning and her daughter rode out in their carriage, while llobert and Eleanor enter¬ tained Mr. and Mrs. Conway with shew- in tr them the beauties of the castle. Mrs. Conway was quite delighted with Eleanor, and declared she never felt such an affection for any one in her life, and hinted how much she should like her to> return to London with her. 13
Eleanor, who felt no great inclination to leave her native scenes, made a suitable reply; while Robert, alarmed by the men¬ tion of such a proposal, gaily added, that she was too great a treasure to be trusted, without a protector, to the dangerous de¬ lusions of London. He glanced his eyes tenderly on Elea¬ nor, while Mrs. Conway exclaimed—" At least you fear the trial, lest some rude hand should dare to 10b you of your trea¬ sure" " True, madam," he returned; " I ac¬ knowledge those sentiments are mine." " And it is not to be wondered at," in¬ terrupted Mr. Conway, bowing to Elea¬ nor ; " for where we see beauty and mo¬ desty so truly blended as in the present instance, how fearful must its admirers be to place it within the reach of tempta¬ tion !" Eleanor felt confused, while Robert, pressing her hand, gently drew her on¬ ward. The presence of Mi\ and Mrs.
Conway prevented his saying more; but every look, every action, bespoke the pas~ sion of his heart. Eleanor took occasion to speak of her little flock, and asked Mrs. Conway if she would like to visit her schoolhouse; which she, however, declined; adding, she never took any delight in visiting the poor and vulgar; though, she added, it did Eleanor great credit, and that, before she left Scot¬ land, she should beg to add a something towards her institution. Eleanor thanked her, and concluded by informing her of the little treat she was going to give them in a few days. Mrs. Conway again praised her good¬ ness, though, she added, she should take no pleasure at being present on the occa¬ sion, as she could not endure vulgarity and ignorance. " It is to banish both those qualities, madam," returned Eleanor, " that this in¬ stitution has been raised; and I trust our efforts to that effect have not proved fruit¬ less, and that many a little innocent heart
may, in time, acknowledge the advantage of education. Mr. Conway politely complimented her on her benevolence and compassion to¬ wards the offspring of the poor; and in a short time after the party separated, to dress for dinner. Lady Glendinning was engaged* out in the evening, and the task of entertaining Mr. and Mrs. Conway again fell upon Eleanor. Lord Arthur shut himself close in his room, and Eleanor sighed, as she reflected on the melancholy to which he gave himself up. Politeness induced her to exert her utmost powers of pleasing lier guests, though she inwardly regretted being confined to the house, as the wea¬ ther was extremely lovely, and she much wished to visit her school, as she used to do. On the next evening her wishes proved more propitious, as lady Glendinning and all the family remaining at home, she ex¬ pressed her intention of going to the vil¬ lage. With a heart light, and beaming
with benevolence, she bent her steps along", the evening was lovely and serene, and, with a view to extend her walk, she pro¬ ceeded-to the sea-side, and arrived at those tremendous rocks mentioned at the begin¬ ning of this work. She paused to view their stupendous height, and admire the beautiful, yet awful work of nature; she ascended a part which was accessible, men¬ tally supposing it was impossible for hu> man footsteps to attain its summit; the sea glided along serenely, and the pro* spects it afforded were beautifully grand* Eleanor, now turning rounds beheld an¬ other point of the rock wdiich jutted out nearly opposite to where she was, and to her great surprise saw a female figure kneeling; her hands were clasped toge¬ ther, and her eyes were raised, with- the appearance of true devotion. Her features were concealed by a long black veil thrown over a garment of the same colour. Her figure was interesting, and Eleanor felt a degreo-of curiosity for this- unknown ob¬ ject. She continued in her kneeling pos-
ture, and Eleanor, quitting her situation, resolved to try to encounter her; to effect this, she was obliged to strike out in fresh and difficult paths; and on arriving at the spot, the stranger had disappeared; but vain were the efforts of Eleanor to disco¬ ver her, and she was at length obliged to quit the rocks. Dissatisfiedanddisappointedjherthoughts insensibly wandered to this stranger: who she could be, and why she should have chosen such a place as that for devotion, appeared equally surprising. Her mind was now . attuned to awful calmness—a superstitious terror assailed her frame, and in this sort of mood she passed the church of St. Michael's, She hesitated for a mo¬ ment whether she should enter; her feel¬ ings were just suited to the- solemn occa¬ sion/and she passed through the door. An involuntary trembling seized her frame as she approached the tomb where.she had witnessed the mysterious figure; she cast her eyes fearfully;around, in expectation of beholding some new cause of horror;
but all appeared as silent as the marble on which she leaned. •' Poor Frances!" she mentally ex¬ claimed, " thou sleepest in peace, uncon¬ scious of the tear of regret which thy relatives drop on thy silent abode. * Yet, alas! how enviable is thy fate! Escaped from the snares and perilous trials of this deluding world, thy spirit reposes in the bosom of thy God; free from all stain of nature, thou risest in immortality. Oh, enviable state! oh, blest reward of inno¬ cence and virtue P Eleanor paused—she thought she heard a footstep. A figure approached her; she uttered an involuntary shriek, when, rais¬ ing her eyes, she beheld, in the cause of her alarm, Robert Glendinning, who flew towards her, and taking her hand, ten¬ derly inquired the cause of her alarm. Eleanor, ashamed of her weakness, en¬ deavoured to smile off her fears, and re¬ plied, that the solemnity of the place had •filled her mind with terror, which his un¬ expected appearance had increased.
He expressed his sorrow at having so alarmed her; " but," he added, " I left the castle with the intention of meeting you on your return from the village; but, to my surprise, I saw you enter this church; I therefore followed you in. I saw you drop the tear of affection on the tomb of my lamented sister; yes, beloved Eleanor! while ali around are engaged in scenes of gaiety, you, alone and unob¬ served, retire to a scene like this, and with that amiable weakness, that sweetness of disposition, which so truly adorn you, you drop the tear of regret over the sad remains of her whom, living, you loved. Ah, happy Frances! how enviable is thy fate, since an angel mourns thy clay-cold bier, and bestows the tear of regret on thy tomb!—Oh that I could but obtain such an interest in thy tender heart! Yet let me hope that, while you thus lament my sister, you cannot, for her sake, be indif¬ ferent to the happiness of her brother." " What means this language, this seri¬ ous address ?" inquired Eleanor, who felt
greatly agitated. " I scarce know how to answer you." " I will be explicit, my Eleanor," re¬ plied Robert; " the time, the stillness of the place—all conspire * to my feelings; nor doubt my sincerity, when^ at the tomb of my sister, who perhaps is now a guar¬ dian angel hovering over our heads, I, for the first time, at least in speech, avow how much I love you. Do not think the avowal abrupt," he added, as Eleanor dropped her eyes in soft confusion; " but I can no longer conceal the emotions of my soul. You knew not the pang I ex¬ perienced yesterday morning, when Mrs. Conway half-invited you to accompany her to London—I felt I could not bear to lose you* even for a short time: this caused the reflection to arise. «How could I see you <united to another, and thus lose you for ever ? I therefore determined to seek the first opportunity of soliciting your fa¬ vour—your love. Oh! say that no one else is in possession of that inestimable: treasure,"
" Oh, Robert!" cried Eleanor, " why have you made such an avowal as this, so injurious to your peace? Believe me, my heart is entirely free from that delusive passion; and sorry am I that you should have encouraged these feelings for one unworthy of your regard." "Unworthy P re-echoed Robert—"Cruel Eleanor! what a term is that! Oh! where shall I find worth and beauty, if I behold them not in this lovely form ? where can X expect to make a choice equal to you ?" " You forget," cried Eleanor, " the de¬ pendent situation in which I am placed in your family, who will of course demand of you that you should fix your affections on a wealthy and high-born female; ancl I am convinced neither lady Lenox or lady Glendinning would sanction your making choice of a poor unknown being, like myself, whose birth is even myste¬ rious." " You wrong yourself/' replied Robert; ** are you not supposed to be the daughter of my aunt lady Frances, and consequent*
ly your descent high as my own ? while my uncle Charles has ever declared his in¬ tentions of giving you a portion equal to your birth; though this, in my opinion, is too unworthy a consideration to be for a moment thought on, any farther than to ease your scruples—your delicate ob¬ jections. My father loves you, Eleanor, as his daughter, and would, I am sure, gladly acknowledge you as such; there¬ fore, only grant me your esteem-—give me a hope that I am not indifferent to you, and, if a heart devoted to you can procure you happiness, we shall be blessed beyond the common lot of mortals. Oh, Eleanor!" he added, looking passionately in her face, " you know not how much I love you; and a disappointment to my hopes will at once mar my peace for ever. Say then what I am to expect; on your answer now rests my fate." Eleanor was greatly agitated; she knew not what reply to make; she felt convinced that the passion of love had not entered her bosom for Robert; she esteemed him,
but it was as with a sisterly affection; yet when she saw the agitation of his counte- . nance, and beheld his visible emotion, she felt a sentiment of pity arising in her heart, which prevented her giving him a decided answer; and pity is so akin to love that she could hardly define her own sensations. —" I would not willingly inflict a pang in your bosom," she at length, faltering, re¬ plied; " but this declaration is so sudden, so unexpected, I know not how to reply. Heaven is witness I wish you happy, Ro¬ bert, and would almost do any thing to render you so; but I must be candid to say, I fear this avowal of yours will not tend to render you so." " Why not?" interrupted he; " you do not entirely reject me, and to ease all your fears I will seek my father, and acquaint him with my love for you; he knows and appreciates thy virtues, and I am sure of his approbation. Thus sanctioned by a parent, I shall then offer you a heart and hand, accompanied with a father's blessing —yes, my Eleanor, I will this night hasten
to lord Arthur, and implore his consent to our union." "Forbear!" cried a voice, in solemn accents, accompanied by a hollow groan. Eleanor shrieked aloud, while Robert, violently terrified, caught her hand, and gazed wildly around.—" What voice is that?" he cried, " which thus interdicts the sacred purpose of my soul? what hid¬ den form thus intrudes upon my privacy?" " It is the voice of fate," replied the invisible object of their terror, " who,. through me, warns you of your danger. As you hope for peace on earth, and ever¬ lasting bliss in the world to come, think no more of Eleanor; for sooner shall the ravenous kite woo for its mate the gentle dove, than you shall be united—never can Eleanor be yours." " Horrible!" ejaculated Robert. " Oh! why this cruel denunciation ? Oh, Elea¬ nor! Eleanor! why dost thou not speak? Oh! look up. This must be some design¬ ing enemy," he added, " to our peace: I will not believe hi idle superstition."
" Oh* no!" cried Eleanor, " it is no idle chimera; you, Robert, tremble, and be¬ lieve its power, while you endeavour to dissuade me from it. Never can I forget the mandate from heaven; sure it arises from the tomb, and can we dare to disobey a warning- so awfully given ?—Look! oh look!" she added—" Merciful Heaven! savelme from that form." She sunk, fainting, dn the arms of Ro¬ bert, who, casting his eyes around, beheld a figure, in black, retreat from the tomb; it waved its hand, and instantly disap¬ peared. Robert, nearly as terrified as his fainting burthen, gently withdrew Eleanor from the church; and on her inhaling the fresh air she^ began to recover, but her alarm was so great, she could scarce collect her senses. Robert endeavoured to sooth her, and expressed his wretchedness at a scene which had at once deprived him of all hopes of bliss. " Oh! never more renew the fatal sub¬ ject," exclaimed Eleanor, " but forget a
9-
wretched being like myself, born to mys¬ tery and sorrow, which attend my steps, and still pursue me with increasing horror. Oh! let me hasten home, that 1 may in some way endeavour to compose myself." Robert expressed his fears for her health, as, he said, her looks indicated the agony ' of her mind. This remark caused her some apprehension lest lord Arthur should ob¬ serve her looks, and Robert unguardedly reveal the cause. She knew how much lord Arthur had already suffered with the Inysterious scenes at the tomb, and she therefore resolved to spare him the pangs of a recital; and she begged of Robert for ever to conceal within his own bosom the circumstance of that night. To this he willingly consented, as he thought, if it were buried for ever in oblivion, he might in a future time again solicit her love. On their reaching the castle, the pale cheek of Eleanor was instantly noticed; lord Arthur cast a look of scrutiny both on his son and Eleanor, while Mrs. Con¬ way inquired if she was ilL
: Eleanor replied in the affirmative,! add¬ ing, she: had ibeen seized with a 'sudden headache, which-prevented; her■ visiting, the village; * and.; having^ met Robert, she had accepted,.his \ offered; assistance, aiid- returned to tlie castle. >; v ;< ; > ; /;- "And; to be sure^ I .think Mr. Glendin¬ ning looks almost, as bad as..you, -Miss* Eleanor,''; returned 'Mrs. Conway; ■? but I suppose ^ie's: terrified. almost to death about you. But I would recommend you tolay down a bit, and I dare say that will ease your head." ; r ^ -.„■: To this advice Eleanor readily > agreed,. and she instantly retired for ;the';nighty- while lord Arthur anxiously desired she- lnight: have medical advice, if she were not.better.:...;. ■.: ■.,>-,^.- ' J;.- .^. ■■■; The impression made on the mind, of Eleanor was?so great by, this mysterious circumstance, that it continually, preyed qn her peace; and though she strove, on the succeeding day, (to appear cheerful, arid declared herself perfectly recovered, yet her countenance indicated a mind, ill
nt ease.; and as,'she" looked' upon Robert, she beheld the rsamec uneasiness E manifest in his features; ^hoth ^imposed a', silence^ as neither-iyifishedi.tojwpundithe! other with.thc.repetition of r a;scene;whichjhad given ; ihem h,oth so much'pain.-; Eleanor, with assort,of,intuitiye fear, kept close to the castle,, though/ as;,the days rolled on, she recollected that hen presence .was ne¬ cessary at the school house,, to arrange every thing preparatory to the promised festival,, which now drew neary,,and she resolved not to disappoint the hopes she. had raised among the villagers and her little flock. A rural dance was to be given on the green, at which Eleanor had promised to attend, and join with the honest rustics in their innocent gaiety, while all the chil¬ dren were to partake in suitable amuse- ments. While Eleanor was thus arranging a gratification for the poorer sons * of men, the inhabitants of St. Michael's Castle, and the marquis of B------, with lady Cecilia VOL. i. K
GrajVwere making splendid preparations for (the arrival of the young lord Mdntal- bair^who was <Jaily expected. Georgina was'iipon theftiptoe'^bf impatience* to be* hold r her ^intended^husband, 5 and'talked incessantly "of fhis merit and accomplish¬ ments to Mrs. ConWay, who declared that, though Mr, Conway had now meant to return to 1 London, >she would protract her stay, in order tb behold tliis " wonder," as «he styled him; ancl all, with equal impa¬ tience,' longed for<the arrival of lord Fre¬ derick Montalban.«
IHAPTER Xin.
** lie saw the lustre of her eye, Ami modest cheek of roseate damask dyo— lie taw, and sudden felt love's pleasing smart Tlnill through his hreasr, and centre in his heart. A kindred fl.une her tender bosom warms, And .ulds new beauty to her maiden charms. 1 he youth profess'd a passion for the fair, Pare as the thoughts of heaven's mchangels are."
D.d my heart lo\c till now, forswear it, sight— I never snvv true beauty till this night. SuAKESpr,ARC. The encomiums which had been bestowed on lord JMontalban, though warm and ar¬ dent, proved no more than his real due; the marquis of B ------ had tlie felicity of clasping a «onifl^his arms, whose merits and amiable/'qualities entitled him a fit object of regard." ^ Lady Cecilia, on heaiing of his arrival, ___ K 2
hastened to the drawing-room, and gave her darling nephew the most affectionate welcome; with a sentiment of exultation "she gazed on the elegant and manly form of lord Montalban, who, during his ab¬ sence from his family, had improved in every grace of person; his features were lighted up with a pleasing vivacity, which evinced the natural gaiety of his temper, while his feelings were cast in nature's most susceptible mould; and tho meeting with his father and aunt appeared to excite the warmest sensations in his ardent mind. Lord Montalban had been made ac¬ quainted with the motives for which he had been called home, and lady Cecilia soon entered into the subject next her heart; and after extolling the beauty and hiu'h descent of Miss Glendinning, she launched/forth into her own praise in seeking .a i wife so every way suitable for him; adding, she was sure he could not possibly find the least shadow of an objec¬ tion to the alliance. .
Lord Montalban, who knew the failing* of his aunt, inasmuch as related to family pride, humoured her disposition, in gene¬ ral, with much good-nature; in the present instance, he however replied, that though he ever paid the greatest deference to her discernment, and had no possible objection to such an union, yet he hoped, in the important choice of a wife, he should be permitted to judge for himself, as, ho con¬ fessed, if he really gave up his liberty, he should wish to find in return the pure en¬ joyments of domestic happiness. " You will find all you can wish in Miss Glendinning," replied his aunt: " she is handsome and accomplished, and has the most charming spirits imaginable; you cannot be otherwise than gay in her com¬ pany." " If she possesses generosity of heart and temper sufficient to overlook my many faults," returned his lordship, " I shall becontented; believe me, I shall not be fastidiously particular; and if I can at all coincide in your opinion respecting
Miss Glendinning^ I shall be happy to oblige both your ladyship and my father. And now, when am I to be introduced to this peerless damsel, who, by your lady¬ ship's account, is to steal my heart on the first glance ?" '* We will send word of your arrival to St. Michael's Castle,"-, cried her ladyship, ««and to-morrow I wiil introduce you my¬ self." The marquis remained silent, while lady Cecilia was arranging her plans; in this instance his wishes coincided with his sis¬ ter's, he therefore left it all to her; he was by nature a quiet and passive man, and had gradually suffered his more haughty and ruling sister to govern his family and himself; and she reigned with despotic sway over all; the promised obedience of lord Montalban put her into high spirits, and she bestowed on him the highest marks of her favour. The day on which his lordship' had ar¬ rived at his paternal home, was one of those delightful ones which nature, in her
highest ■) hounty, bestows ;* on ; us ; : $nd ori the. conclusion, of dinner,, lord Montalban expressed.his intentionpf taking ; a ramble over his native plains,?;and visitingspme of those scenes where he; passed:his boyish days. .' . : ■■■ -;■ . ■; .^ : h ;i:::' .■.•■i;r.'}j;.'i>*';-r ■;■?;? '*.. ■ Lady Cecilia begged him;4p have the attendance of a footniari,' as he might pos¬ sibly find himself at a'Joss.an many parts. ■" No," cried his lordship; ?■«:it is my in^ ten tion to visit my father's honest tenants, whom I can remember'going to in 1 my boyish days,'and I do notiwish to restrain their rustic ease by iai'proud display; of grandeur; this evening ; at least I am de¬ termined to dispense with it, and gi-atify myself with their i honest simplicity; to¬ morrow I will ^please < your .lordshipi by displaying all the pomp ofmyrank.''/ r>v- ; His lordship bowed,and taking.his hat, instantly bent hisi steps- towards the spot which -he wished; to visit, i The motive which induced: himi was ' that whichi did credit:to his heart; with ( a-generosity of temper found; only ;in; few,l he,. when ; a
boy) had sought out the poorer of his fa¬ ther's tenants/ and from his own purse re¬ lieved the wants of all who happened to be distressed; during his absence, he feared perhaps that' many had drooped for want of his assistance, and he resolved to take the first opportunity after his return to bestow marks of his bounty. With a heart light, and bounding with the most gene¬ rous designs, he hastened to the neigh¬ bouring village, which contained the hum¬ ble tenants of the marquis of B------; the sun was just linking behind the distant hills-and rocks which surrounded the sea, and all nature appeared to put forth her gayest foliage: -with the greatest delight he enjoyed the surprise^of some of the honest rustics, who, on recognizing him, were .profuse in > their Y joy at his return. Lord Montalban proceeded on till he ar¬ rived at the green, where he beheld a scene which at once surprised and delight¬ ed him: a number of young and healthy children were arranged, neatly dressed, the glow of delight mantling in their
countenances; ,at,the farther end of the green was placed a rustic table, *on which various refreshments were spread; a band of music stood near, at a- little distance from which appeared a number of young- females, attired in the dress of their native plain, apparently ready to join in the rus¬ tic fete. Lord Montalban gazed with de¬ light on the pleasing scene, which brought to his mind the , delightful >lines i of Bar- ford's sacred pastoral, where he says— " Ye j;iacefid vii gins, join the febtive train 1 With all the sweet simplicity of diess, And swell the \oti\e song, und joyful brins; Ui.spotted f.uth and innocence of he.ut." Suddenly the band struck up a lively air, and lord Montalban beheld a young and lovely female advance towards the children. His attention was instantly ri¬ vetted to her—the superior elegance of her person excited his wonder. She was elad in pure white drapery, with a silk plaid carelessly thrown, over her shoulder.*, and partially concealing a neck where a K3
thousand beauties lay concealed; a veil was over her head, which she now threw off, and discovered, to the unobserved gaze of lord Montalban, a countenance beaming with beauty and innocence; her luxuriant tresses were simply arrayed with a white rose, and gave to her whole ap¬ pearance a bewitching effect. On her reaching the spot where the children were arranged, the music ceased, and the youth¬ ful tribe evinced their respect by dropping a rustic curtsey. Lord JMontalban, in great surprise as to this lovely figure, advanced still nearer to the object of his admiration, and, unseen by her, heard the enchanting strains of her voice, as in the kindest accents she addressed the little flock—he heard her pour forth a kind but eloquent speech, in which she exhorted them to fill the duties of their station; and concluded by en¬ forcing on their minds the necessity of attending to the dictates of religion and virtue, 'She then gave to each a present,
expressing, her approbation of jtheir.good conduct. Lord Montalban was enraptured—the 1 admiration excited by this lovely female was enthusiastic, and the effect was in¬ stantaneous—she seemed at once to take possession of the noblest feelings of his heart, and he resolved, if possible, to be¬ come acquainted with this charming fe¬ male. For the first time she now turned her head, and beheld his lordship. His evident observation raised a blush > on her face, while lord .Montalban, bowing ..respect¬ fully, walked on, to spare her delicacy. Oiiileaving the green, he hastened into one of the cottages where he was known, and inquired of the gudewife the occasion' of the present festival. * . " It is the anniversary of > my lady's school, my lord," she replied; " and, Hea¬ ven bless her charitable heait for her kind¬ ness to a', baith young and auld! and she has condescended to come oniang, them
hersel' to-night, to share in * their bonny sports." " And pray who is this kind and lovely female?" inquired lord JMontalban. - " Miss Glendinning," replied liis inform¬ er; " and your lordship may well say she is lovely, for a greater beauty I never saw." " Miss Glendinning'" interrupted lord Montalban; " what, from St. Michael's Cabtle?" " Ay, <my lord," she replied, " and a better lassie never lived; why she is the benefactress of the whole village. Your lordship may see her now talking to the children on the green, where fop a' the world she looks like an angel; and if there ever was one upon earth, I think tt> be sure she is..'* " She is indeed," ejaculated lord Mont¬ alban. He coyld not proceed—the sur¬ prise and joy of such a discovery almost overcame him; the sweetest sensation shot across his> heart—a heart which he felt he hadjj even at this transient view,, resigned^;
to find his intended bride such a model of perfection—to see her engaged in such an office, which at once coincided with his own cliaritable hearts—was a source of such delight 1 that he could almost have wept for joy. The band of music at this instant struck up a lively Scotch air, and vibrated on the ear of lord Montalban, when the gudewife informed him that a dance was to be given amang the lads and lassies, and that she dare say Miss Glendinning would conde¬ scend to trip it wi* them. " Indeed!" cried lord Montalban, as a sudden thought came across his mind; " then I will also join in the festive scene." He then requested the good woman to introduce him to Miss Glendinning as a friend of hers lately arrived, when lie would request the favour of her hand; *' and be sure," continued he, " that you do not betray my title to her; and I charge you likewise to caution all those who are acquainted with it, not to call me by it
to-night; I have my reasons for it, and ,1 trust you will oblige me." " To be sure, my lord," she replied; " I am in-duty bound to obey your lordship, as are all the rest who are so indebted to your lordship's bounty; and if you will go along wi* me, I will speak to her." « Lead on," cried his lordship; " I am all .impatience to be introduced to this charming girl, whose (i Bc:.uty Imiigs upon the cheek of itijit, Like a rich jewel m an iEthtop's tar— Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear. So shews a stmvvy dove ti oping with crows> As yonder lady o'er her fellows shews. " The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand, And, touching heis, make happy my rude hand." The woman smiledat his raptures, which she did not understand;. but quickly pro¬ ceeding to the green, advanced towards the object of his admiration, who was ar¬ ranging partners for the rustic dance, and with a respectful curtsey begged leave to present to ber notice a gentleman of her acquaintance, who, taking great delight in
these rustic sports, much wished to join in them. Eleanor, whom doubtless j our readers will have < already ascertained to be the lovely object of lord Montalban's admira¬ tion, turned her head, and on beholding the stranger whom she had seen before, blushed excessively, as lord Montalban, with tlie most graceful and winning man¬ ners, addressed her, and begged the ho¬ nour of her hand in the dance. A soft confusion stole over her lovely face as she replied to the elegant speaker, whose grace¬ ful and prepossessing form hispired her young heart with the most lively emotion; and after some little hesitation she granted him his request. Lord Montalban was enraptured—he should now have an opportunity of con¬ versing with his intended bride, who, in ignorance of his real character, would be¬ have with her native unrestrained man¬ ners : and if he had been struck with the beauty of her person, how was he enrap¬ tured with her on a farther acquaintance!
He congratulated himself on his happy fate, and anticipated the moment when he should unfold himself to her as her in¬ tended husband, and yield himself up a willing votary to her bewitching loveli¬ ness. Alas! he knew not the fatal mis¬ take under which he was .labouring, or that the passion he already too truly felt, was that which was to prove the bane of his peace. He felt he trod on air, as lie led her through the soft mazes of the dance: his behaviour to her was respect¬ ful and tender, and his admiration of her increased to such a height, that he felt his future happiness depended upon her alone: he beheld her in a situation most calculated to please him—in the acts of charity; and where she was dispensing blessings to all around, he heard a thou¬ sand tongues vibrate in her praise, and invoke blessings on her head, while she herself appeared " Piea&'il with all, and happy all to please; Gay without ait, and muuecut with e.ise." Kor was the impression made on his lord-
ship less dangerous than that which his figure and behaviour had raised in the susceptible bosom of Eleanor, who felt that her heart was no longer a stranger to that passion' which had been so vainly implored by Robert Glendinning; lord Montalban had, in a few hours, been able to effect that for which the former had so unsuccessfully pleaded; Eleanor, for the first time, loved, while the behaviour of her delighted partner plainly shewed her that their feelings were reciprocal. Lvery thing that night appeared to conspire to¬ wards their mutual felicity; unobserved by the eyes of greatness or the remarks of their families, each felt at ease, and no¬ thing occurred to discover the fatal mis¬ take in which lord Montalban was delight- ino-; the rustics addressed her as Miss Glendinning, and his lordship could not admit a doubt of her being his intended bride. Eleanor, greatly surprised at the elegant appearance of her partner, much wondered
who, he could : possibly be; she was con¬ vinced he was of high descent, and was astonished at his being introduced by the cottager to her; she could not learn his name, as all .-who. really knew him paid too • much respect to disobey his orders. At length .the, shadows of night began to draw on, and Eleanor, with a sigh, recol r lected she must withdraw. The parting Vfith the stranger caused her a pang, of which she almost felt ashamed; but the idea that she should perhaps never see him again, hurt her more, than she even acknowledged, to herself; but it was un¬ avoidable, for a servant of lord Arthur's now appeared to conduct her home. Ro¬ bert Glendinning had intended to have escorted her on this night, but a severe cold had confined him to the,house, much against his will, which had eventually aid¬ ed the first impression of a passion which would have caused him the bitterest pang tO'knOW./; -: ... ,;-.;; •;,;,.;.. . .■,;.., r .. v ;'-. Eleanor, now gracefully curtseying to
lord Montalban, informed him she must retire, as a servant waited to conduct her to the castle. His lordship took her hand, and fervent- ly pressing it between his own, replied— " I will not be so selfish as to detain vou one minute longer, as in so doing I should expose you to the night air; but, believe me, Miss Glendinning, the pang I feel at parting can only be assuaged by the as¬ surance that xve shall meet again; and be¬ lieve me when I say, that the pleasure afforded to me this evening will ever dwell in my remembrance. Oh! might I in¬ dulge a hope that lovely bosom would also remember a being whom you have thus highly favoured, how great would be my happiness!" Eleanor was agitated—too well she felt he would indeed be ever present to her imagination, but prudence whispered in her ear to conceal her feelings.—" This language, sir," she replied, " suits not with the present time, nor must I listen to it from the lips of a stranger."
Lord Montalban bowed i respectfully— *' I would not for worlds offend your de¬ licacy," he cried; " believe me, Mihs Glen¬ dinning, I admire you more for your charming reproof. 1 am, as you justly observe, a-stranger at present; but the time will come, and shortly too, when, I flatten myself, you will change that title to a friend, at least until you shall be pleased to bestow on me a still dearer than that." He gazed tenderly on her, while Elea¬ nor, more surprised than ever at his ad¬ dress, could hardly conceal her real feel¬ ings. Lord JMontalban re?d the soft con¬ fusion in her intelligent features; she could not reply; he therefore, resigning her hand, wished her farewell, while Ele¬ anor retired amidst the blessings of all around. For the first time their honest effusions were unheeded by her — the stranger alone took possession of her thoughts, and it was with a degree of pleasure she reflected on his assurance that they should meet again.
Meantime lord Montalban also bent his steps to his own home. He found his father and aunt in some surprise as to his long stay.—" And to mc," he cried, uc the time has appeared to fly; for never have I passed such happy hours. Oh, my dear aunt, I am almost mad with joy," " So it should seem," replied the mar¬ quis, " by all this transport. But pray condescend, while you yet retain your senses, to explain the cause of this violent joy." " I have seen her!" he exclaimed, " and she is the most 'lovely, the most bewitch¬ ing girl I ever saw. My heart is so elate that I cannot talk rationally, therefore ask me no more questions this night, for I am so entranced with my own thoughts, that mere w r ords appear too trivial to ex¬ plain my meaning, and cannot sufficiently express my admiration of this charming girl." " For Heaven's sake, Frederick," cried lady Cecilia, 5 " what do you mean by all this rhapsody? And who is this female,
of whom you are so enamoured, when your ideas should alone turn on Miss Glendinning ?" " Then,- for once, madam," said lord Montalban, " I havethe happiness of act¬ ing right, in your ladyship's opinion. It is to Miss Glendinning I am enslaved—it is on her alone my thoughts are fixed; I have this night seen her—conversed with her—and she has captivated my very soul." The countenance of lady Cecilia bright¬ ened up at this declaration, as she inquired how he had seen her ? His lordship mere¬ ly replied that he had seen her at the rural fete, without discovering himself to her. Lady Cecilia knew that lady Glendinning subscribed to the village school, but was unacquainted that Eleanor was its patron¬ ess; she therefore readily believed that it was Miss Glendinning, and entered into warm encomiums on her goodness, in which lord Montalban joined, and ex¬ pressed his impatience for the arrival of | the morning, when he was to; be intro-
duced at St. Michael's Castle; and on re¬ tiring for the night, his dreams realized the lovely visions which his waking thoughts had presented, and he fimcied himself the happiest of human beings.
CHAPTER XIV.
Oh, slipp'ry state of things! U"liat siuldou turns What strange vicissitudes in the first lear" Of man's sad h ; 3tory !—To-day most happy, Ami, ere to-morrow's sun lias set, most abject. How scant the space between these vast e\trcmeo! Br..\ia. The family at St. Michael's Castle having received intimation of the arrival of lord Montalban, were in eager expectation of his visit, Georgina was all impatience to behold her lover, and so filled was her head with the idea of her promised great¬ ness, that she could scarcely obtain any sleep on the night preceding his expected visit; nor was she the only one whose re¬ pose was disturbed within the walls of the castle—Eleanor in solitude and silence passed a night of uneasiness and disquie¬ tude: a half-formed wish arose that she
had never beheld the unknown stranger; yet, when she reflected on his graceful form, she felt she would not forego the pleasure of his acquaintance for worlds, and with a secret anxiety she anticipated the time when, according to his promise, they were to meet again. Alas! how un¬ foreseen are all mortal occurrences! how little did Eleanor imagine that, on seeing him again, she should be plunged into the depth of woe—that his presence would only serve as tlie means of destroying her peace of mind! On joining the family next morning at breakfast, she heard almost with indiffer¬ ence of the expected visit of lord Mont¬ alban, when lord Arthur, who had been retired, on the preceding night, before Eleanor had returned, inquired the parti¬ culars of the rustic fete. She endeavoured to give a description of it, but her voice faltered as she spoke on the pleasure she experienced; nor could she have courage to mention the stranger with whom she VOL. I. L
i danced—a something prompted her to conceal this circumstance, most probably because she could not name him without -betraying the emotion she felt on the oc¬ casion. ' fi Lord Arthur bestowed liis ?usual appro¬ bation on her actions, while Mrs. Conway declared it must have been a pretty sight, and almost wished she had gone to it, a.s no doubt it must have been conducted in a very genteel manner, as Miss Eleanor had had the management of it. " At least, madam," said lord Arthur, " it was no doubt conducted in a way to gratify the feelings of the parties whom it most concerned, as I am convinced Elea¬ nor had no other intention than that of bestowing on the objects of her bounty a few hours of rational delight; and happy should I he if I saw others of my family imitate her praiseworthy example, and in the practice of acts of unostentatious cha¬ rity, find those pure delights which are sought in vain in the vortex of dissipa¬ tion."
. Lady Glendinning cas't a> look full df anger on his lordship—" I understand th& meaning of your allusion/ my lord," she cried; "but possibly those other persons, of your family, though equally inclined to assist the institutiori. may possess ideas- too enlarged to mix with theJdwer order of society, who, though doubtless* very* good sort of people, are - not' fit - compae nions for either lady Glendinnihgi or hen daughter." ' ,! v - M " " By no means," replied his lordship;, " I am a strenuous advocate -for distinc¬ tion amongst the classes of society,, but, on an occasion like the present, the {>i% sence of their kind benefactors must ha\*t\ produced a pleasing sensation in their bo^ nest hearts < and I am confident* were your ladyship to taste the real blessings of charity, you would experience moid pleasure than in nightly wasting youtr hours in dissipation." " Possibly so, my lord," She - cried ;.'<' I will not dispute the point with you ;*;M l a * 5
all have their different ideas respecting the word pleasure —happiness I will not constitute it, r for. that is a gem I never more' expect to possess; pleasure is there¬ fore *>my 'only pursuit, which I seek in scenes of-gaiety. • Eleanor finds it in her schemes of benevolence; while you, my lord, I suppose, enjoy it to tlie utmost extent in resigning yourself to a profound melancholy,-which lias eventually sunk a master, a husband, and a father, into a glddmy misanthrope, from which no power of his family can withdraw him." Xordi Arthur felt rather confused at this address; he could not hut own the truth of hbr reproof* though he felt angry with her speech.—" It is in vain, madam,*' he returned, " you thus reproach me; my melancholy is of a nature past all remedy. I own <it has absorbed me, nor do I wish to'throw, it off; the world has no charms for me—I have long ceased to value it— it is,-at best, but.a delusion, to wreck the happiness of man; and were it not for that hope which teaches us to look for some-
thing ibeyondi the?contemplativeimind could scarce endure the vpriyilege^bf thought;"."^ :•■.•■;■;',■>'''/■; V'tu-,: >:Atirt:rj:\q.i vLady Glendinning was about>to ; reply^ when she was interrupted by the entrance of lady Lenox, who hastened sto the castle, in order to be present at the introduction of lord Montalban, and the ! conversation reverted entirely to him; 'vr.-r.-fixi yAi-"u> Mr. and Mrs, Conway, with Eleanor, retired, as they deemed their presence might be intrusive on i the first introduc¬ tion ; and Georgina also declared she would wait iniier own room! till she was: sent for down, adding, she knew/her. grandma'jwas fond of etiquette and form;! > ~>ws'L will •:■ Lady Lenox entered into a long- /har rangue on the propriety of her behaviour, and then suffered her to retire. ^^-i- :,:hv At a very early hour the arrival oflady Cecilia Gray and lord Montalban was an¬ nounced. Lord Arthur, ever attentive to the rules of good ; breeding, received: him with every mark of respect, as did lady Glendinning, with her. usual dignity; of
IntoeFs, f \ Lord \ Montalban was in the highepti'spirjts imaginable, and his whole appearance and behaviour excited the j\\h$t\ favourable^ impressions oh lord Ar- thurfandJiislady; : :< : ; ;• '-:,v-'. c oI.iLady ^Cecilia Gray now inquired- after thebbealth: of ? Miss Glendinning,' Avhile lojfd;-Montalbaiu /anticipating the i arrival of the moment fpr: which he so panted, jmp^tjlently: requested tp he; introduced to •k(?f^:yq .- : r-/-r. ■:•■.,;•■ ■■. -■ ■>'■■ •■.- :' - ! -'. : - ' :fedy Lenox i desired a; gerva.nt to re r %uest the presence of Miss Glendinning. \\ v vvThe heart ef lord Mbntalbas throbbed rwith emotion.—" What a surprising like¬ ness Miss Glendinning bears towards lord Arthur!" he cried. " Had I previously seen your lordship to; my meeting with your lovely daughter, I should have re¬ quired ho greater introduction than the resemblance she bears." f. :.; VvWh'at then, have.;you already seen myi ^anddaughter;■?*- said- lady Lenox. ^ f>?fIOh yes," replied lad^ Cecilia; " and the effect has proved just what I expected
ELEANOR. —I knew" he must admire Miss Glendin¬ ning." " Or else I were lost to all sense of beauty," he returned; " for to see that lovely form must be to adore; who can be insensible to such fascination ?" r " And pray, my lord," inquired lady Glendinning, *' how and when have you seen Georgina?" " Last night," he replied, " unknown to herself, I saw her, and conversed with her." " Indeed!" said her ladyship. " But where ?" His lordship was about to answer, when the door opened, and Georgina entered, leaning on the mm of Eleanor. . Lady Glendinning advanced, and meet¬ ing them, exclaimed—" Lord Montalban!" Eleanor, on seeing him, uttered an ex¬ clamation of surprise, her cheeks turned pale, and she trembled, as the whole truth flashed upon her mind; while lord Mont¬ alban, passing Georgina, seized the hand of Eleanor, exclaiming—" Lovely Miss
Glendinning! may I hope the pleasure of this hour is reciprocal ? And permit me now to fulfil the promise I last night made you, when I vowed we should meet again; - and thus, in the presence of your parents, I acknowledge the felicity with which your presence inspires me." Eleanor was near fainting with varying sensations, while lady CeciUa and lady Lenox both exclaimed—" What is the meaning of this ? Is your lordship mad, or are you really labouring under a mis¬ take?" "What mistake can there be?" returned his lordship; ** do I not address Miss Glen¬ dinning, the daughter of lord Arthur?" " No, my lord," cried lady Glendinning, who felt provoked at the slight put upon Georgina; " or at least," she added, in a sarcastic tone, " not my daughter, whom I now present to your lordship." Georgina, who felt extremely mortified, bowed very haughtily, while lord Mont¬ alban, in a tone of disappointment • and distress, begged an explanation of the
mystery, and added, having been intro¬ duced to that lady as Miss Glendinning, he had of course concluded it to be the daughter of lord and lady Glendinning. Lady Lenox cast a look of furious anger on the affrighted Eleanor, as she violently exclaimed—" This comes of this girl's in¬ trusion into our family, and being called by a name to which she has no right; thus causing an insult to be offered to my granddaughter, of whose presence lord Montalban hardly appears sensible." " I beg your ladyship's pardon," he re¬ plied ; " no insult, on my part, has been offered to Miss Glendinning, who, I trust, knowing the mistake which has occurred, will pardon an unintentional offence." " None has been offered on your part," cried lord Arthur, who had appeared great¬ ly distressed at the above discovery; " the mistake which has occurred was very na¬ tural; and I must affirm that lady Lenox has greatly forgotten herself; when she expresses herself in a way so insulting to l 3
Eleanor; and I insist that an apology is made to her. You behold in that young lady, iny lord, not my daughter, but my niece, who, in that character, is entitled to as much respect as my own offspring; and I insist, while under my roof, she shall meet with it" Lord Montalban appeared to revive at this declaration—** Your lordship's niece!" he repeated; *' then at least I may be both pardoned and excused for my mistake." " And that is at best but doubtful," in¬ terrupted lady Lenox, who was highly enraged at the speech of lord Arthur; and dancing her eyes at him, she continued— " Although your lordship pleases to assert it, other people may not be inclined to be so credulous; and I must say your folly is n6w very apparent, as in encouraging her arrogance, you have subjected your own daughter to this disrespectful treat¬ ment No doubt Miss Eleanor was high¬ ly 'delighted last night, in passing herself off as the heiress of Glendinning'" Eleanor, who till now had remained si-
lent, hearing herself so falsely accused, re¬ plied—" I beg your ladyship's pardon; the unfortunate mistake which has oc¬ curred was perfectly undesigned on my part; nor am I aware why your ladyship should thus unjustly accuse me. It is true that lord Montalban widely erred in his judgment, when he mistook a poor orphan like myself for the much happier and accomplished Miss Glendinning; I acknowledge my depeiident situation on the bounty of lord and lady Glendinning, to whose kindness I owe every thing; but, notwithstanding this, I feel a sentiment within my bosom, which impels the rising blush to pervade my cheek, as 1 think on the indignity offered to me; let me be whose offspring I may, I trust I am not the object of insult. Lord Montalban," she continued, " will, I have no doubt, soon repair the injury done to Miss Glen¬ dinning, by forgetting the trifling ac¬ quaintance he formed with an unfortunate being like myself." She could not pro¬ ceed, her feelings overcame her, and she
burst into tears. Ashamed of her weak¬ ness, she then begged permission to retire from a scene to which her presence could oniy add fresh embarrassments. , " For your own sake, my dear Eleanor," cried lord Arthur, " I will allow you to leave the room, as your feelings must doubtless be greatly hurt at the treatment you have received, and which, I trust, will never again be repeated, or I shall be compelled to use the authority of my own house, in desiring those who are deficient in the respect due to my family to desist from their visits, and to learn that an in¬ sult offered to you is an indirect one to me; and, depend on it, I shall resent it as such.; And now, my Eleanor, retire, and compose yourself, and be assured you will always find a protector in me." Eleanor curtseyed, and was about to leave the room, when lord Montalban, again rising from his seat, into which he had dejectedly thrown himself, thus ad¬ dressed her:—'* Before you leave the room, Miss Glendinning, permit me to apologise
to 3 r ou for the unpleasant situation into which I have, though unintentionally, thrown you ; believe me, 1 shall ever re¬ gret that I should have been the cause of giving you such uneasiness, be your situa¬ tion in this family what it may; you are the acknowledged niece of lord Arthur, and, as such, you certainly claim every attention and respect on my part. And I must now beg leave to correct an error in your expression, where you say I shall soon forget the acquaintance made with you : on the contrary, I shall ever remem¬ ber with pleasure the meeting with you last night; and I trust that meeting wiil prove favourable to my wishes, in forming a lasting friendship between us. To you, Miss Glendinning," he added, bowing to Georgina, " I am ready to make any apo¬ logy which you think necessary; but I am sure your good nature will prompt you to pardon an error which can in no way derogate from your beauty and merits; and be assured I shall at all times be ready to pay every respect due to the daughter
Of lord Arthur; and I now trust you will generously pronounce my pardon." Georgina haughtily replied that his lordship's excuse was admitted, as the occasion could not possibly affect her in any way whatever. Lord JMontalban turned from her, and bowing to Eleanor with the utmost ten¬ derness, continued to gaze on her till the door closed after her; he then threw him¬ self into his chair, and leaned pensively on his hand. All voices now began to resound in dis¬ cordant tones; lady Lenox, who was dy¬ ing to vent her spleen against fSleanor, continued to throw out invectives, but was restrained by the presence of lord Arthur; while lady Cecilia, who thought and acted in compliance with her, ex¬ pressed her disapprobation of the forego¬ ing scene; adding, she thought lord Mont¬ alban had made himself very ridiculous in the affair, and that she could not see why so much should have been made of a trif¬ ling mistake, which had now been tho-
roughly explained, and the subject might now be altogether dropped. Lady Glendinning had remained tlie most silent of the party; it was evident that she was greatly disconcerted, but she forbore to express her feelings on the oc¬ casion. Lord Arthur looked the > riiost gratified of all—he appeared to be the only one pleased at the above incident; while lord Montalban plainly evinced how much uneasiness he experienced in this cruel disappointment to his hopes: his situation was certainly a most unpleasant one, as he had so openly avowed his ad¬ miration of Eleanor, who he Saw had no friend in any present, save lord Arthur; it was in vain he endeavoured to converse with ease; and all parties found them¬ selves mutually embarrassed. Earl Campbell now entered the room, when the mistake which had occurred was detailed to him. .With his usual policy, he smiled at the trifling incident, which he passed off as a thing of no consequence whatever, though he plainly saw, by the
countenances of all present, that the effect was dangerous; and poor Eleanor was the mental object of his displeasure Lord Montalban as soon as possible shortened the visit, which had so com¬ pletely crushed his hopes of happiness: the ladies took leave of him rather coolly, while the hearty shake of the hand given him by lord Arthur, proved that he at least was his friend; he likewise gave him a general invitation to the castle, which lord Montalban of course accepted. On his entering the carriage with lady Cecilia, she began by pouring out a pro¬ fusion of invectives against his foolish conduct, and vented a torrent of abuse on Eleanor, whose true and doubtful situa¬ tion she now explained to her nephew; adding, that she was a most presumirig, forward girl, who, taking advantage of lord Arthur's folly, intruded herself into their family, much against the inclination of one part of it. Lord Montalban warmly defended the innocent object of her wrath, and openly
avowed his admiration of her; that he had already yielded his heart too far to withdraw it from her; and that Eleanor was the only woman he ever saw who could make an impression on him. At this avowal lady Cecilia was en¬ raged almost to madness; she threatened instantly to discard him from her favour, and also threw out hints that his disobe¬ dience should be extended to his father. This alarmed lord Montalban ; for himself he cared not, but he knew the marquis had been imprudent—his estates were mortgaged, and he in a manner was de- pendent on his wealthy sister, who reigned sole mistress on this account: all her im¬ mense property she had bequeathed, at her decease, to the marquis and his son, and she now threatened to withdraw all favours, if lord Montalban persisted in his folly towards Eleanor. Under these cir¬ cumstances, he endeavoured to pacify her; but on their arrival at home she immedi¬ ately sought the marquis, and acquainted him with the result, and her anger at lord
Montalban's conduct. The marquis, who -lived a slave to her wishes, directly coin¬ cided with her, and joined in threats to¬ wards his son, who at last, wearied with their united persecutions, promised to think no more of Eleanor, but to visit at St. Michael's as the lover of Miss Glen¬ dinning. As soon as possible he retired to his own room, and in an agony of mind reflected on this distressing occurrence. To appease his relatives he had indeed promised to forget Eleanor, but the painful sensation at liis heart told him that was impossible —he had.suffered her to take too deep an impression on his heart to erase her, and her lovely form arose before his eyes with redoubled delight; he thought on the cruel treatment she received from lady Lenox, and her tears pierced him to the soul. Had he been independent, he would instantly have gloried in avowing his love, and joined his hand to hers; but, as it was, he dared not: he felt he could never love another, and a secret motive
induced him to keep on friendly terms at the castle, as it would give him an oppor¬ tunity of frequently seeing her; and he indulged a hope that something might transpire to favour his wishes, as he saw lord Arthur was not displeased at his at¬ tention to Eleanor. How different were liis feelings to what they had been a few short hours since, when he had thought himself at the climax of earthly happiness, in being about to receive the hand and affections of t : he lovely being who had so enslaved his, very soul It- the. contrast was HOW so umresanig max ne coiau t>v«.i*~Wy endure the painful conviction, and he threw himself on a chair, and mentally exclaimed—" I am the most miserable of human beings," .
CHAPTER XV. Thou seest we i,ire not all alone unhappy; '1 his wide and universal theatre Presents more woeful pageants than the scene Wherein we play Shakespeare. Eleanor, on quitting a scene so painful to her feelings, instantly retired to her own room, and there gave vent to those emotions which she could not conceal; never in her life had she felt so truly mi¬ serable—the treatment she had received had stung her to the soul; but even that appeared light, when put in competition with the discovery she had made; to find, in the graceful stranger, lord Montalban, the intended husband of Georgina, was agony to the extreme; she had suffered her young and innocent heart to cherish his fascinating form since they had met on the preceding evening, and she would
have given worlds to have found him any other person in existence than lord Mont¬ alban ; of course she novv considered she must endeavour to forget him, though how difficult would be the task, when she should be continually seeing him! She concluded he would also withdraw his attention from her, now he had found her to be only a dependent on lord Ar¬ thur; her pride was hurt again. She thought on his kind and impassioned be¬ haviour towards her; but that was while he was-under the impression of his mis¬ take; his attention must now be directed to Miss Glendinning, while she was ren¬ dered miserable; yet, be her feelings what¬ ever they might, she was resolved to give no farther encouragement to lord Mont¬ alban, as she saw the indignation of all the family would fall upon her if she were an obstacle to their greatness; she saw her¬ self, by a sudden and unexpected event, plunged into a difficulty, from which she feared there was no resource; she dreaded
•the rage of lady Lenox, whose behaviour filled her with terror, and she pictured to herself future scenes of vexation and dis¬ tress; she mentally raised a prayer to the wise Disposer of ali events, to guide her safe through her perilous situation, and to give her strength to sustain lier present affliction. She had scarce relieved her surcharged heart, when Mrs. Conway tapped at her door; and on entering, expressed her sur¬ prise at the remains of tears which still shone in the eyes of Eleanor. She endea¬ voured to give a trifling excuse; and Mrs. Conway proceeded to say, that having learned she was in her own room, she had come to her to know what she thought of lord Montalban; adding, she had watched him into his carriage, and that she thought he appeared the most genteel and hand¬ some young man she had ever seen. This question raised the embarrassment of poor Eleanor, and as she coincided in the opinion of Mrs. Conway, a deep blush
pervaded her countenance, and a fresh tear chased down her cheek, which had before glistened in her eye. Mrs. Conway now asked her the cause of all this emotion, and begged her to tell her the cause of her grief; adding, if it was in her power to serve her, she might depend on her will. Eleanor thanked her, and partly owned the cause of her agitation, as slie thought it must now reach the ears of all pariiefc— her having met with lord Montalban at the rural fete. Mrs. Conway blessed herself with sur¬ prise, and significantly added, she guessed who would be the future lady Montalban; though, to be sure, in that case, she conti¬ nued, what was to become of poor Mr. Robert Glendinning, who to be sure was dying for her ? Eleanor immediately corrected both her opinions, adding, that it was totally im¬ possible for eitlier of those gentlemen to be any thing farther to her than they
were; and begged her never to mention such a subject again, if she valued her peace. Mrs. Conway of course promised she would not do any thing to vex her, as she should always be most happy to do any thing to serve her; and added, that if any of the family treated her ill through the present mistake, that her house should al¬ ways be an asylum for her. Eleanor sincerely thanked her, and sighed as she reflected that Mrs. Conway's suppo¬ sition might prove real, and her offer ac¬ ceptable to her: Eleanor found her so truly good-natured, that she excused her vulga¬ rity and ignorance, and she felt glad to converse with one who appeared to be¬ friend her. Mrs. Conway staid in her room until it was time to dress for dinner, and Eleanor dreaded almost to meet the family under her embarrassed situation, particularly as she understood lady Lenox was to be pre¬ sent; and had she been aware of what
had transpired during the morning, she would have dreaded still more to have met with her. We have already observed that Eobert was confined to his room with a severe cold, and consequently had not been pre¬ sent at the scene of confusion, which saved him the pangs which it would have in¬ flicted in his bosom. After the departure of lord Montalban, lady Lenox paid a visit to the chamber of her grandson, and on his inquiring respecting lord Montal¬ ban, she immediately related the scene which had passed, with all due exaggera¬ tion, alleging that Eleanor had passed her¬ self off as Georgina, danced with him, and, in short, had so artfully captivated him, that she supposed the consequences would be very pretty indeed. This account greatly distressed llobert; he did not believe a word to the disadvan¬ tage of Eleanor, but that lord Montalban was really in love with her he did not doubt, and* it was also probable that she VOL. i. m
was likewise pleased with his lordship: this idea caused him the greatest pain, and he resolved, let the consequences be what they would, to avow his own love for her, and endeavour to gain her affec¬ tions before they should be irrevocably lost; he therefore defended Eleanor, and said quite enough to convince his enraged grandmother of the state of his heart. This information added to her former vexation, and she left Robert, highly en¬ raged with him also. She considered Ele¬ anor as an object doomed to thwart the hopes of her ambitious plans, as, in the event of lord Montalban fulfilling his en¬ gagement with Georgina, another blow was ready to fall on her head, still worse than that; that the heir of Glendinning should so demean himself, was a dreadful degradation to her pride, and she inwardly resolved to form some plan to get rid of the unfortunate Eleanor. She left llobert, highly displeased; while he, regardless of her disapprobation, resolved to speak to his father on the sub-
ject; and he flattered himself that, in ob¬ taining his consent, he might also gain that of Eleanor. The awful warning at the tomb he now looked upon as some imposition—it might even have been a stratagem of lady Lenox, who had pro¬ bably overheard their conversation; at all events, he resolved to make another effort to gain the hand of Eleanor. Finding himself something better, he joined the party at dinner, where all ap¬ peared dissatisfied ancl ill at ease; lady Lenox never spoke, or took the least no¬ tice of Eleanor, who sat uneasy and sad; Mr. and Mrs. Conway were the only lively ones in company; they mentioned their intention of shortly departing for London, and again begged the present party to favour them with their company at some period or another. This invitation produced in the mind of lady Lenox a plan, which slie was re¬ solved to try to effect, by which means to rid herself of Eleanor, whom she now
m2
really hated; these thoughts she, how¬ ever, kept to herself until another oppor¬ tunity. As soon as possible, she mentioned her design to lady Glendinning,, who made no objection to the proposal, as, she was really hurt at the affront, as she considered it, put upon her family by lord Montalban. Pursuant to her design, lady Lenox now became all of a sudden very civil to Mrs. Conway, and at length hinted how pleasant it would he to her to return to London with a female companion; and that she dare say lady Glendinning would be kind enough to let Eleanor accompany her. This was immediately caught at by Mrs. Conway, who much wished for the society of Eleanor; and thanking lady Lenox, slie said she would ask the per¬ mission of lord Arthur and. his lady. Accordingly, on meeting again at the tea- table, Mrs. Conway openly requested Ele¬ anor to accompany her to London, in which she was joined by Mr. Conway. Though Eleanor had not the least wish for such a journey, yet, under the present
circumstances, she considered it niight possibly be the wisest step she could pur¬ sue, Which would of course remove her from lord Montalban y she hesitated in her reply, und looked fearfully at lady Gleridinning, who, putting on a smile, cned-ii-" If you think you should like &e journey, Eleanor, you have my 'free ^permission and approbation to accompany Mrs. Conway for any time you like." ' « Thank your ladyship," said the de¬ lighted Mrs. Conway. " No\v> Miss Ele¬ anor, you can have no farther excuse; and I am sure I will "do every thing in my power to make you comfortable." " I have no doubt as to that, madam," cried lord Arthur, in a tone of displeasure'; " but Eleanor has yet a very just excuse left for declining your kind invitation—a reason Which puts it entirely Out of her power to &ecept if." " Indeed, my lord," replied Mrs. Con¬ way ; " and what is that ?" " My total disapprobation, madam" he
returned; ^.and I think Eleanor ijwould not wishtodisobeymy commands." ^ v ; :" Certainly not," replied Eleanor; " ,be assured I; would not; think; of it, without -it was sanctioned by ,y ourjlprdship," , *f. And pray, my lord," cried -ladyAGlen- dinning, -,-$. what may your objections -be ? -WhenJ haye given my consent-I <should judge; it quite sufficient: 'oyer,Eleanor's actions;] I have certainly an undoubted right." -h-,,-'. : v . ; : ;v;J,; v:,- : -\::-i,w:-y>: ]" You have so," he replied; ^ but when she was consigned to ^owr care, she. be¬ came, from that moment, an inmate of my family; and 1 no part, of it shall ever quit;this house unaccompanied, either,by yourself or me; and I trust Mrs.. Conway will not deem this avowal as & rude ; orie, hut impute it to its right meaning; and therefore I hope the; request will, not be renewed, as I never will consent to it." ; Mi's.Conway said,'though she was:vast¬ ly disappointed, she coulcT not be so, t un- gentteel ;astOi repeat her ; wish, as his lord-
ship did not like it; and it was now finally settled that they should depart from the castle on the next day. On hearing her plan defeated, lady Le¬ nox was greatly enraged, and she threw out bitter sarcasms'on the behaviour of lord Arthur; and requesting her carriage might be ordered, she left the room, high¬ ly displeased. She requested to speak to lady Glendinning, and, when alone, she incensed the mind of her daughter against lord Arthur, and added fresh fuel to the fire which burned within her bosom; she was indeed greatly vexed with lord Ar¬ thur for counteracting her designs, and for the next succeeding day she behaved towards him with an additional haughti¬ ness, which had no other effect upon him than that of still being more displeased with her than ever. Tn the course of the morning lord Mont- r/lban was announced, having come to pay 3 morning visit. Eleanor, who was pre¬ sent, trembled a3 he entered the room. He addressed her in the most polite man-
uer, and likewise conducted himself the same to lady Glendinning and her daugh¬ ter, though it was evident that his mind was ill at ease; but our readers are ac¬ quainted with the fatal cause of his forced obedience to his aunt, and will not there¬ fore wonder that, to please her, and to save his father, he had consented to visit us the lover of Georgina, though, in his own mind, he was resolved never to wed any other than Eleanor. Robert, who was now present, watched the direction of his lordship's eye, which he saw fixed with tenderness on Eleanor, and gave to his heart a pang which he could scarce conceal. Lord Montalban too truly read in the intelligent countenance of Eleanor that his feelings were reciprocal; he saw the blush of her cheeks, he beheld her down¬ cast eye, with emotions of joy and grief. To be loved by her was the height of his wishes; and yet it was almost madness to hope it, in his present situation. ^Eleanor, who was greatly embarrassed
by his presence, took the first opportunity of retiring with Mrs. Conway, in order fo assist her in arranging her things fdr tra± veiling. She was profuse in her praises of lord Montalban, who, she said, was a fit husband for Eleanor, and that she must forgive her for saying they would make a charming couple. Eleanor reproved her for her observa¬ tions, and begged she would not repeat them, as it greatly distressed her. ' Mrs. Conway staid with Eleanor almost to the last minute of her departure,* till at length Mr. Conway sumrhoned her to the chaise, which was waiting. A very cor¬ dial leave was taken by all the family, arid Mrs. Conway promised to write EleanOr an account of her reception with her fa¬ ther. * ' ' ? ' , Eleanor did not rriakti her appearance in the drawing-room while lord MontaU ban staid, as she resolved to avoid him as much as possible, as his presence was now too painful for her to endure. .MS l( ' ' .-*'< 'i .
The whole family remained at home that day, and after tea, Robert requested pennission to speak to his,father alone. Lord Arthur, who usuaily retired early to his own room to indulge his melancho¬ ly, desired him to follow him ' there, and they left the room together. Eleanor, who' knew her* presence could be dispensed with by the present company, resolved to take a solitary ramble; and accordingly leaving the castle, bent her steps towards the seaside, with the inten¬ tion of again ascending the rocks where her curiosity had been so excited a short time since. She climbed up a craggy point, and gazed with admiration on the beautiful scene around her; suddenly she heard a low murmuring; she thought it was £ human voice; she listened atten¬ tively, and was convinced it was so. She cast her eyes around, and on another part, rather higher than that on which she stood, she beheld the same female whom she had before seen, again kneeling, and apparently raising a prayer to Heaven.
Eleanor was astonished; she left the spot on which she stood, and softly ascend¬ ed the other part of the rock, and arrived close behind the mysterious female. Ele¬ anor paused—she did not wish to interrupt her devotions, and she stood, fearing almost to breathe. The stranger, in an impressive voice, ejaculated a fervent prayer, and then, in supplicating accents, exclaimed—" Do thou, oh Father of mercies! receive my penitence—witness the contrition of my soul, and forgive my manifold errors. Yet, alas! I almost despair that pardon can be granted to a wretch hke me, who, repin¬ ing at thy wise decrees, has meditated the rash act of self-destruction. Yet thou, oh God! knowest my sufferings, and in death alone I seek repose." She paused, while Eleanor, who dis¬ tinctly heard the foregoing speech, trem¬ bled violently; she doubted not but this unhappy female was about to plunge her¬ self into eternity—she shuddered, as she feared lest in one moment she might be-
3352 ELEANOR. hold an act so repugnant to the feelings of * a true Christian; she had ever been brought up in the bright paths of religion, and the enormous Crime of which she thought the stranger now going to be guilty, made her tremble with horror, and she resolved to save her from her dreadful fete; she rushed forward, and catching the arm of the female, she exclaimed—" Rash woman! what art thou about, that thou darest thus to violate all laws, sacred and divine? Thinkest thou such prayers as thine can be acceptable to the Throne of Grace, who has pronounced an everlasting fiat on the suicide, who dares, unbidden, plunge into the presence of an offended God?" She paused, while the stranger, gazing wildly on her, gave a piercing scream, and exclaiming—" Merciful Heaven!" sunk fainting in the arms *of the terror-struck and astonished Eleanor.
CHAPTER XVI.
Then lei thy tongue my fate explain, And I will try to bear my woe. Lord Lyttleton Alns! how oft does goodness wound itself, And bweet affection punc the spring of woe! Home. Lord Arthur, on reaching his own room, turned a look of inquiry On his son, who, however, remained silent, and appeared vainly endeavouring to conquer an em¬ barrassment under which he evidently la¬ boured. After a pause of a few minutes, lord Arthur broke the silence, by exclaim¬ ing—" Now, Robert, I am ready to give you the hearing you wislied, and Wait your communication, Which I suppose to be a subject of consequence, by this pri¬ vacy." " It is indeed, my lord," he replied, «* a
subject on which hangs my future happi¬ ness ; and, in throwing myself upon your mercy and clemency, I trust I shall, as I ever have done, find a kind friend in my father, who will pity and assist me in my wishes." " Speak out," cried lord Arthur; " you have a father willing to promote your hap¬ piness, if in my power; say then what it is you would ask at my hands—what it is you require." *' I will, my lord, unfold all the weak¬ ness of my heart to you," returned Robert —« or rather let me say, my glory; for why should man blush to acknowledge an affection for a lovely, virtuous woman, whose smiles alone have power to capti¬ vate our very soul-—whose beauty, though like the glittering star of heaven, which now shines in majestic splendour in yon spangled sky, is but as a secondary object, when compared to the virtues of her mind —that sweetness of disposition and temper which have irrevocably won my affections? However, my lord, you may think this
picture overdrawn,, it is? realized in the lovely object of my affection, the .idea ,of whom has animated me to this expression." Lord Arthur faintly smiled at the warmth of his son, but a deep sigh escaped his lips as he replied—" If you really love such a woman as this, you cannot fear any disap¬ probation on my part, unless peculiar cir¬ cumstances impel me to it. But reveal the name of this captivating girl, and I shall then judge how to answer you." " Does not your lordship already guess ?" exclaimed Robert. " That I can have seen but one who bears this description,, you, my father, already know; you love her, and will, I am sure, receive her as your daughter. Oh then bless me with your approbation—let me fly to my Eleanor, and tell her that,, sanctioned by the con¬ sent of my father, I lay my hand and for¬ tune at her feet." > « , " Eleanor!" ejaculated lord Arthur, as his face assumed a deadly paleness—;" my worst fears are then realized! Oh, Robert!
rash, mistaken boy! never Can I sanction such an attachment." " Is it possible liiear you aright ?" cried Eobert. " Oh, my father! doom me not to such woe: I never can be happy with* out her. Is she not all you could desire for your son? is she not all I have de¬ scribed her ?" " She is indeed," replied lord Arthur*** " I own her matchless worth. But, mark me, Eobert, if you wish not to blast your own happiness for ever—if you value the peace of your father-—nay, my very rea¬ son—think no more of Eleanor—I so¬ lemnly avow she never can be yours; therefore promise me from this moment to forget her, or at least to view her in the light, as she really is, of a very near relation; speak, my son, and promise me this; oh! you know not what you have occasioned in my already-troubled bosom! then quickly vow obedience to my com¬ mands, and relieve thy agonized father." llobert was surprised at the agony of
his countenance; his heart was ready to break; his filial love prompted him to obey his father, but, in so doing, he lost Eleanor for ever.—" Oh, my fatlier!" he cried, " at least give me your reason for this cruel injunction—tell me what fatal cause exists to prevent our unions sure I am entitled to know why my hopes of happiness are thus crushed." " Must I explain to my son ?" retorted lord Arthur, in an angry voice t " it is my command, sir, that you obey my orders respecting Eleanor; those commands, how¬ ever cruel they may appear to you, are sa¬ cred, and I charge you to fulfil them; for know, should you persist in your purpose, and actually lead Eleanor to the altar, I Would at that moment step forth, and in the face of Heaven forbid your union, by revealing a cause which would at once stop thy impious design." " If such a causae exists then," inter¬ rupted Robert, <* reveal it now, my lord. I am your sori, it is true, and, Heaven is
my witness, I would sacrifice my life to the duty I owe a father; but, my lord, it is not your threats will enforce obedience. I feel I am injured; to affection I would yield any thing, but to your threats I am invulnerable." Lord Arthur took his hand—" Robert," he cried, " I have been too warm, but you know not the agitation of this wretch¬ ed bosom. I cannot reveal w r hat you ask, for, in so doing, your father would consign himself to everlasting shame and disgrace; therefore spare me—it is a father entreats his son—it is a father who thus prostrates himself to his child;" saying which he actually threw himself on his knees before the astonished Robert. " Rise, my lord," he exclaimed—" de¬ base not yourself to me; oh! rather let me assume that posture, and beg for your mercy. Rise, my lord, if you wish not to distract my senses." " Never," replied lord Arthur, " until you promise me to renow >& all thoughts
of Eleanor: oh! say but this, and you will relieve your father from the depth of misery." He appeared convulsed with agony: what a moment was this for a son!—'* My heart will break," cried Robert. " But, oh, my father! nature pleads for thee; rise then, and receive my vows of obedi¬ ence ; and Heaven grant me fortitude to aid me in my resolution! Yes, my father, for you alone I give up all thoughts of Eleanor; and now, my lord, I am again your son, and permit these knees to bend in obedience to your commands; they shall be sacred, though they cost me dear indeed." Lord Arthur started up, and throwing himself on the shoulder of his son, ex¬ claimed— " May the blessing of Heaven, who now witnesses thy filial piety, fall on thy head! Oh, Robert! I know not how to thank you enough; you have relieved my heart from a dreadful weight, for I know you will keep your word with me. Doubtless you think my commands cruel;
but the time may come when you will own that my reasons were decisive; and be assured, in any other choice you may make, yon shall have my entire approba¬ tion ; choose but a lovely, virtuous bride, and, be she ever so lowly, I will with joy receive her as my daughter." Robert shook his head.—" Alas, my father! no other willjiave power to erase Eleanor from my heart. Yet fear me not —I will adhere to my promise to you; but my own private feelings must be acute. And now pray excuse me—per¬ mit me to retire, that I may endeavour to compose my feelings." , . " Do so," replied his lordship, " and the blessing of your father attend you! I must also endeavour to collect my thoughts, for my mind is a perfect chaos." Robert pressed the hand of his father, and rushed from the room; while lord Arthur, throwing himself on a sofa, gave Vent to the feelings of his heart. That his son had thus nobly sacrificed his wishes to his will gave him the greatest satisfaction;
yet, while he applauded his conduct, he felt for his sufferings: to conquer an un¬ fortunate attachment he well knew was a pang almost past endurance; yet there were reasons which compelled such a sacri¬ fice to be made. His thoughts now revert¬ ed towards Eleanor: would she not also be rendered a sufferer by this blow to the hopes of Robert? Were her affections placed on him ? This he could not ascer¬ tain: he was fully aware that she had made an impression on lord Montalban, but he could not decide whether it was mutual; and here again a fresh perplexity arose in his mind. If he favoured the wishes of lord Montalban, he> was in a manner conspiring against Georgina; and could he act in opposition to the welfare of his own child? He knew not what steps to pursue; but he at length resolved to see Eleanor, and question her on the subject of Robert's attachment, and con¬ vince himself of the state of her heart. He endeavoured to compose himself, and then, pursuant to his design, he left his
chamber, and, regardless of the observa¬ tion it would excite, returned to the draw¬ ing-room—a practice of which he had ne¬ ver made use since the fatal time which had consigned him to the gloom and pri¬ vacy of his own chamber. Lady Glendinning and her daughter were now alone, and looked with a coun¬ tenance of surprise on the hasty appear¬ ance of lord Arthur.—" This is a favour, my lord," said her ladyship. " What has induced you to pay us this visit to-night ?" " Where is Eleanor ?" demanded lord Arthur, without paying any attention to his lady's question; " I want to speak with her immediately." Lady Glendinning looked mortified.— " I thought it must be an occasion of great importance, my lord, that could in¬ duce you to leave your chamber; Eleanor is certainly of great consequence, to be thus able to withdraw you from your fa¬ vourite solitude; but you must exert the virtue of patience till her return, for Ele¬ anor is out."
" Out!" re-echoed lord Arthur; '«where should she be, so late, and alone?" " Indeed I know not," replied her lady¬ ship ; *' over her actions you take so much concern and interest, that it scarcely leaves me any room to exert my authority." Lord Arthur appeared incapable of re¬ plying to his lady, and seating himself, merely expressed his intention of awaiting her return. The shades of night drew on fast, and still Eleanor did not appear. Lord Arthur paced the room.— w Does she usually stay out so late as this?" he at length inquired. Her ladyship replied in the negative. Another half-hour passed on, when a sudden thought assailed him.—" Where is Robert ?" he inquired. " He went out, my lord," replied Geor¬ gina, " directly he left you." " Then it is plain," cried lord Arthur. " But I will not be deceived—I will know the truth of this." He then desired that Eleanor might be sent to him, let her return at what time
she might; and leaving lady Glendinning much astonished at his conduct, once more retired to his own room. He there gave way to the most painful suspicions—-he was convinced in idea that Robert was now with Eleanor, and he tormented him¬ self by reflecting that perhaps he was, even now, forgetting his late promise to him, and persuading Eleanor to become his; in all the agony of suspense he re¬ mained for some time, tormenting himself with imaginary evils. Lord, Arthur, once the pride and envy of Scotland, was novv degenerated into the most miserable of his sex—bis fate apparently lying on the conduct of two children, whom he now concluded to be acting in total opposition to his wishes* What a piece of work is man L for ever " ingenious to contrive his own woe," and continually seeking out objects of grief; and, in anticipation of the future, passes over the present good—unmindful of bless¬ ings which are falling; on our heads, ob¬ scured perhaps.by the veil of adversity for
a time, but which eventually leads us to everlasting happiness—if not in this tran¬ sient world, it is revealed to us in that unknown land, where all is bliss without alloy. " Would to Heaven," sighed lord Ar¬ thur, " that this miserable frame were laid in its last peaceful abode! Who would live to be the wretched being I now am— a slave to my own tormenting passions, weighed down to earth by the stings of conscience, and sinking under the afflic¬ tion of a tormenting secret, which renders me a burthen to myself? Oh, Eleanor! Eleanor! where art thou now ?" he con¬ tinued. " Couldst thou but know what are my sufferings, thy gentle heart would pity me." He paused, as a tear dimmed his sunken eye. In a few minutes, as if suddenly re¬ collecting himself, he drew out his watch __the hour of nine was considerably past, and Eleanor not yet returned; his pa¬ tience was exhausted—he resolved to seek vol. I. N
her himself, though unacquainted with the route she had taken; he caught up his hat, when his door suddenly opened, and Ele¬ anor stood before him. " I was just coming to seek you," he cried, in an angry tone. lie cast a scru¬ tinizing glance on her; she appeared in¬ capable of speech, her eyes were red with weeping, and her whole frame trembled with emotion. This increased the alarm of lord Arthur—" Yes," thought he, « it is plain Robert has been with her—he has communicated my sentiments to her, and the result is evident. Oh, miserable father that I am! Yet the task must be com¬ pleted, though an arduous one." He kept his eye fixed upon Eleanor for some time, who seemed near sinking: she raised a glance so expressive on his lord- sliip, that he felt himself agitated,—" Ele¬ anor," he cried, " why have you absented yourself so long to-night? Is this well done, to assist in deceiving me? Nay, start not," he continued; " I am aware of what has been communicated to you this
night—your evident agitation is sufficient proof, and acts as a fresh torment to my mind." " Is it possible that I hear you aright?" said Eleanor, in a tremulous voice, " Can your lordship guess the fatal cause of my grief and horror? Oh! then I am most miserable indeed." " Yes, unhappy girl!" he replied, " I am not to be deceived. Where—where, I say, is your companion, with whom you have been reviling against me? But I solemnly declare that this deception shall be punished as it deserves. -Where have you left this beloved object, for whose sake you have forfeited my esteem ?" " Oh! say not so," exclaimed Eleanor, sinking on her knees before him. " Can you wonder at my grief, my agitation? But, oh! let all your anger fall on me alone; for that loved being, whom you thus unjustly accuse, suffer me to plead. Can your anger sever the affection that exists between us? oh, no-—impossible. Ah! frown not on me—let nature plead N2
at thy heart, and receive your child, your daughter, to your arms." " My daughter!" he re-echoed, as a cold shudder ran over his frame—" oh, Elea¬ nor! you know I already love you as such; but never can you become the wife of Robert." " The wife of Robert!" repeated Elea¬ nor. " Am I really in my senses? or does 1 your lordship mock my misery?— Too surely that is an event impossible to transpire; and I know not why, at such a time as this, you should speak on a sub¬ ject which 1 can only fill me with horror." " Let me rightly understand you," cried lord Arthur, " and tell me candidly, does not this emotion arise from Robert having this night acquainted you with my disap¬ probation of your union ?" " My lord, I know not what you mean. I have not seen your son this evening, nor do I know what has passed between Ro¬ bert and you on a subject of that nature, of which; be assured, 1 am in entire igno¬ rance—a subject which, with my consent,
can never be renewed, as tlie mere idea fills my mind with horror." The features of lord Arthur assumed a more placid appearance at this assertion.— " What then," he cried, " has not your grief proceeded on account of Robert? and have you not been staying out with him this night ?" " On my word, I have not," replied Eleanor; " and be assured, Robert is the last person in existence whom I could think of in the light to which you allude." " Why all this agitation then ?" inquired lord Arthur; " and why did you plead for my mercy on your companion f Did you not avow my frowns could not sever the affection between you and the beloved ob¬ ject? did you not acknowledge, in this, in favour of Robert?" Eleanor cast a glance of surprise— " Was it to him you alluded, my lord ?" she cried. « Certainly," he returned; " but I find I am mistaken." Eleanor clasped her hands together— N3
a smile of satisfaction stole over her love¬ ly features, as his ! lordship proceeded—^ " Though you have removed a weight .from my heart, yet much remains to be explained. Tell mo the meaning of those expressions 1 which burst from your lips as you implored mc to receive you as my daughter, and likewise who has been your companion to-night." Eleanor was evidently confused—she hesitated in her answer.—" My lord, your own behaviour is iny excuse; you ad¬ dressed me with seventy, and, unused to that tone from you, I sunk agitated, and became hardly able to reply. Am I not your child by adoption ? and, as such, a daughter implored the mercy of her father." Lord Arthur was affected—'* My child," lie replied—" my Eleanor, thou art indeed dear to my heart; yes, you shall be my daughter in affection; but still I must take the authority of a parent in asking where you have been to-night, and with whom ?" " My lord," she cried, '* I have been down to the village, and was detained in
conversation by one of the villagers, with whom I feared you were angry; and' it was for her I pleaded." Lord Arthur saw the blush on her coun¬ tenance as she framed this, excuse, for he was convinced it was so. Another suspi¬ cion now crossed his mind: it was very- probable that the companion of her walk was lord Montalban, and this sufficiently accounted for her extreme agitation and self-confession; even this idea appeared as light to^ him, in comparison with his other thoughts respecting Robert; for so great was his secret reason for preventing such an intercourse, that all else appeared as trivial. " Eleanor," he cried, addressing her very seriously, " I will question you no farther on a subject which evidently embarrasses you—1 will shew you what confidence I place in your virtue and integrity, only imploring you never to depart for one moment in future from the paths of sin¬ cerity ; the first deviation is fatal, since to retrieve it is impossible, particularly a young and lovely female, who^e tender
sex exposes them to many persecutions. Eleanor, trust not in man, unless sanc¬ tioned by the approbation of those whose maturer judgment can better discern your chance of happiness; in such a case, select some friend upon whose confidence you can rely, and who will serve you at every risk; make that friend of me,. Eleanor, and be assured I will ever protect you; should love, insidious love, woman's worst, destructive foe, assail your heart and wound your peace, then fly to me, reveal all your wishes, and be assured I will exert every nerve to promote your happiness. And now, Eleanor, though I would willingly, nay proudly, acknowledge you as my daughter, yet are there reasons of the most urgent nature to prevent your union with Robert; therefore, for my peace, once more promise me that you will never listen to his addresses." " Never, my lord," replied Eleanor; " I solemnly promise you, by all my hopes of peace in this world* and eternal happiness in that to come, never to regard him in any other light than I do at 1 present; and
be assured I entertain no other thought of him than I ought. I have ever looked upon him as a near relation, and as such I alone consider him." ' " I take you at your word," returned lord Arthur, " and believe me it is no common motive that thus impels me to act; I have reasons of the most serious nature, which I cannot explain. But I think I need not farther enforce obedience on your part, as, if I mistake not, your wishes point to another channel, but which, I fear, will tend only to embitter your peace of mind. Blush not, my Ele¬ anor," he added, as she averted her eyes in confusion—" love is a passion which, sooner or later, absorbs the noblest facul¬ ties of our souls. You are formed by na¬ ture tender and sensible—alive to all the softer feelings of your sex; this makes me tremble for your future peace. I am fully aware that lord Montalban has already discerned your superiority, and appreci¬ ates your virtue; but I fear his relations will not sanction his wishes, and I confess it would hurt me much to see my Eleanor
drawn into a family who^would scorn her; tlierefore beware how you listen to him, for I know, by sad experience, that a lover will use every argument to gain the object of his wishes; believe me, I have your welfare truly at heart, and, did it rest on me alone, I would promote your union with lord Montalban* who I think deserv¬ ing my Eleanor; and when I say this, I pay him the highest proof of my regard." " My lord," cried the agitated Eleanor, *' I know not how to thank you for your kindness to me; would I could express my gratitude! But, with respect to lord Montalban, though I own his superior qualities, yet I would scorn to enter his family under such circumstances; no, my lord, though a poor, unacknowledged ob¬ ject, I possess as proud a spirit as the haughty lady Cecilia Gray; though, I trust, not the same ungenerous temper to despise a being whom she imagines below her in birth. But the time may come when I shall stand forth and demand the respect due to my birth—my mother may some day stand forth and acknowledge
my rights; I may then probably be en¬ folded in a father's arms, who will bless and own his child. Oh, my mother! when shall I behold that time ?" Lord Arthur was astonished at her warmth—" Thy mother /" he repeated— " oh! would / could behold her! —Ah! why does she so long conceal herself from my view? Yet perhaps she no longer exists—dreadful thought to me!" " I believe, my lord," said Eleanor, gazing earnestly at him, " you once loved her with ardour and affection ?" " Once loved her!" he replied—" oh, Eleanor! I still dote on her—never can her image be effaced from my memory— no time can wash away my tears." " It is strange," v exclaimed Eleanor, " that lady 'Frances should thus have ab¬ sented herself so long from her family." " Lady Frances!" re-echoed lord Ar¬ thur, staring wildly on Eleanor. " Yes, my lord," she replied—" your sister, whom you so truly mourn—my supposed mother." " True, true," he cried; " my head-wan-
ders sadly to-night, I scarce know what I say, so many events press on my mind; I would therefore wish to be alone. Retire, -Eleanor, for to-night you also stand in need of rest; go and compose yourself, and endeavour to obtain some repose early." Eleanor, glad of his permission to retire, wished him a tender good-night, which he returned with affectionate warmth—he pressed her hand fervently. She looked at him earnestly—the starting tear was visible in her eye; she moved towards the door, and then returning, she pressed both the hands of lord Arthur between her own, and, in a voice of great emotion, she cried —« Oh! bless your Eleanor." Lord Arthur was affected at her ad¬ dress ; he cast a smile of delight on her, as he pronounced the words—*' Good¬ night, my dearest Eleanor; may the Al¬ mighty bless you as fervently as I do!— Bless you, my child!" E'SD OF VOL. I.
1'iinted by J. Darling, Lendenhall-Strect, London.
