OWEN CASTLE, 



A NOVEL. 



OWEN CASTLE; 

OR, 

WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 

IN FOUK VOLUMES. 



BY 

MARY ANN SULLIVAN, 

LATE OF THE THEATRES ROYAL, LIVERPOOL, MANCHESTER, 
NEWCASTLE, BIRMINGHAM, AND NORWICH. 



Kdow then this troth, enoagh for man to know, 
Virtoe alone is happiness below. POPE. 



SECOND EDITION. 
VOL. XL 



-is.5>*»^^«<6=f- 



LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR 

A. K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALL-STBEET. 



1823. 



Edward Hodson, Printer, 15, Cross Street, Hatton Garden. 



8^3 



vta- 



OWEN CASTLE ; 



OR, 



Which is the Heroine? 



CHAPTER IX. 

XlIE ladies returned to the drawing 
room, leaving Sir Matthew to do honour 
to his guests and cellar ; after tea the whole 
party adjourned to enjoy the coolness of 
the air in the pleasure grounds^ from 
thence to the temple which rose on a 
sloping bank, edged by the broad smooth 
lake that wound through the valley :. to 
the pillar of the temple was confined a 
pleasure gondola, ornamented with a 
white awning, trimmed with green and 
VOL. ir. B 



2 (TWEN castle; 

pink frirge, the seats covered by green 
silk cushions with pink tassels, the oars 
and gonpola painted to correspond. Near 
the steerage sat a Welch harper, the in- 
strument dressed with ribbons, and send- 
ing forth, from beneath the fingers of 
the hoary performer^ the sweetest melody 
of his native wilds. Four rowers, dress- 
ed in white trowsers, green jackets and 
straw hats, held their oars read}^ to obey 
the summons of the Baronet, who re- 
quested his guests to honour him with 
their company on board the little bark. 
They assented, and were swiftly conveyed 
along the glassy surface of the lake. 

" Yonder is a pretty cottage that seems 
rej^dy to fall into the current, for it hangs 
on the edge of the acclivity/' said Au- 
gustus. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 3 

*' It is the parsonage/' answered Grace, 
^^ don't you see the church and a few 
hovels, with farm houses in the perspec- 
tive?'' 

" I now see them," he repUed, '' but did 
not suppose it possible those huts could 
furnish forth a congregation." 

*^ Indeed but tbey do,'* said Mrs. Wal- 
lace, " and scarcely any weather prevents 
their assembling before the leader of the 
flock, at whose house Sir Matthew in- 
forms me he means to call.'* 

"My imagination is led to picture 
this pious pastor in all the meek virtues 
that usually adorn the village preacher,*' 
said Augustus. 

IS 2 



4 OWEN CASTLE ; 

Mrs. Wallace smiled, and cried, '' I 
wish your fiiiicy may not be disappointed 
in liis a})})earance; ^ov he is in my opi- 
nion the very opposite of what we con- 
ceive, or find in novels, of country par- 
sons. There is another^ about eight miles 
oiX all that would charm the sight or ear. 
The youthful preacher, Rufus Mar ma- 
duke, would indeed be worth sitting in 
a damp and dilapitated aisle to listen 
to." 

*^ Is he so engaging, then?" said Om- 
phale. 

" You shall judge of that, for he has 
accepted a card for the ball, and I warn 
you to be careful of your heart," said 
IVIrs. Wallace. 



ORj WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 5 

*' 1 no fear to lose what I have not/' 
returned the artless Omphale. 

" Don't be too sure of that," cried the 
former. 

Omphale smiled, and gaily replied, " I 
will dare the trial without great dread. I 
no fear." — Augustus appeared thoughtful. 

Mrs. Wallace went on, lookins: archlv 
in his face : " Would you not fear for the 
dangerous trial, and think a handsome 
swain with fascinating address and solid 
sense, no object of indifference?'* 

" I think, madam,'' he returned in a 
serious tone, '- that the lady who could not 
resist a predilection for'a new acquaint- 



o OWEN castle; 

ance, would not deserve the affections of 
an old one.'* 

" But/' continued she, " if she gained 
the former, the affection of the latter 
would be of no value, and easily forgotten 
while under the influence of more pow- 
erful charms." 

" It is very true, madam, (said he) wo- 
man is mutable by nature." Then turn- 
ing to Omphale with an uneasy expres- 
sion of countenance he added: " Do you 
not long to prove the force of this danger- 
ous gentleman's superior qualifications?" 

'^ I own," cried Omphale, with great 
sweetness, " / should like much to see 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 7 

and converse with him, since de lady talk 
so highly of him/* ^^ r^j 

" I thought ^/* said he, '* but be not 
too bold." 

" Beware of a rival/' whispered Mrs. 
Wallace. 

" 1 shall,''' returned Augustus with a 
menacing look, " when I find him.'*' 

She laughed, and with a sprightly air 
rallying him on jealousy, soon found, by 
the eagerness he displayed to convince 
her he did not possess an atom of that 
propensity, that with only imagi?i€d cause, 
he would become a slave to that baleful 

B 4 



8 OWEN CASTLE; 

passion; she congratulated herself on her 
skill in discovering this blemish, and 
determined to turn it to her own pur- 
poses. 

Having arrived at the steps leading to 
the parsonage^ Sir Matthew handed Oni- 
phale and Grace out of the gondola, and 
begged Augustus to take care of his aunt 
and PiTrs. Wallace. 

The Reverend Mr. Maskall spoke his 
sense of the honour Sir Matthew had 
conferred on him, by the unexpected 
pleasure of his company, and the sanction 
of the ladie?, v^ho partook of refresh- 
ments in his rustic parlour, added infi- 
nitely to his happiness. 



GR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 9 

" I took the liberty of an old acquain- 
tance/' cried Sir Matthew, '' in thus abrupt- 
ly forcing myself and friends on you. in 
order to give this gentleman and lady 
(introducing Augustus and Omphule) 
who are lately arrived in England, an 
opportunity of admiring the romantic 
scenery about this cottage of your' s, with 
the lake, and my castle in the distance. 
The moon is at its full, 'twill be a charm- 
ing guide on our way home. Fearing the 
dews might fall heavy, and the air too 
Gool on the water, I ordered the carriages 
to meet us here, and convey us all home 
in good time, that I might not trespass 
too much on my young travellers." 

Mr. Maskall received this speech from 
Sir Matthew with the most servile smile 

B d 



10 OWEN castle; 

of gratified humility. His pupil, Tobit 
Swithin, a comely youths now entered 
the room, with a fishing rod in his hand, 
and a small basket loaded with the finny 
spoil, carried by a foot-boy Vtho followed 
him. He blushed, and was drawing back 
in great confusion on seeing unexpected 
company assembled before -him, when 
his tutor called on him to remain : he re- 
turned^ made an aukward bow to the 
ladies, starnmered an excuse for his un- 
dressed appearance, and in his embarrass- 
ment, seated himself, before Mr. Maskall 
had introduced him to the strangers ; but 
on that gentleman naming him to Augus- 
tus, and Augustus to him, he got up, over- 
come with the consciousness of his inadver- 
ency, and endeavouring to make it less ob- 
servable, by repeated bows rendered him* 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 1 1 

self more conspicuously ridiculous : when 
his tutor introduced him to Omphale 
he seemed to recover a little, but on 
her throwing back a white veil, that had 
shaded her face, he was thrown entirely 
off his guard, and stood, staring on her face 
with vacant stupidity, till awoke as it 
were, by a pinch on the arm from Mrs. . 
Wallace, who sat enjoying the effect 
which Omphale's complexion had on the 
vouth. She could not refrain a smothered 
titter at his expence ; this threw him into 
fresh dismay, and faltering out an inco- 
herent compliment on her beauty, sunk 
silent and stifly on the first chair that pre- 
sented itself, which unluckily stood by 
•chance in the middle of the room. Thus 
was he surrounded bv the eves of the 
ladies, which so overpowered his diffidence, 
b6 



12 OWEN castle; 

that he bent his own upon the ground, 
not daring to encounter them, but by 
obhque and side-long glances. Grace, 
who had frequently been in his company, 
and knew the good nature of his heart, 
and rusticity of manners, drew her chair 
close to his, and asking him how some of 
his acquaintances were, reheved him from 
his embarrasment. When the invitation 
was mentioned, his eyes sparkled with 
pleasurable expectation, and in a foolish 
simper, whispered Grace, that he hoped 
for the honour of her hand for the two 
first dances, but was sorry he could not 
oblige her for more, as he had engaged 
himself devotedly to the pretty Miss 
Sabina xMeredith. 

" She is highly honoured, I'm sure," 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 13 

cried Mrs. Wallace, over hearing him, 
and determined to make him the butt of 
the company. ^' But for the affront offered 
to Miss Fitzbeaucamp, I think you should 
be banished from the night's diversion." 

" Affront/' cried he, reddening with 
accusation,'' I meant no affront; I should 
be concerned, nay, miserable, if I had 
given any to a young lady of her mo- 
desty, beauty and accomplishments ; but 
when a promise was given to another 
one preferred — no, not preferred," he stam- 
mered, at being thus led unwarily to 
betray himself, " I don't mean to say so— 
but I mean" — 

" Yes, we can perceive very well what 
you meariy' said Mrs. Wallace, interrupt- 



14 OWEN CASTLE; 

ing him ; "you mean that your love for 
Miss Sabina Meredith has conquered ; — 
forsaking all others, you cleave to her 
alone." 

^'Now, I vow, madam, you quite mis- 
construe my simple words. I do not love 
Miss Sahina. I admire her as a very 
handsome agreeable young lady; but love 
is another thing. No, madam, I assure 
you if 1 did solicit her hand privately, it 
was because she dances so well ; and it is 
the talk of every lady, that we are charm- 
ing partners, and never should be sepa- 
rated," returned he in confusion. 

" Yes, it is evident enough how you ac- 
cord, and none I'm sure will have the barbar- 
rity to part you. Depend on my good will 



OR; WHICH IS THE HEROINE.'' 15 

being made use of in your behalf, for I'll 
warn all the company of your previous 
contract, and the lady shall not be taken 
from you said she/* 

"There now again, how you run on^^ 
cried he in an alarm ; " I shall not dare to 
look Sabina in the face ; she will never for- 
give me, if you keep the gentlemen from 
asking her hand, and then she will be obli- 
ged to sit still all the time Fm dancing with 
Miss Eva/' returned he pettishly. 

" Oh ! you traiterous creature, and have 
you engaged yourself to two devotedly/. Did 
you not inform Miss Fitzbeauchamp, that 
Miss Sabina had chained you for the 
night?" exclaimed Mrs. Wallace in mock 
anger and astonishment. 



1 6 OWEN castle; 

"Oh dear! how you catch one up/' re- 
turned he abashed and in a half whisper, 
said slyly, " If you must know, and won't 
tell every body of it, I am obliged to finesse 
a little with the ladies, and please them all ; 
for being a great favorite with them, 
I should be monopolized by every one, all 
are so anxious to keep me to themselves; 
so I divide my attentions, and by that 
means keep them in good humour. Really 
a good dancer in a country place has hard 
work to escape wrangles and jangles ; so 
to prevent altercations, I put down all I 
am engaged to, of an evening, in my poc- 
ket book : — So then I pay my attentions 
to one lady, carry tea to another, lemon- 
ade to a third, chat with a fourth, flirt 
with ^ fifth, and so on."^ 

" I really, sir, did not know of how 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE 1 l^ 

much importance you were. Why you 
are a perfect slave to the fair. It is very 
fortunate you had a card. Had you been 
omitted, half our ladies would have been 
in despair/' cried Mrs. Wallace in a se- 
rious tone, and with a grave face. 

" If it was'nt for Titus and I, the balls 
and amusements would be worth nothing ; 
we help one another, and cater for the 
amusements of the ladies between us; — 
the rest of the country gentlemen are taken 
up in hunting, coursing, and the bottle; 
so that they attend little to the pleasures 
of the ladies. Thtobald Raymond is 
grave and despises such pursuits; and 
Rufus Marmaduke, he is always studying 
Greek and Latin, and says he has no 
time to throw away; then there is Griffith, 



18 OWEN CASTLE; 

Guy and Nathan, that think more of a 
fox diace than the finest woman in the 
land r the\^ are resolved to hve as bachelors 
they say, and enjoy tlie sweets of peace 
and hberty, in defiance of all the smiles 
and ogles of the belles, who at church 
never fail to assail them/' 

" Then I perceive you and Titus are 
the Damons of the village, the guardians 
of pleasure and love, to whom offerings 
should be made by every maiden^ wife, 
and widow/* said Mrs. Wallace. 

*^ No, no, we leave the wives and widows 
to their husbands and relations ; we dare 
not take charge of them, for they would 
be more troublesome than a legion of 
maidsj being so long in command over 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROIxVE? 19 

their husbands, they would use the same 
authority over the bachelors perhaps, and 
drive us before them. Now the maids are 
gentle and thankful for our attentions, 
and wishing to please always smile so 
sweetly, that its quite dehghtful to enlist 
under their banners, they laugh quite 
involuntarily when I appear/' cried he, 
" and call me good natured Tobit and 
kind Tobit." 

" And handsome Tobit, iVe heard,** 
said she. 

"Nay^ now madam, you quite confound 
me, and before all these ladies too V' sim- 
pered he, looking down, then summoning 
courage, cried out, " London ladies have 
wit and beauty at will, and strike a coun- 



20 mVEN CASTLE; 

try youth quite off his guard in a tvvink- 
ling." 

"I have one request, Mr. Tobit to 
make," said she, " and Tve done ; which 
is, that you will overlook the bachelor's 
rule, and take me, although I am a wife, 
under your protection and guidance for 
pleasure this next dreary winter. Tve 
no relations, no husband to cater out 
amusements, and must rely on your 
gallantry to keep me awake in this dull 
place, or to give me a sleeping portion, 
that I may slumber away the heavy 
hours like the dormouse." 

^' Nay, now you are jesting again, 
madam, and pleased to laugh at me. 
You have seen too many tine doings in 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 21 

London, to relish our country sports; 
besides, who dare gallant a captains 
lady ; — indeed neither Titus or myself 
dare venture the undertaking." 

" You reject me, then," said she, pre- 
tending grief. — He bowed saying, " I've 
no inclination to be called out, madam." 

'^ You are right, Mr. S within," said 
Sir Matthew, " and I wish all young 
men were of your opinion, that to gallant 
a married woman is not only encroaching 
on her husband's right, and running into 
error and danger, but an insult to the 
single part of that creation, whose mo- 
dest worth and retiring beauty demands 
the respectful homage and attentions of 
every true lover of virtue and honour." 



22 OWEN CASTLE ; 

Mrs. Wallace bit her lip in vexation 
and resolved to be revenged on him. 



" In London/' said Omphale, ^' you 
would find vast number of single ladies 
very thankful for de kind office of so plea- 
sant a gentleman ; for the married gen- 
tlewomen take all the young men to wait 
on them, I understand while I was there; 
but did not see them myself, being much 
confined at home." 

« Yes/' cried Mrs. Wallace, '' all hus- 
bands^ particularly old ones^ should keep 
their wives in the country, if they mean 
not to be the ridicule of their acquaint- 
ance." 

Sir Matthew's eye met her's. He felt 
her insinuation, but ventured not a reply. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE r . 23 

The party now adjourned to the flower 
garden to view the beauty of the scenery, 
"which was in<Ieed romantic and sublime, 
A full and splendid harvest moon rose 
grandly over the smooth lake, casting its 
spangling beams upon the rippling edges 
that kissed the steep base of the aspiring 
hills towering above the fleecy clouds that 
moved gradually beneath a clear blue 
sky, which being reflected and softened in 
the water, gave to the whole additional 
serenity and majesty. The ripened corn 
tied in sheaves together on the sloping 
land, the deep gloom of a thick coppice 
and commanding castle, with the frothing 
water- fall, which was heard in hollow 
murmurs, were all objects conspiring to 
heighten the aspect of the delightful scene. 
The sea was faintly visible in the dis- 
tance. 



24 OWEN CASTLE; 

^' This cottage is rich in prospect and 
neatness/' said Augustus to Mr. Maskall; 
and you must be extremely happy in the 
possession of it, sir/* 

"I like it very well, sir," answered he; 
" but a rich living would be preferable to, 
a fine prospect." 

^^Most parsons are fond of the goods of 
this life," cried Sir Matthew, " and they 
are right. It is not what goeth into the 
man that defileth him but v\hat cometh 
out. Eh ! Maskall, what say "vou ? a good 
dinner anda couple bottles of wine after 
preaching a whole morning, is as accept- 
t.ible to a parson as to a j'>tdge, a soldier, 
or a statesman?" 

" That a pardon should partake of the 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 25 

blessings of plenty, I think just and pro- 
per ; but must say, that excess becomes 
him less than any other man. If his doc- 
trine be worthy adoption, let his moral 
conduct and actions correspond, not contra, 
diet it, or give the ignorant cause to reflect 
on him as a disgraceful and indolent sup- 
» porter of the pure faith, he should be ever 
studious to inculcate and promote ;" said 
Mrs. Milbourne. 

" Let us hope there are few such, ma- 
dam," returned Mr. Maskall, " as deserve 
the censure of so amiable a lady, but m*- 
ny worthy her commendation." 

" I hope so too, sir," answered she^ 
*' and wish they would exert themselves 
more earnestly than they do at jiresent ; 

VOL. II. C 



26 OWEN CASTLE ; 

their congregations would then be more 
numerous, and the 7nethodistical chapels 
less thronged." 

"I fear/' cried Mrs. Wallace, '* the 
rosy and joyous face of Mr. Maskall, joined 
to his rotundity of figure, make you sus- 
pect him of inattention to his flock. " 

'^ The opinion of any lady, must be of 
weight with nie, (replied the divine,) but 
particularly that of Mrs. Milbourne, whose 
liberality of heart I am sure is too great to 
suspect me wrongfully, or conclude fioni 
my appearance tliat I am a votary of ex- 
cess. " There was a forced smile, accompa- 
nied by a low bow, that convinced the wi- 
dow that he had taken what she had ut- 
tered to himself. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 27 ' 

Tobit S within was complaining to 
Grace of Mrs. Wallace's behaviour to him, 
and expressing himself much hurt. " Her 
rallying me would be all very well, if she 
did not contrive to stingr as it were so 
cruelly, in the midst of her jesting. If I 
was'nt afraid of putting my wit against 
hers, rd let her sele I was nt so simple as 
she thinks I am. Now every one knows 
how sensible you are, and yet I can talk 
to you by the hour, and have nothing but 
sweetness and pleasant conversation in re- 
turn ; and if I was foolish Toh'it, as I have 
heard she has nick-named me, you would 
not beteazed by my company. I wish she 
had kept herself in London, and not have 
come here, for until her arrival nobody 
doubted my capacity, I was as wise as any 
of them; but now my best friends laugh 
c2 



2S OWEN CA&TLE; 

and wink at every word^ look, or turn 
I take; and do all I can, I cannot convince 
them tliat m}^ understanding is as clear as 
any country gentleman's within twenty 
miles round." 

"T don't doubt it/' answered Grace, 
wishing he would withdraw himself, as 
she saw Sir Matthew watching them ; but 
he went on, happy to have one he sup- 
posed sympathized in his distress. — " I 
know you never did ; no, you know me 
better ; but is it not a hard case, nay, a 
serious misfortune, for a young gentleman 
to labour under : say what I will, it is all 
the same, and I find there is nothing so 
hard to overcome as a received opinion, 
however unjust. If you knew^ how much I 
suffer from it, you w ould pity me. " — The 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 29 

woeful face he drew up in saying this, 
caused Grace to laugh iu spite of her en- 
deavours to the contrary. 

Sir Matthew joined them, saying to To- 
bit, " You possess the talent of pleasing 
Mr. Swithin, in a very eminent degree ; 
Miss Fitzbeauchamp looks gayer since 
with you, than IVe seen her for this many 
a day. What might be the topic, pray T* 

*' I don't know. Sir Matthew; that is I 
can't just recollect. I don't remember say- 
ing anything remarkably witty, but it 
seems the lady thought so, and that is 
quite enough for me," answered he, much 
elated and with great self satisfaction. 

" I am come to conduct you to the car- 



30 OW£N CASTLE; 

riage which waits, " cried Sir Matthew^ 
'^ that is if you will allow me that gratifi- 
cation ; but perhaps Mr. Swithin has be- 
spoke that honour/* 

" No, 1 have not Sir Matthew," said he, 
" and you are perfectly welcome to take 
charge of Miss Fitzbeauchamp while I go 
and make myself serviceable to the other 
ladies ;" so saying he bounded out of 
sight. Grace found herself entirely alone 
with SirMathew, towhome she gave her 
hand to lead him to his carriage. 

" Have you forgiven the effect of a too- 
fervent passion, lovely Grace, that tran- 
sported me beyond the limits of hospitality 
or kindness, and made me appear the 
very opposite to what I really was ?" 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? B*l' 

" You said nothing, Sir Matthew, but 
what was strictly true," answered she; -'and^ 
I had nothing to forgive, but every thing' 
to be grateful for." 

" Gratitude is not the theme, or appli- 
cable at all to the present question," cried 
he ; '' or if it were, it must belong solely to 
me, who must ever acknowledge the un- 
wearied preseverance of so kind a little 
nurse when confined to a sick chamber." 

** That was nothing more than my duty 
to one in affliction, who had been so kind 
to me." 

"_You think too lightly of so great an 
obligation. I would repay it with my hand 
and fortune, if thought by i/ou a re- 
c 4 



o2 OWEN CASTLE; 

compence adequate to your loveliness and 
merit'* — He paused for her answer. 

" Tlie honour, the high reward for un- 
worthiness such as mine/' she faultered 
cut, but fearing she had said too much 
stopped short, and he supplied the re- 
mainder — *'is such, that you will accept/ 
(cried he) in the greatest rapture, and I 
am happy," 

She was silent and could scarce sup- 
port herself to the carriage, into which 
he handed her, where Omphale was al- 
ready seated. Augustus, Mrs. Wallace, 
and Mrs. Milbourne, took possession of 
the other. Grace drew her veil close over 
her face, and leaning back in the coach 
sunk into a despondent reverie. Omphale 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 33 

often looked earnestly upon her, as if she 
read in her dejected countenance the un- 
easiness of her mind, and was anxious 
to relieve it. When Grace attended her 
to her dressing room, she pressed her 
warmly to accept her friendship, and re- 
veal the secret of her apparent grief; but 
loath to communicate the situation of her 
aunt, to one so recently known to her, 
she excused herself, and consigning her 
to the care of her faithful Chloe, departed 
to her chamber, much prepossessed by the 
artless and spontaneous offer of the beau- 
tiful West Indian, whose warmth of heart 
shone conspicuously through all her ac« 
tions.. 



34 OWEN CASTLE; 



CHAPTER X. 



X HE next morning as they walked 
together in the pleasure grounds, Om- 
phale thus addressed her : " The prospect 
of this ball to-night gives me no plea- 
sure. Me always dread the gaze of stran- 
gers ; my appearance being opposite to 
their; own they make wonder of it, 
which hurt me, and shew much ill-breed- 
ing from them." 

" You have nothing to fear from that ; 
though our neighbours are rustic gentry,'* 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROIxNE ? 35 

answered Grace, ^' they know what's due 
to politeness." 

" I hope you be right ; for London 
people, whom all call graceful in manners" 
and elegance, were, in my poor idea, de- 
void much of politeness ; for the gentle- 
men and ladies stare so long and full in 
my face, as shame me to blush. They 
less mindful of good manners den quite 
vulgarity people in the street/' said Om- 
phale. 

^' I have been told it is their practice to 
each other, and not confined to strangers ; 
and custom reconciles them to it so well, 
that females after a long residence in town, 
feel no inconvenience from the scrutiniz- 
ing glances of the other sex/* 
c6 



36 on EN castle; 

''When I am married," continued the 
former, " I shall take great pleasure much 
in your company, if you will be with 
ftie as sister, for (I don't know de reason 
"Why I feel so) I love you so soon as I 
see you. Me never see since I come to 
England, one whom I could wash make 
friend but you. Ah! all white lady no like 
you, me fear ; so once more, I ask you ta 
be my friend and sister, to tell me how 
1 can serve you, and will perform my 
word. Mr. Stanley speak great of you^ 
and tell me you be very good and affec- 
tionate girl,. I know much of your situa- 
tion, and beg you to give de full statement 
of it to a sister :'' saying this, she took her 
hand vv^ithin her own, and leading her to 
a seat, received the full explanation of 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE r 37 

her difficulty with respect to Sir Matthew* 
At the mention of his views, the full 
and beautiful eyes of the mulatto spark- 
ted with anger and surprise. When Grace 
concluded, she cried, " You never marrjr 
dat grand papa, with a broken heart 
for love; while Omphale have riches she 
will be your friend ; you live with her, and 
tell him so, that he no more teaze you 
with odious passion." 

" I dare not hazard that, dear madam^ 
till I know the bounty of your affianced 
husband has given my aunt a home!"— 
Her grateful heart, overpowered by the 
liberal kindness of her new and youthful 
friend, relieved itself by tears, which she 
shed on her dark but benevolent hand. 



^8 OWEN castle; 

" Ah ! you no love me/' sighed she, 

" I should be devoid of feeling indeed, 
if after such partial proffers of confidence, 
I did not," returned Grace. 

*' Then give me sincere proof," cried 
Omphale, taking from her finger a rich 
ring, and placing it on one of Grace's, 
*' by accepting this poor token of unity, 
confidence, and affection, that I give you ; 
and hence to come, you call me Omphale 
mster, though notof de same blood, but 
sister to serve and love you her life long." 
They embraced, and the compact wa& 
ratified by the delighted Grace. The sud- 
den and strong preference felt by these 
young and inexperienced daughters of 
innocence and unsophisticated truth, for 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 39 

each other, is a striking proof that as- 
similating minds and dispositions are in- 
sensibly attached, in their first intercourse; 
and where guile has no harbour, the ac- 
tions are free, open and ingenuous. Thus 
it was with Omphale ; ardent and enthu- 
siastic by nature, she listened to the ac- 
count the good Mr. Stanley gave of Mrs. 
Milbourne and her niece, with pity and 
a determination to befriend them ; but 
when she saw them, her compassion mel- 
ted into fervent esteem and a desire to be 
helovedhy them. The simple yet touching 
story of the unfortunate fate of the be- 
loved of Grace, joined to her mild beauty 
and patient grief, so wrought on her, that 
she hailed her, in the warm impulse of 
her feelings, as her future sister, compa- 
nion and friend. — Augustus and Mrs. 



40 OWEN CASTLE-r, 

Wallace appeared at the end of the walk so 
close in conversation that they did not no- 
tice the friends. A deep sigh from Om- 
phale, startled Grace, who turning quickly- 
round, beheld a heavy gloom gathering on 
her expressive countenance, and her fea- 
tures contracting into severe meditation. 
^ Are you not well/* said Grace, with anx- 
ious voice, struck by the sudden change of 
her aspect ? 

" Yes, very well in health, but sick of 
mind," she returned, following the receding 
forms of Augustus and Mrs. Wallace with 
her eyes. '' Oh ! me no happy, when me see 
my Augustus so neglectful." She then in- 
formed Grace, that he had been less atten- 
tive since their residing in London, and 
much devoted to novelty and dissipation ; 



OR WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 41 

frequently taunting her on the singularity 
of her complexion, when she requested 
him to introduce her abroad ; and finally 
refusing to pay those marks of respect and 
love she had been so long honoured with. 
*' Every pretty white face charm and se- 
duce him from his engagement to me (she 
cried) in town ; then why should I not 
dread the same in country r" 

"Believe me, you wrong him,*' said 
Grace. " You saw not the agony he suffered 
when your life was in danger ; if you had, 
you would banish all doubt of his strong 
affection ; and let me entreat you will not 
bring on yourself the misery of suspicioii 
in so tender a point. The lady he now con- 
verses with, is a wife and mother ; who 
notwithstanding her gay manners^ is con- 



42 OWEN castle; 

scious of the sacred characters she has to 
support'* 

" It is very like I may be wrong," re- 
turned Omphale^ her expressive counte- 
nance brightening at the recollection of 
Augustus having preserved her life, and 
pleased by lier friend's defence of one she 
so ardently hoped was all her fond heart 
desired : " I may be tenacious in my tem- 
per ; my mother was blacky and amongst 
the many crimes attributed to persons of 
that colour, h jealousy. I allow that to be 
true, for me feel myself to be suspectful in 
my love; and may inherit it from my 
mother; who love my father to madness, 
for she poison herself when he leave her, 
and she left me to the mercy of strangers, 
as he had done; but I was preserved by an. 



OR, WHICH 19 THE HEROINE ? 43 

angel : I will tell you more some time 
hence," she cried, wiping her eyes ; then 
taking up her discourse, went on. — *'I 
cannot counteract my nature, nor do I 
grieve for it ; for I would rather give up 
my affections in the fervent and decided 
way I have, than be indifferent, though 
one state may give torture, and the other 
calmness. While I accuse my poor rash 
parent of this blemish in my disposition, 
I must defend her, and many of the same 
colour, against the cruel accusations of 
wicked people, and say truly, that the co- 
hur is no bias to the heart ; for they love 
sincere those who merit it, pity the 
wretched, worship the true God, and are 
ever faithful v^ hen entrusted by the confi- 
ding. The cold plodding inhabitants of 
these climes, no make allowance for those 



44 OWEN castle; 

fostered by the tropical sun, who glow 
with passions not to be confined by the 
icy rules of senseless Laplanders/' 

" Many are worthy of your vindica- 
tion,*' said Grace, '' but all are not (I have 
heard) to be regarded in the same light ; 
some are treacherous and crafiy.** 

" Good and bad of all colours," cried 
Omphale. " Poor slave when bleeding 
under de lash of tyrant master, cannot 
feel regard ; No, he think of home, his 
wife, babes and parents ; and then the 
heavy chains gall him "sore, his labour 
great, his food scant, his correction se« 
vere. These no prove de white man 
loving, kind, or faithful, who have edu- 
cation, and religious instruction ; much 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE : 45 

less the poor, harassed, ignorant slave : No, 
no, it is kindness that bends them to 
obedience, not cruelty ; if de planters 
would reflect on their own savage treat- 
ment of de savages, as they call de black 
Africs ; no wonder they turn tigers and 
destroy their oppressors. But me no 
spring from Afric, my mother was 
Gentoo black." 

*' I feel the full force of what you say," 
replied Grace, " and join you in believing 
that less severity would render those whose 
misfortunes have thrown them into sla- 
very, more pliaHt and resigned.'* 

Tobit Svvithin appeared, searching for 
them, and having caught a glimpse of 
their figures, came running up, puffing 



46 OWEN CASTLE; 

t)ut of breath, to inform them that Rufus 
Marmaduke had arrived, and that Sir 
Matthew was anxious to introduce him 
to the ladies. 

" It is also whispered/* added Tobit, 
casting a sly glance on Grace, " that he 
is not invited here for nothing, and that 
he carries a Hcense in his pocket, to be 
ready wlien called for/' 

" A licenser said Grace, **' who is 
going to be married? Pray Mr. Swithin, 
inform me." 

^* Well, that's very funny and quite odd 
that you pretend to be so strange, when 
every body else knows who is to be the happy 
pair; and that this gay ball is only given 



OR. WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? ^J 

'by Sir Matthew, in compliment to vou, 
who are to be Ladv Fitzowen/' 



" I Lady Fitzowen," (cried Griace, 

overcome with vexation and alarm ) '-what 
could give rise to such a report ; a reuort 
that has no real foundation." 

" Why, I said to myself,'' (returned 
Tobit, with an appearance of gravity and 
self-approved wisdom) *' that I thought 
it was verv stransre that so voung^ and 
lovelv a lady should all uf a sudden marry 
a gentleman old enough to be her grand- 
father, because he has a fine fortune, and 
she would be called -my lady. It is the 
wonder of every body, and they do so jest 
about the ancient beau and his young 
^ife, that you would die of laughing, 



4S OWEN CASTLE ; 

were you to hear them ;' exclaimed he 
bursting into a hearty laugh. 

" I think not/' (returned Grace, much 
hurt to find what she supposed an entire 
secret, so pubhc,) " and give me leave 
to ask you, how this story of my be- 
coming Lady Fitzowen originated?" 

^' Dear me! how serious you look^ (an- 
swered he dropping his tittering, and 
lengthening his visage into a regretful 
expression) '^ had I known you would 
have been so offended, I would not have 
said a word on the subject. Vm sure 
there is nothing to vex you, Miss Fitzbeau- 
champ ; for when I told my acquaintances 
that you were to be Lady Fitzowen, 
they said they were very glad of it, and 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROlKE ? 4$ 

that they hoped you would make the 
castle your abode for the winter, and 
give treats and balls to enliven Sir Mat- 
thew, and gratify them." 

'' So then it is 7/ou, Mr. Swithin, I 
have to thank for circulating this report ; 
may I beg to know how you came so 
w^U acquainted with my transactions as 
to make them the topic of conversation?'* 

*' I came by it without enquiry, I 
assure you," returned he, wishing to 
make his own peace, and throw the blame 
on another ; " for Mrs. Wallace said so in 
the note she sent with my card.*' There 
it is (cried he, giving it into her hand.) " I 
was not led to suppose it any secret, there" 
fore I cannot be so much to blame." 

VOL. II. D 



60 OWEN CASTLE ; 

" Mrs. Wallace by the request of Sir 
Matthew Fitzowen begs leave to offer to 
the acceptance of Mr. S within, the 
enclosed card, and invitation for a ball 
on Wednesday evening next, which is 
to celebrate the intended nuptials of Miss 
Fitzbeauchamp and the baronet, who 
entreat the honour of your company. 
Friday morning'' 

Grace was surprized and vexed at the 
discovery of Mrs. Wallace being the in- 
former, and could not define why she 
should thus wish to blazon the offer, 
which the baronet had made her ; but 
on returning the note into his hand, she 
exonerated him from any fault in the 
affair; she then led away Omphale, and 
hastened towards the library. As they 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? SI 

proceeded, she could not refrain from 
expressing her wonder, that a person 
professing so much friendship, should 
act in a manner quite foreign to it, with- 
out apparent motive. — Suppose I was 
engaged to Sir Matthew, she could derive 
no advantage from the union ; what then 
could induce her to make his offers so 
public ? The more she reflected on the 
affair, the more perplexed she was, and 
unable to account for the anxiety Mrs. 
Wallace evinced in spreading abroad what 
seemingly was so uninteresting to her. 



D 2 



52 OWEN CASTLE 



CHAPTER XL 



JL OBIT Svvlthin was the only son 
of the rich Mrs. Swithin, who had been a 
widow many years, and so fondly did she 
doat on hhn, her only child, that she 
could not bear to send him to a latin 
school, or college, where he might receive 
an education fitting the sphere of life his 
fortune would entitle him to ; but con- 
signed him at an early age to the care and 
instructions of the Reverend Mr. Mask- 
ail, whose cottage being adjacent to her 



OR, WHICH IS THK HEROINE.- 53 

residence, gave her the daily delight of 
beholding her blooming boy, whose 
every whim was in the fond mother's 
eye, a law not to be disputed. Thus in- 
dulgedand unstimulated by the example 
of other youths, he became indolent in the 
pursuit of knowledge, careless of the 
advice of his tutor, who never failed com- 
plaining of his inattention to his mother, 
in order to retain him longer under his care, 
or she would have had him home, and by 
that means lessen the income he had by 
her liberality so long enjoyed. Knowing 
the blind partiality of his credulous pa- 
rent, and the fortune he was heir to. To- 
bit determined not to burden his brain 
with too much learning, but to indulge in 
every frivolous pursuit, where novelty 
caught his unsettled fancy. In order to 
D 3 



54 OWEN Castle; 

secure himself freedom, for he hated no- 
thing so much as confinement, he backed 
his tutor's complaints against himself with 
an appeal to his mother, who ever be- 
lieved her darling, on the score of delicate 
health, which could not brook the close 
application to study which the anxious 
care of the parson recommended : the 
consequence of this pity-inspiring plea, 
was, a respite from all controul, and a 
month's recreation was allowed at home, 
admist his youthful companions . Idle 
habits so easily contracted and encou- 
raged, were not easily shaken off, and even 
when the value of solid acquirements, 
became more conspicious^ from his ripen- 
ing years, he had not stability to embrace 
the remaining time with ardour or per 
severance. A slight smattering of the 



OR^ WHICH IS THB HEROINE? 55 

principal branches of literature^ with a very 
little Greek and Latin^ was all the know- 
ledge he had acquired. On attaining his 
eighteenth year he was to leave his tutor, 
and reside entirely with his mother, the 
idol of her heart, and lord of Rusty Hall ; 
of that period, only two months were 
wanting, which he employed in following 
the bent of his inclinations. The sweetness 
of temper, lively manners, and desire to 
render himself agreeable toa 11, joined to 
a strong curiosity and proneness to com- 
municate the gleanings of it, made him 
the favourite of the fair; while the serious 
part of his own sex blamed him for being 
a foolish idler. The tender passion had 
not yet awoke any painful sensations in 
his breast but he had often fancied himself 
sarely afflicted by the little god ; but in 
D 4 



56 OWEN CASTLE; 

a short space, he usually recovered the 
delirium^ to the no small disappointment 
of the forsaken object. Miss Sabina wasr 
for the present the imagined goddess of 
his adoration, who, relying on her reput- 
ed charms, hoped at last to fix the rover. 

The renewal of an acquaintance with 
Rufus Marmaduke, was a fresh source of 
distress to the lovely Grace, who be- 
held in him, the brother student and 
intimate friend of her beloved William 
Murray, and whose hand she had rejected 
in the vain hope of being united to the 
possessor of her heart. The return of 
those addresses was what she had reason 
to fear, yet knowing the atfection Rufus 
bore his friend, and the sensibility of his 
nature, she felt convinced, he would 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 57 

not, by a selfish supplication for her re- 
gard, wound her more. Thus assured, 
she met his eye with less discomposure 
than she expected, and was much reliev- 
ed by his not even glancing at the fate of 
one so truly lamented by both. The sup- 
pressed admiration of his expressive fea- 
tures, while intently gazing on Grace, told 
the ill smothered passion. Her coldness 
and avowed preference for his late valued 
friend, he flattered himself was in some 
degree diminished, and how ardently did 
he hope the day might arrive, when a 
second time the honest offering should re- 
ceive a kinder acknowltdgment. 

Augustus Milbourne courted his society 
with every mark of respectful attention 
which his refined conversation, high learn- 
D 5 



68 OWEN castle; 

ing, and poliirhed manners, so justly me- 
lited. His judgment was sound, his un- 
derstanding clear, comprehensive, and 
highly enriched by a luminous genius. 
The strict probity of his heart, joined to 
the most sensitive feeling and benevolence, 
gave a softness and urbanity to his actions 
most prepossessing ; while firmness of re- 
solve, and manly courage, gave the noble 
and finished colours of his character. 

Omphale felt much pleasure in listen- 
ing to their discourse, which was intelli- 
gent and spirited. He explained the 
beauties of England, and advised a tour 
through it before the severe season of the 
year set in. Augustus, on his promise 
to accompany him, readily accepted the 
proposal for the next spring; but said his 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 59 

engagements in London for the few inter- 
vening months, would prevent his wish 
being gratified sooner. 

Mrs. Milbourne was happy to find her 
nephew so eagerly solicitous for the ac- 
quaintance of Rufus Marmaduke, and in 
whom she was confident he would find an 
agreeable companion during his abode at 
the castle. The tender method he used in 
introducing the subject of his late friend's 
death to the widow charmed her. His ap- 
proval of his gallant conduct during a skir- 
mish with the enemy, and the accom- 
panying sentence, that dropt from his 
lips, still sounded in her ear in accents 
.the most grateful. " My friend died as a 
British soldier should, an honour to the 
king he served, and terror to the eneipy 
d6 



6o OWEN castle; 

who assailed his rights ; few would grieve 
of all in such a cause, and to be so ho» 
noured in lamentation," he concluded, 
fixing his eyes on the black robe of Grace. 
*^ Mourned by one so fair, so faithful, so 
mindful of a mere promise, which many 
in the vow of wedlock think no more 
incumbent, my friend is blest in death 
when such a woman mourns his untimely 
fate." 

^^ Fearing the effect the sombre appear- 
ance of mourning might have- on her spi« 
rits, I blamed her much for wearing it,'' 
said Mrs. Wallace. 

*^ How could you blame her, dear ma- 
dam^ for what proves the sacred light she 
held her engagement in. If not the wife 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? CI 

of my friend, she was his affianced bride, 
and in my opinion those weeds do more 
honour to her heart and virtues, than 
the richest ornament could add lustre to 
her personal charms, by its scarcity and 
value. Oh ! 'tis a heavenly sight, when 
youth and loveliness, is adorned by chas- 
tity, truth, and religion. Were all women 
thus conscious, how greatly would the 
sum of man's happiness encrease." 

" You have great value, (cried Om- 
phale, who seated near, had overheard 
their discourse) " for a high respect of 
promise between lovers.'* 

" I have indeed madam," returned he ; 
•^ I hold a promise second in esteem only, 
" the last indissoluble tie.'* 



62 OWEN castle; 

" All gentlemen not think so/' she 
cried, " who have free choice to address ; 
poor woman must not make choice too, 
she only can refuse when she no like, per- 
haps that one never come/' 

" I agree with you, madam/' said he, 
** that my sex are not free from fault ; 
but you must allow the encouragement 
given by the ladies to outward show, and 
that coquetry is the great cause of all 
their misfortunes ; person is the admira- 
tion of most, while the head or heart of 
a man undergoes no examination. Would 
they reflect how little the splendid equi- 
page of any man is to be esteemed, when 
his head and heart are good for nothing, 
the honest man would net be scorned 
for the flimsy garnish wealth throws 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 63 

round the self-adorning fool, who knows 
not the value of a deserving woman, and 
only treats her as an appendage to hi» 
reputed gallantry." , 

" I wonder one so accomplished conld 
not find a theme less old/' cried Mrs. 
Wallace ; " for the vanity of poor woman 
has so long been considered the prime 
cause of all her woes, so often treated 
on by the best authors, ancient and mo- 
dern, that the subject has become flat, 
hacknied, and the well known rule of 
every apprentice." 

" I am sorry I am not more happy in 
my opinion of some, than those^'w ' 
mer date, as it proves a lamentable truth,* 
that womankind though ever so lovely ^^ 



64 OWEN CASTLE; 

continue to improve in that, and obsti- 
nacy against good counsel whether an- 
ciently or modernly administered/* re- 
turned he smartly. 

" Oh! out on you/* she playfully re- 
plied, " I am no match for the satirical 
retort of a learned parson. — I would fain 
become the champion of my absurd sex, 
but against so powerful an opponent, I 
I want the ammunition of hard words; a 
wig, gown, and a judge's chair, ere I 
dare brave the assault/' 

'^ No wonder you require able support, 
madam,'* he laughingly replied ; when the 
cause is bad, it is ever the case, and 
you will find that levity has but one 
trusty friend, ever ready to defend it, and 
that is Jashlon" 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 65 

•• ril not stay to hear this cruel man 
rail thus at ladies, but by sacrificing to 
the deity he abhors, prove I am yet no 
convert to his rules, for I will adorn 
myself with the emblems she distributes 
to her votaries \' (cried she, rising from 
her seat in playful good humour, and 
advancing towards him, with mock gravity 
continued in a burlesque tone,) " as for 
thee, friend of the reforming society, I 
would advise thee also to repair to thy 
dressing room, the first dinner bell having 
rung, or thou wilt not have time to ap- 
pear amongst us fashionables, who mean 
instantly to depart and do homage to 
the goddess o^ fashion you wish to tra-- 
duce;* she cast on him a twinkling bright 
eye, which seemed to say, " I ridicule 
morality from lips so young, tho' I can- 
not confute the truths they utter," 



66 OWEN castle; 

The animation of her lovely face, the 
spiritof her pointed eyes, and bewitching 
smile, called forth his gallantry, though 
not his love or approbation, and giving 
way to the gaiety she inspired, he sport- 
ively caught her hand, and while con- 
ducting her to the door, said, " there is 
malice in being so resolved on conquest ; 
for certain am I that you never visit your 
toilet, without three attendants ; fashion 
is the first deity, dignity and heauty 
follow,** saying which, he took the hand 
of Omphale, and joining it within Mrs. 
Wallace's, turned to the retiring Grace, 
and added, to the suite of these, I give 
diastity ; let her modest counsel direct 
the drapery of each, and heauty gains an 
empire with man no power can conquer, 
no force can shake;'* as he pronounced 



ORj WHICH IS THE HEROINE? Cj 

this sentence, his eyes encountered those 
of the the blushing Grace who bending 
with confusion and timid elegance, left 
the room. 

Mrs. Wallace cast on him a sneer of 
contempt, adjusted her lace tucker with 
triumphant satisfaction at the loveliness 
it revealed, and hastened from the apart- 
ment. 



€8 €W£N CASTLE^ 



CHAPTER XII. 



W E shall pass over the dinner, and 
come to the ball room, where many of the 
expected guests at an early hour assembled. 

At the head of the spacious hall, which 
was converted by the taste of Grace into 
a ball room, stood Sir Matthew Fitzowen, 
and Mrs. Mil bourne, attended by Au- 
gustus Milbourne, Omphale, and Grace. 
Sir Matthew was in high spirits, and 
by his gay appearance did honour to the 
happy event his vanity led him to sup- 



X>1R., WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 69 

pose he was celebrating. His head was 
profusely powdered to hide the miserable 
•grey hairs of which there were very few, 
that hung by his temples, the rest of his 
pate being entirely bald ; he wore a green 
silk suit of clothes, with silk stockings 
and light pumps ; a nosegay in his bosom, 
and highly perfumed; Mrs. Milbourne 
in a grey satin dress, a turban of white 
crape, and handkerchief of the same neatly 
pinned on, stood in becoming cheerful- 
ness to do the honours. Augustus was 
indeed admirable in every respect ; the 
fashionable elegance of his light attire 
gave great advantage to his graceful car- 
riage. Omphale bound on her pohshed 
forehead a single row of diamonds set in 
the form of laurel leaves, her ringlets 
diffused in full wave over her head, except 



70 OWEN castle; 

a few that disdained confinement, and 
would wander on her neck, in spite of 
the costly knot of diamonds that strove 
to constrain them ; her robe was of the 
finest white, wrought with diminutive 
gold sprigs of myrtle, her zone was orna- 
mented by a rich ruby set in pearl, in the 
shape of a heart, a solitaire of diamonds 
glittered on her neck, while the pendants 
from her ears endeavoured to out sparkle 
them; her arms were adorned in the same 
brilliant manner, a narrow gold border- 
ing round the train, and half drapery that 
fell negligently from her shoulder, com- 
pleted a figure at once majestic and almost 
divine. Grace who had been compelled 
to abandon her favourite black robe, to 
accept a white satin dress (which was pre- 
sented by Sir Matthew,) appeared in it 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 71 

with simplicity and beauty ; she had 
trimmed it with a sHght wreath of jessa- 
mine in full blossom, with a bunch of the 
same on the left side of the head ; it was 
her own copy from nature, and did her 
infinite credit ; the rosy tint of her cheek 
was faded, and the dullness of her once 
bright blue eyes, told a tale of sadness to 
the penetrating eye of Rufus Marmaduke, 
who attempted to draw her into conversa- 
tion, and bade him despair of awakening 
a second love within her bosom. 

Mrs. Wallace chatted in buoyant spi- 
rits with Augustus, who smiled at her gay 
sallies, gazed, admired, and delightedly ho- 
vered by her side. 

" We have already expatiated on the 



72 OWEN CASTLE; 

personal gifts of this lady, their enticing 
power and playful softness, as well as sa- 
tirizing wit she so eminently possessed; she 
had not omitted the grand aid of dress to 
improve her other charms, and was attired 
in a pink muslin light drapery, looped off 
each shoulder, a la mode enfant; a thin 
sarsnet skirt flounced with lace ; through 
the fine texture her pretty ancles were 
clearly seen, her small and delicate feet, a- 
dorned by pink sandals ; oti her head she 
wore a crown of roses, whose vivid bright- 
ness could scarce vie with those that 
bloomed on her cheek; her neck encom- 
passed by a necklace iti fine stones, that 
added to the whiteness of a skin embellish- 
ed by art; her arms were decorated with 
bracelets of the same. " Behold,*' she cried, 
" the vestal of purity approaches, conducted 



©K, WHICH 15 THE HEUOINE ? 7^ 

by the Narcissus of the Welch plains." Au- 
gustus turned his head, and beheld Lady 
Temperance Mathias conducted by Sir 
Matthew Starveling. ''See with what grace 
the swims up the room ; I would lay my 
life it is forty years since she was in a ball 
room; that fly-cap appears ready to take 
wing at each zephyr that puffs through 
those curls that hang like petty can- 
nons on her neck, plaistered by poma- 
tum and powder; that hoop looks big with 
ancient grandeur, while the yellow satin 
petticoat, and blue damask sack, with 
treble flounces, gives ihe whole figure a 
spirit and finish, at once striking and de- 
sirable." 

"She is indeed a strange figure amongst 
the moderns,(said Augustus,) sheappears as 

VOL. II. E 



J' 4 OWEN CASTLE; 

if her skin had been dried to mouldy 
parchment, her teeth borrowed from a 
charnel house, and her grey eyes from the 
head of a dead nun. Who is that meagre 
form, that ghost hke hovers round the 
ancient pile ?" 

*' That is Sir Matthew Starvehng, (an- 
swered she) her relative, a person of no in- 
considerable value I assure you ; his dimi- 
nutive figure, added to a sharp visage, red 
hair, greenish eyes, and crooked nose, is 
no detriment to his favour amongst the 
belles of this neighbourhood, who all strive 
to gain the envied distinction of his name 
and title. He is one of those few, who know 
the deficiency he possesses with respect to 
person, and makes up with officious polite- 
ness and flattery for that defect. Titus 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 75 

and Theobald Raymond, accompanied by 
their mother, now followed: after the Hsual 
ceremonies on such occae^ions, they sepa- 
rated round the room in ditterent groupes^ 
Theobald sought his friend Rufus ; — Titus 
andTobit soon joined, occupied in commu- 
nicating various gleanings and intelligence 
when Miss Eva Mildred, and the three 
youngest Miss Merediths entered, escorted 
by the trio of Bachelors, Natha??, Gui/, and 
Griffith Single f 077. "Efaith Tobit, (cried 
Titus,) here comes thy Same the sweet Sa- 
bina, with my chosen fair, the pretty 
Eva, now be sure to take especial care to 
keep all intruders from them but ourselves. 
Rebecca must be coupled with Guy, they 
are a fit match in a hunt, and why not in a 
country dance. 



/6 OWEN castle; 

'' No;' said Tobit, '' I intend to scheme 
rare sporty in contriving to get her in the 
courseof the evening to Sir Matthew Star- 
vehng, whose dehcate nerves, flimsey frame 
and low voice, will be an admirable contrast 
to his boisterous partner, who will shake 
him down the dance in a way he never 
before experienced. Jemima must have my 
brother Raymond, who hates country dan- 
ces, and would not be here were it not for 
his reluctance to offend Sir Matthew , by 
slightinghis invitation. She is a great romp 
and will heartily fatigue him, with her 
aukward .graces childish whims., and repea- 
ted questions; such as what is this :* whois 
tiiat ? and why so ? Then Nathan should 
have Lady Temperance, for he hates old 
maids and she old bachelors, so they will 
wrangle together at least one dance, a mu- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE } 7/ 

tual punishment; Griffith, who hates talk^ 
ing., shall be coupled to your mamma, 
whose tongue will dun him to an irre- 
coverable deafness. Sir IMatthevr, said 
Tobit, I hear, means to open the ball 
with the sweet MissFitzbeauchamp; — for 
the exertion, he will be shook to atoms, 
his old joints will never regain their wour 
ted tightness, flannel and sciatica will be 
his winter comforts, ,< 

** Rufus Marnaduke takes the hand of 
the rich West Indian lady, madame Om- 
phale, and much delight I wish him, for 
she appears too stately and proud of her 
ill-gotten riches for me; for I have heard, 
(he added in a whisper) that she had a vast 
plantation abroad, and above a thousand 
of poor devils of slaves to wait on her, 

E3 



78 OWEN CASTT F : 

which she would tie up by the tliumbs 
and heels;, for only so much as looking 
at her. She is also a pagan and worships 
the devil, feeding his image with gold 
dust and pearls. Do you think, Titus, that 
a christian clergyman should converse 
with her so freel}^? Let the young spark 
she is to marry talk to her if he likes, 
«uch outlandish people I have no fancy to; 
but I have one great happiness to relate, 
that Mrs. Wallace is to dance with the 
West Indian, so I shall escape her jibes 
and sly ridiculing, for when she is by, my 
best wit goes for nothing." 

*^ How are the rest of the company 
disposed of?" enquired Titus. 

*• 1 neither know nor care; and see (said 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 79 

he) they are leading their partners already 
to their places." Away he flevv^ and hav- 
ing arranged all to his satisfaction^ con- 
ducted Sabina to her station. 

Grace and Sir Matthew Fitzowen led 
off the ball : he all rapture and attention, 
she ready to sink with vexation and con- 
fusion, at being the object of universal 
remark, and disgusted by his fulsome re^ 
gards. The band by desire of Sir Matthew, 
struck off, Haste to the ivedding, which 
so overcame the conscious Grace, that 
it was with difficulty she could disguise 
her feelings of abhorrence towards the 
slow and heavy partner, that dragged her 
down the avenue of youth and loveliness ; 
whose ill concealed mirth at the unwieldy 

£4 



so OWEN CASTLE; 

motions of her aged inamorata, did not 
pass without their mortifying notice. 

When the two first dances were over, 
Rnfus after paying every attention to 
Omphale, could not refrain from contem- 
plating the saddened features of his be- 
loved Grace. While thus employed. Miss 
Eva Mildred and Rebecca Meredith, with 
some more ladies, clustered by him, and 
he could not, on catching the name of 
Grace, refrain from lending an anxious 
<?ar to their discourse, 

" Yes/' said Miss Eva, (in continuation 
of what she had before been saying) " she 
looks very sadly for a bride.'* 

" A bride!" interrupted Rebecca," Why 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 81 

it was but the other day she was mad 
for the loss of William Murray ; who 
would have supposed she could think of 
marrying such an old broken knee'd hack, 
only fit for the dogs." 

" Hush! hush!'' cried Sabina, with an 
affected toss of her pretty head, " you 
are always so coarse, sister, in your ex- 
pressions, so rough I may say ; did ever 
lady behave as you have done this even- 
ing ; I protest you ve not an atom of ele- 
gance ; you pulled the little baronet along 
in the dance, till you quite overpowered 
him, he absolutely trembled when you 
gave him your hand " 

" Ha! ha!** cried Rebecca, bursting out 
E 5 



82 OWEN castle; 

into a loud laugh, '' the first heat has 
done his business I warrant ; I soon found 
what a mincing, light bred spark I had 
got ; so bidding him call for Go to the 
devil and shake yourself, I gave him 
such a breather, that he won't under- 
take a second gallop in a hurry." 

" A breather indeed/' cried an affected 
lady, shrugging up her shoulders ; " I 
the light you were out of your senses^, 
as yoa paid no respect to toes, or arms, 
but trcd and hauled along the figure be- 
yond all time or decorum. I really 
thought I should expire with fatigue, and 
that the merciless way you dragged the 
almost fainting baronet would have been 
his death." 

" I hate such dainty gentlemen," re- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 83 

turned she. " What are they good for ; 
they've no spirit, no fire in them ; and 
the next partner I have, lil take care 
shall be no such Jemmy frightful. He 
has more startles and fears than a young 
colt just broke in ; had I not held a tight 
rein, he would certainly have ran out 
of the course. But what were you saying 
about Miss Fitzbeauchamp going to be 
married to old sly and dry ?** 

" For shame, sister/' cried Sabina^ 
" what odd, out of the way mascuhne 
sayings you have ; I vow, I sink with fear, 
every time you open your mouth." 

" And I should fear less for you, Sabina, 
(retorted Rebecca) if you broke your look- 
ing glass and left off those fanciful airs.'' 



84 OWEN CASTLE ; 

'^ Well, sister, remember where you 
are/' cried Sabina, " and that you are not 
at home or at a fox hunt/* 

" I wish I was, (said Rebecca) anything 
would be preferable to the insipid gos- 
sipping of mawkish young ladies, that 
are never happy but when they are cavil- 
ling and finding fault with one another ; 
and one thing I must declare, which is, 
that I don't believe a word of this inten- 
ded marriage, and that I like Miss Fitz- 
beauchamp, she is better than any about 
her,*' — so saying she went striding off, and 
slapping Guy Singleton on the shoulder, 
entered into a discourse with him on the 
merits of a favourite horse he had betted 
on for the ensuing races. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 85 

" I am glad she is gone/' said Miss Eva, 
^' for I can now inform you from the best 
authority, (she did not chuse to say 
Tobit Swithin was her informer,^ that 
Sir Matthew Fitzoweu is to make Miss. 
Fitzbeauchamp, Lady^Fitzowen, on Sa- 
turday next ; and that the young parson, 
Rufus Marmaduke, has brought the li- 
cense to day, and he is to perform the 
nuptial ceremony^ which was a very cruel 
request from Sir Matthew; for you must 
know Rufus Marmaduke was a lover of 
her's, but after coquetting with him, she 
gave her promise to wait for William 
Murray, his friend, until he came from 
abroad; and then went mad with ^We/" 
at his death, some say with vexation 
because Rufus refused to have her after 
her shameful conduct to him before; so, 



86 OWEN castle; 

now she is willing to be my lady, A title 
has a cha^iiiing sound for a portionless 
girl; but for my part, iiad I the beauty, 
goodness, and perfection she is said to have, 
I should be sorry to inarry so old and tfgly 
a man, and so cross too, as every body 
knows, though he be a baronet; it looks 
so mercenary:* — She was going on with 
a long string of inuendos, when Sir Mat- 
thew Fitzowen joined ihem, his compli- 
ments were graciously received, and the 
whole groupe moved up the room. 

Rufus was astonished at what he had 
heard, and could not believe what Miss 
Eva had so confidently asserted, knowing 
what related to himself in the business to 
be entirely false. Not having heard a sin- 
gle word during his visit, from Sir Matthew, 



OR, WHICH 15 THE HEROINE ? BJ 

Mrs. Milbourne, or any of the guests at 
the castle, he banished it as unworthy 
attention, improbable, and the groundless 
murmurs of the village ; yet the suggestion 
was a painful one, for fond hopes had 
kept ahve the pure flame her charms had 
kindled, and while he beheld her weep- 
ing over the tomb of his lamented friend, 
the beloved of his heart, he repressed not 
the flattering wish that her affections 
might turn on one she had once declared 
could only be rejected for her William. 
Thus had he indulged his hopes and fears, 
but respect for her sorrow had compelled 
silence on a subject he cherished so near 
his heart; delicacy unknown to common 
minds tied a tongue that longed to declare 
the unshaken love of an honest soul ; but 
lulled intosecurity of future blessings in th« 



88 OWEN CASTLE ; 

possession of Grace, he never dreamed a 
rival so suddenly would start up to dispute 
her favour, or break the vision of felicity 
he believed so near its fulfilment. 

Theobald Raymond now joined, whom 
he immediately questioned on the subject, 
and was amazed to find by his replies^ 
that there was such foundation for belief. 

*^ It cannot be," he cried ; " she would 
not unite herself to dotage and infirmity 
for sordid views, she has a soul above it." 

" I don't know that," returned Theo- 
bald, *' woman is incomprehensible in all 
her actions.'* 

" Do not be cynical, Theobald, I con- 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 89 

jure you; this is a point on which I can 
bear no animadversions; tell mej, have you 
discovered any symptoms in her conduct 
to confirm the report in circulation?" 

^' Yes, every symptom ; she blushes 
deeply whenever her ancient ami ap- 
proaches her^ looks silly at the congratu- 
lations of the company, and does not 
attempt to contradict what she knows is 
the received opinion of every one." 

*' Cruel girl," exclaimed Rufus, " Why 
have I set my store of happiness on 
thee." 

" Why indeed/* replied his friend ; 
" it surprizes me that any man of moder- 
ate understanding, shold risk his happi- 



go OWEN castle; 

ness by placing it in the hands of a 
woman; — women! that are by nature, 
fickle^ tyrannical and inconstant, 

^' Do not rail at her, she is not to 
blame/' said Rufus, •' for I have never 
renewed my addresses; she is ignorant 
that I still retain a parsion fervent and 
everlasting, therefore deserves not the 
odium you throw on her.*' 

'^ Then why upbraid her ?" demanded 
he. " Did you not even now accuse her 
of cruelty r" 

'^ I did wrongfully accuse her, I own ; 
but her heart might tell her, that next to 
the dead, I have demands on her affec- 
tions none can equal : She shall not give 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? gl 

them to another without first accounting 
for it to me." 



** Upon my word (said Theobald) you 
talk like a madman, calling a girl to ac- 
count for giving her hand as she pleases, 
when you have never solicited it. You 
had got your own consent, and concluded 
her's of course would follow. How in- 
consistent! What prevented your asking 
the girl the plain question at once, and 
not have kept dallying till ^another ran 
away with her ?*' 

** Delicacy was an obstacle that I could 
not surmount. My connexion with her 
once betrothed, rendered a hasty declara- 
tion selfish, and unmindful of his fate. 
Had 1 been bye, I know with his dying 



02 OVV£N CASTLE; 

breath he would have bequeathed her t<^ 
me/' returned Rums. 

'^ You men of high sense act in the sil- 
hest way possible. I ^dar^ be sworn the 
girl waited in fond expectation for your 
fine delicate declaration, and despairing 
of the blessing, preferred wealth and title, 
though incumbered with old age, to a 
headstrong youth nearly as poor as herself. 
On my honour I ask pardon of the sex in 
her name, and shall henceforth proclaim 
them the wiser animals of the two; — but 
come let us attack her, she is now seated 
by the elegant Omphale, I'll engage her 
while you try your rhetoric with Grace. 
Courage man, you may yet win, though 
your rival is so near the goal. 



OK, ^VHrCH IS THE HEROINE f 93 



CHAPTER XIIL 



'W'hILE Rufus availed himself of the 
opportunity given him^ we will follow 
Mrs. Wallace and Augustus; who, as the 
ball-room grew warm, strolled with some 
more of the company towards the temple, 
w^iich was illuminated with variegated 
lamps, and stored with the most delight- 
ful refreshments. On the margin of the 
lake was planted a close row of fine elms, 
whose foliage netting in a canopy above, 
excluded the rays of the sun during the 
day, and formed a pleasing cool retreat 



d4 OWEN CASTLE; 

to the meditative mind. It was a charming 
retirement, undisturbed by mortal: there 
might Melancholy brooding sit with sad 
despair, or innocent lovers relate their 
pains, and sue for pity. Thither Au- 
gustus and Mrs. Wallace slowly paced 
their way, — unknowing of their route^ they 
gained the thickest shade, and but for 
the silver orb of night that rode majes- 
tic in the heavens, and would force her 
pale beams through the waving branches, 
all had been dark and stillest gloom. At 
the distant opening a faint stream of 
glowing light sent from a wavering flame 
that burnt within a gaudy lamp, marked 
the entrance. 

'* Good heaven !'* cried Mrs, Wallace^ 
*^ we have passed the temple, let us re* 
turn."— 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROIN E ? 95 

" What alarms you, madam ; surely 
this Sylvan scene has nothing terrifying in 
its appearance ?" returned Augustus, " and 
is so well calculated to inspire the soul 
with love and adoration, that I would 
not for the world retire, ere I had con- 
fessed the admiration I feel for you :'* — he 
took her hand. 

" Sir!*' she cried, drawing it away, 
" you take advantage of my confidence, of 
spirits not consonant with my unhappy 
situation, it is true, but worn as strangers 
to my sinking heart, to beguile its misery* 
Do not insult me by language so com- 
mon, so absurd. Though volatile, I am not 
forgetful of what is due to my character 
as a wife ; and under the protection of 
Sir Matthew Fitzowen, I did not expect 
this freedom." 



96 ©WEN castle; 

" Insult r said Augustus, *' on my 
honour I meant none. I spake the spon- 
taneous overflowings of a heart enchanted 
by sparkhng wit, unaffected grace, and 
unrivalled lovehness ; — if warm, they were 
the pictures of a soul sincere. While daz- 
zled by such beauties, I remembered not 
they were another*s/' He deeply sighed 
and besought her forgiveness. ^' I par- 
don you," she cried, *^ and on reflection 
must take share in the fault, for while 
talking with yoii, I had forgot I was ano- 
ther's." She cast her eyes upon the 
srround as if conscious she had inadver- 
tently said too much, then recovering 
herself cried, '^ Our hearts have misled 
us, let us repair the crime, by avoiding 
each other for the future ; on this condition 
do I only grant my forgiveness ; we are 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 9/ 

both bound by ties not of a trifling 
nature, had we been free — '* 

" What then ?'* he eagerly exclaimed, 
catching her hand, and holding it to his 
bosom, with rapture and delight. 

" Our actions would have corresponded 
with the feelings of our hearts, but now 
we must call honour and prudence to 
guard what others may demand." With 
this sentence she forced her hand from 
him and fled hghtly from his view; as 
she turned the end of the walk, Chloe 
crossed her path. " Are you looking for 
your mistress, Chloe?" said she, " No 
madam me no seek her,'* was the short 
reply, and turning quick she disap- 
peared. 

VOL. II. F 



98 OWEN CASTLE ; 

Mrs. Wallace hastened to the ball room, 
and found that Miss Fitzbeauchamp had 
been taken alarmingly ill, and obliged to 
leave the company. Omphale had fol- 
lowed, declining to partake the gaiety 
around when her friend required attend- 
ance. 

Little worth relating occurred during 
the remainder of the ball, and the com- 
pany departing at a very early hour in 
the morning, restored the castle to its 
wonted serenity. 

The avowed passion of Rufus dis- 
tressed the enthralled Grace, beyond ex- 
pression ; she felt her heart cold and in- 
sensible to his suit, and lamented his 
unhappy preference with real regret, as 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 9^ 

she knew the value of the heart he of- 
fered. 

Overpowered by the ardency of his 
address, and strugghng to conceal the 
disgust the loathsome gallantry of Sir 
Matthew caused, proved too much for 
her to conquer; a pervading faintness, 
added to the heat of the room and her 
emotions, she sunk to all appearance life- 
less in her chair, 

Kufus left the castle early the follow- 
ing day; his mind tortured by suspence 
from the uncertainty the fainting of Grace 
left him in, with regard to her acceptance 
of his love. 



F 2 



loo OWEN castle; 

We will now pass over one month, 
and give to our readers a letter from Au- 
gustus to a friend of his in London, which 
will explain the state of affairs at Owen 
Castle, better than the most laboured 
detail of trivial events, and bring the anx- 
iety of our indulgent followers, to a pe- 
riod that will at once excite their pity and 
surprise. 

" Dear Frederick, 

" Blame me not for yielding 
to the passions that were nourished by 
the too bounteous sun, beneath whose 
beams I drew my breath. Would to hea- 
ven I had been cast amidst the snows of 
Siberia, there to freeze a dull phelgmatic 
creature, devoid of these torturing con- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? lOl 

flicts, these maddening discontents that 
now agitate my breast, 

" You say you cannot understand or 
pity the ills of which I complain ; you 
recommend flight as the most prudent re- 
solve, and bid me conquer a passion that 
honour denies, and an irrecoverable bon- 
dage to another forbids. — Alas ! my friend^ 
you do not know the tumult of my bo 
som ; I strive in vain to follow the dic- 
tates of reason, or wholesome advice of 
careful friendship ; the infatuation will 
not bend to such laws, but returns with 
double force^ shakes all my resolves, sub- 
dues my mind, and overpowers all re- 
straint. From the dawn of life, I was 
taught to think the indulgences so long 
bestowed upon my wishes were to be for 
F3 



102 GWEN CASTLE; 

ever at my command, but in the buoyant 
height of my supposed power, I find it 
clogged by restrictions cruel and slavlsky 
held bv^ a woman, in whose sift lies wealth 
or poverty. I can ill brook the latter ; mis- 
fortune and dependance would be a hard 
task to learn, after so long enjoying the 
sweets of riches and authority; yet this 
wretchedness is the only prospect my 
fatal attachment seems to lay before my 
bewildered sight. — Oh my friend! I have 
been cheated into dreams of freedom, 
while bearing round my neck a golden 
yoke; for well you know, if I refuse the 
willing hand of Omphale, my wealth is 

forfeited to her revenge. Destitute of the 

# 

comforts of life, could I dare suppose 
Arpasia would share the biting poverty, 
my sanguine hopes might invite her to 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 103 

partake Would she (breaking through 
the solemn ties that bind her) fly to a beg- 
gar's arms, there to dwell in misery, and 
meet the scorn of an unfeeHng world? Ah 
no, it musT not be. What then remains, 
to act tlie open villain's part ; link myself 
to my hate for subsistence, and lavish on 
jny love the fortune of a fond, confiding 
wife. /^7/e would be the crime! An act of 
treachery and baseness, — Let me notdwell 
on it, lest .weakened by familiarity, it lose 
its horrors and gain acceptance." 

"Let not my unjust pen defame my 
Arpasia, who shrinks from the black view, 
and bids me banish from my mind and 
sight, those charms which threaten to the 
beholder nothing but ruin and despair. 
Yes, Arpasia is right ; I feel our love is 
f4 



104 OWEN castle; 

fatal, teeming with distraction and deaths 
for should her husband arrive (who is 
monthly expected home) he should sooner 
take my life than part us ; he deserves 
not such a treasure, and should be made 
to surrender it to one more worthy. I am 
the chosen of her hearty he but the 
tyrant law imposes on her gentle nature. 
But what avails this union of hearts, shac- 
kled as I am by imperious fate? I can 
never hope to call excellence like her's 
mine ; no, I must languish in the sight of 
supreme bliss, a victim to inexorable ho- 
noiir, when one bold stroJie of guilt 
might place in my possession all I sigh 
for. I want courage to play the wily cri- 
minal, and must totter on the brink of a 
precipice I long, yet dread to leap, a wa- 
vering tool of coward conscience. My 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 105 

eyes, those traitors of the heart, have 
told the secret of my burdened soul, to 
the penetrating orbs of the jealous Om- 
phale, whose detestation of her innocent 
rival, breaks forth in every gesture. My 
adored Arpasia baffles the hauteur of my 
aunt, and the reserve of her niece, by 
the most studied circumspection and un- 
remitting offices of kindness, but with- 
out effect, their breasts are steel, she is 
neglected and condemned. Suspicion 
lurks in every mind around me; they 
dread the decision I may make, and I 
wait in doubting fear the crisis of my 
fate. I am wretched at every turn, by in- 
terested anxiety and the j)iercing eye of 
jealousy. Arpasia knowing the injustice of 
her enemies has fled their unfriendly roof, 
and abandons herself to solitude and con- 
F 5 



106 OWEN CASTLE; 

trition, for an involuntary passion ; nor 
clare I approach her humble retreat but 
by the formal regulations of cold civility. 
In her letters, with which she condescends 
to charm me, she conjures me to pursue 
the path of rectitude and honour; urges 
the fulfilment of my engagement, and 
with virtuons heroism resigns to another 
the man she adores, supported in the 
struggle by an approving conscience. Such 
is the woman you accuse of artifice, 
and call a designing wanton. Never more 
offend my eyes by lines so cruelly unde^ 
served, if you do, my friendship is for ever 
lost. 

" I shrink before such auwful virtue, 
in submissive veneration; unhappy yet 
approving the resolve she has made, ne- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 10? 

ver to behold me, till I am fettered by 
those holy laws, she esteems indiio- 
luable. 

" Farewell, my friend ; the next dispatch 
will bear the result of my at present un- 
settled determination ; but in whatever 
sphere I may hereafter move, 

I shall ever be, your's truly, 
Augustus Milbourne." 



f6 



108 OWEN CASTLE; 



CHAPTER XIV. 



X HE widow and her niece were much 
dejected at the cold behaviour of Au- 
gustus ; one day only was to come be- 
fore he would be of age, yet not a word 
of presenting his aunt with the estate 
had dropped from his lips ; the absence 
of Mrs Wallace seemed to fill him with 
gloom and reserve to all, whom he ap- 
peared to condemn as her enemies: the 
jealous conflicts endured by Omphale 
were painful to behold by her companion, 



ORj WHICH IS THE HEROINE? lOQ 

the despondent Grace ; who involved in 
perplexity, and obliged to bear the fulsome 
addresses of Sir Matthew, had sufficient 
distress of her own to combat, without 
the additional grief of seeing one so 
highly meritorious slighted for a caprice, 
and imagined passion of an hour. She 
knew not the firm hold the artful Ar- 
pasia had taken of that unsuspecting 
youth's heart ; the well laid plan she was 
pursuing for her own advantage, and the 
ruin of those whose kind civilities when 
a stranger, had made her the confident 
of each thought that harboured in their 
guileless bosoms : the seeming prudence 
of her quitting the castle while Au- 
gusts was there, was only a blind to the 
eyes of his aunt, who, in the innocence 
of her soul, applauded a resolve so be- 



110 OWEN castle; 

coming her situation as a wife and a 
mother, and did honour to her feelings 
as a woman, who would rather undergo 
the banishment of society so fascinating, 
than strike deeper the bitter thorn of an- 
guish in a bosom, bleeding with wrongs 
her beauty had unwillingly inflicted. 

She urged his marriage with Omphale, 
the flimsey veil beneath which her fear 
of her poverty was hid ; the richer of 
Augustus was the /m^ that bound her to 
him, which could be obtained only by the 
hand of that injured creature ; when he 
was in the secure possession of wealth and 
power, self interest would teach her how 
to entail on herself the reward of infamy ; 
in return for some pecuniary aid afforded 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? Ill 

her by Sir Matthew, she acted in secret 
concert with his designs on Grace. 

Augustus had repeatedly solicited a 
private interview with Omphale, wearied 
by his ceaslcss request, she at length con- 
sented to admit him^ 

He sat silent for some moments, not 
lifting his eyes from a distant picture ; she 
reclining on a sofa, stifling her emotions, 
waiting for him to speak : at length with 
a sudden command of voice he began: " I 
an fully aware of the light in which I ap- 
pear to you, Omphale, and must beg 
your hearing for few moments, to ex- 
plain the nature of my feelings." She 
bowed — He went on — " In India I was 
inspired with a boyish passion for the 



112 OWEN CASTLE; 

adopted daughter of my mother; who iri 
conjunction with my father, encouraged 
the fleeting flame, and bound by a will 
and legal instrument now in your pos- 
session, a youth who had mistook the 
brotherly regard he felt for love ; is it 
not hard that the legal heir should become 
dependent on one, reared by chariti/, 
an utter stranger to his blood 9 The laws 
of truth and justice, must pronounce it 
hard, that he should be compelled to 
marry, and fetter himself in compliance 
to the capricious ordinance of a mad- 
man, the unnatural decree of a cruel 
parent, that strips his only oflfspring of 
riches, he should by inheritance seize 
and demand." 

Omphale hid her face, but waved her 
hand in token for him to proceed. 



«K, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 113 

• '' You do not deny the force of what I 
complain of, you cannot ; then listen to 
another of equal weight; surrounded by 
elegance, beauty, new and fascinating to 
my senses, I have now discovered that 
what I had called a pure lambent fire, is 
no other than a base and factitious ardour 
unknown to real love ; an ardour which 
has almost undone me^ which has nearly 
swallowed up my every hope, and now 
casts me on the brink of despair, unless 
your generosity raise me up again to life 
and bliss. By accepting my hand, you 
ratify my supposed possessions, and seat 
me in splendoiir, amidst the most gaudy 
of this happy country ; a small atone- 
ment and recompence for the loss of li- 
berty and a parentis condemnation of the 
blessings of st free choice,'* He paused 



114 OWEN castle; 

in evident discomposure, and Omphale 
breaking through the restraint she had 
imposed on herself, sobbed aloud, and in 
a broken voice cried, " Yoa will not then 
refuse my hand, but wish rne marry 
you, while your heart is gone forever?" 

'' It is a cruel truth," he returned; 
" but i have no other way to save myself 
the means of life. I cannot love you, as 
you expect or think you deserve; but 
every respectful attention, every indul- 
gence you can desire, shall be yours; no 
delight shall be withheld you, you shall live 
with your friends enjoying every wish of 
your heart.'' — He rose* to approach her, 
she threw herself at his feet in the greatest 
anguish, clasped his knees and wept bit- 
terly, crying in the mosV affectionate 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROlNEr 115 

voice, *' Cease! cease! cruel, cruel Au- 
gustus ; you wring my breaking heart, by 
th^se flattering words of emptiness, for 
well you know the treasure of the Peru- 
vian mines are poor to the wretched 
Omphale, if you abandon her ; amongst 
strangers in a foreign land she will perish, 
no more a burden on your bounty; let 
her embrace your feet, and fly from your 
sight for ever." She paused overcome by 
her strong agitation. — Augustus trembled, 
and implored her to rise ; she did with 
quickness, and opening a small drawer 
in an escrutoire, took out a parchment, 
looked on it through her tear laden lashes, 
with inexpressible regret, kissed and 
pressed it to her convulsive bosom, then 
tore it in countless pieces. — "Thus ! thus," 
she exclaimed, " I cancel my Augustus's 



Il6 OWEN CASTLE; 

bondage ; thus I give liberty and joy to 
him, and condemn myself to misery and 
want. You ^re Jree," she cried, with a 
faint smile of triumph, ''you are free; 
the stranger, the usurper of your wealth 
is no more, she is dead to you for ever." 
She cast on him a look, Oh! what a look 
of unutterable affection. Despair marked 
every feature ; her quivering lips turned 
white,a giddiness swam before her eyes,and 
in making an effort to gain the door, she 
staggered, and fell prostrate at his feet. 
A throb of compunction touched his 
breast, when he saw her lifelessly ex- 
tended on the ground. He raised her in 
his arms, placed her on the sofa, implor- 
ing her to revive. Chloe, who was in the 
antichamber, rushed in alarmed at the 
lamentable sobs of her beloved mistress. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROiNjE ? 11^ 

Augustus committed the insensible 
Ompliale to her faithful endeavours and af- 
fectionate efforts to restore her to hfe and 
misery. The fragments of the scattered 
parchment lay at his feet; his eyes spar- 
kled with ill restrained pleasiire as he be- 
held the havock that gave him liberty. 
I dim free," he cried, " thy nobleness of 
soul, deserted Omphale, demands ac- 
knowledgment." Thei> turning to Chloe, 
who listened to him with astonishment, 
said, '' Tell your lady when she recovers, 
that she has bound me to her, with the 
strongest gratitude — that as a brother I 
will defend her from the want her sacrifice 
has exposed her to. Yes," he continued, 
deepening his voice to a solemn tone, 
*^ / will be unto her a brother, protect 
her from adversity, insult, and danger ; 



118 OWEN CASTLE; 

if I do 7iot, may I perish a prey to all 
the stings of remorse , despised, a wretched 
outcast tvithout home or friend, I have 
sworn it Chloe, and may never ending 
agonies of mind and body pursue me if 
I break my vow T He fixed his eyes on 
Omphale for an instant, then darted out 
of the room. Chloe twined her arms 
round the neck of her mistress, with every 
demonstration of ^attachment, mingling 
tears and blessings on her head. Grace 
entered and joined in assisting to restore 
her fleeting senses. 

*^ Ah ! Missy !" cried Chloe, shaking her 
head, and in a doleful accent, " my missy 
no live long; my massa no more good 
massa, she die, me sure, England wicked! 
never no happy since she come ; but 



©R, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 119 

poor Chloe no leave her, she stay for ever 
to comfort her: poor Chloe, love and 
faithful to the breath of her last mo- 



120 OWEN CASTLET; 



CHAPTER XV. 



VV HEN Omphale revived, and had 
gained a little composure, she informed 
Grace of what had passed ; her resolution 
to quit the castle, and fly to solitude, there 
to bury her wrongs and grief from every 
eye. Chloe repeated the oath Augustus 
had pronouced over her, while she lay 
insensible. 

"I would rather perish, she cried with 
indignation and contempt, than owe the 
support of an hour's existence to one who 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 121 

has so cruelly destroyed my peace. My 
jewels are of value, on them me can alone 
depend. The wretched, lost Ompkale, has 
no other friend to aid her." She clasped her 
hands together, and remained absorbed in 
grief. Grace sat lost in thought, a bitter 
sigh alone giving token of her faculties 
being awake to a keen sense of her dis- 
appointment ; for the conduct of Augustus 
had convinced her, all reliance on his for- 
mer promise to be fallacious, and nothing 
but beggary presented itself before her 
eyes. 

"You not despond (said Omphale af- 
fectionately turning round to Grace, rou- 
sed by the sigh she uttered ) ; though Au- 
gustus abandon me, though he break 
through all ties with the miserable Om- 

VOL. II. G 



122 OWEN CASTLE; 

phale, he no break his word with his re- 
spectable aunt; he behave cruel to none 
but me." 

*' Alas! (said Grace;) tis doubtful, to- 
morrow he will be of age; that long expec- 
ted day will put an end to suspense. Till 
then I will be silent^ and not obtrude my sel 
fish distresses on one so greatly oppressed 
by cruelty and desertion . 1 can labour for 
my bread; labour with cheerfulness, when 
free from the irksome entanglenients I 
now endure; i have healthy youth and 
innocence, a portion invaluable, more 
coatly than ail the riches of the earth ; 
why then should I mourn, but yield 
with resignation" to the will of heaven, 
that has given me so many blessings to 
boast." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 123 

" Me feel poverty now/' cried Omphale, 
embracing her ; " deeply feel it, since me 
can no serve you ; but you did promise to 
be sister lo me in prosperity, you no for- 
sake me now too ?" 

*• Never r said Grace, touched by her 
earnest look of supplication, ^^ never! 
your heart is the same, though your 
power is diminished. I knew the kind 
intentions that dwelt in it, and prize it 
closely for them ; but your hand burns^ 
your temples throb, you m.ust repose in 
quiet for awhile," continued she, pressing 
her hand on the beating forehead of 
Omphale; " let me imploreyou to calm the 
perturbation of your mind and spirits^ and 
by an early retirement to your chamber 
endeavour to court the balm of sleep." 
Q2 



124' OWEN castle; 

^'^ Sleep ! me cannot sleep," said Om- 
pbale, " a shooting pain strikes through 
my brain, my heart is bruised with an- 
guish never to be healed, my limbs 
refuse to bear my feeble frame, and sink 
at once beneath a blow severe, never to 
rise the same T' Here she let fall a copious 
shower of tears, and by the persuasions 
of her friend and Chloe was conveyed to 
her chamber. The next morning an alarm- 
ing fever burst through her veins, and 
medical aid was called in to preserve a 
life, that threatened an houily flight from 
its weak tenement. 

Augustus left the castle, with his equi- 
page, at sun rise, without having made an 
attempt to seeOmphale. Aletter to Sir 
Mattliew returning, his acknowledgments 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 12.7 

for his polite hospitality, and another to 
his aunt, was all the ceremony he used. 
Mrs. Milbourne opened it, with a trem- 
bling hand and boding heart. 

« Madam, 

<* Was I not certain, you 
were under the protection of a relation, 
possessed with equal power to confer be- 
nefits as myself, my regret would be more 
poignant, when I inform you, that I 
have not the ability to fulfil the inconsi- 
derate assent I gave to the request of the 
lady who came to England under my 
care. I am sensible of the kind attentions 
you have bestowed on me, and shall rest 
your pbliged, 

" Humble servant, 
^' Augustus Milbourne/* 
G 3 



126 OWEN CASTLE; 

«« So," (cried Sir Matthew with mali- 
cious triumph) " this is the result of your 
reliance on fine promises made by a hot* 
headed West Indian ; a woman of your 
time of life, cousin, should have known 
the world better than to slight an old 
friend for a new face." 

" I am unconscious of doing that," re- 
turned the widow, discomfited, and much 
sunk by the ill treatment of her nephew. 
"It was my regard and obligations to an 
old friend, that made me uneasy, when 
I thought he was likely to enter into the 
marriage state with a girl like my niece, 
thereby entailing misery and discontent 
on himself and her," 

" Entail a good estate on a poor de- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 12/ 

pendant orphan, you mean, madam," re- 
plied he, " that will be soon on the brink 
of starvation, or e^tposed to evils more 
alarming than those of penury and want 
if I do not make her my wife." His 
angry voice, and keen retort, struck terror 
to the widow's heart, ^' What mean you, 
by misery?'* Hecontinued, "Is the honour 
of my hand, title, and fortune of no value? 
Are these distinctions not worlhy of ac- 
ceptance? My disinterested love might 
command gratitude at least from you, 
whose destitute situation can no longer 
shield your darling from destruction. If 
she be insensible to my lavish tenderness, 
1/ou ought to appreciate it, according to 
its importance ; nay you must — for here 1 
swear, this roof no longer shelters you, 
unless you use your influence with Grace, 

G 4 



12S OWEN castle; 

and command her obedience in giving her 
hand to me immediately. No pining, no 
high flown sentiments to me, madam," 
he said, seeing the widow about to speak ; 
" you know the conditions of my favour ; 
my mind is open to you, and direct your 
actions accordingly/' He flung from the 
apartment in violent resentment, and left 
the widow fixed in mute dismay. 

Omphale being composed in a gentle 
slumber, Grace left her to the care of 
Chloe, and sought her aunt, who with 
tears of anguish rehearsed the contents of 
Augustus's letter, and the scene that had 
passed with Sir Matthew. " I will toil 
for our daily bread, mother,*' she cried 
embracing her, " I will bend with cheer- 
fulness to adversity, if you will not thus 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 129 

afflict yourself ; I am very strong, though 
you do not know it ; I can exert that 
strength, when it is for such a benefactress 
I — (here she tottered to a chair oppressed 
with faintness occasioned by her close at-? 
tendance in the sick chamber of her 
friend ) Don't be uneasy, dear aunt, this is 
nothing but a little giddiness owing to 
the fresh air; that had nearly overcome 
me." 

" My child! my orphan child!" ex- 
claimed the widoWj " What scenes of 
wretchedness or labour can a form so de- 
licate, a mind so refined asyour's endure ? 
Oh! protect her heaven! let not the 
mighty sins of a guilty father fall on 
his innocent child ; fulfil not thy holy de- 
cree ; but on his head, if jjp be in exis- 
G 5 



ISO OWEN castle; 

fence, pour thy wrath — strike?'' " Hold/' 
(cried Grace, starting from her chair) 
^' curse not my father; he forsook my 
angel mother, he cast my infant form 
from him to perish, 'tis true : I know he is 
loaded with heavy crimes ; but oh! curse 
him not ; rather pray (if still he wanders 
on the earth) that his life may be pro- 
longed for repentance, save his burdened 
soul a widow's curse, for his daughter's 
sake. My mother, in the height of all her 
wrongs, of all her distraction, want and 
despair, never curst him. I've heard you 
say so; then do wot you, oh! do not cast 
him deeper in the gulph of eternal pu- 
nishment. I am the greater sufferer, yet 
I have never upbraided him. Poverty vtith 
all her gloomy horrors, temptations, and 
indignities, shall never make me. — A just 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 131 

providence will cast all evil from me, if I 
rely on its benign shield. Why then should 
I by reproaches, however deserved, blacken 
an unhappy father, an exile, or no more 
in being, but in our memories, with his 
child's condemnation?" 

*' There spoke thy mother, (said the wi- 
dow) deserted offspring of my sainted 
sister ! Pardon one who even now shud- 
ders at the recollection of her injuries, 
and looks on thy cruel father, as her 
murderer ; pardon my uncharitable, rash 
intentions. I see, I feel myself culpable 
for daring to cry for vengeance on his 
head, while bending under punishment 
for unknown crimes, I may myself have 
committed ; but 'tis a human thoucrht, the 
natural frailty of most, to think with bitter- 
06 



132 OWEN CASTLE; 

ness on those we know have torn our 
dearest ties assunder, who have blasted 
the promising days of those we tender- 
ly loved, and sent them to an untimely 
grave." 

After much deliberation, the widow 
determined on leaving the castle with 
her niece, and take shelter at a poor 
cottager's in the forest, three miles from 
the castle. Grace felt little uneasiness 
at quitting a place so replete with re- 
straint and disagreeables, as she had lately 
found the habitation of Sir ^jatthew; h^ 
unhappy friend, lying'on the bed of sickness 
was her only regret ; and how to leave her 
in so pitiable a state, was a matter of much 
consideration. She consulted with Chloe, 
who understanding she was about to leave 



Oa, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 133 

her mistress, could not refrain from oom- 
municating the design to the invalid, who 
with the lowness of spirits incidental to 
debility, wept at the supposed unkind- 
ness of her chosen friend, and in the most 
pathetic language implored her not to de- 
sert her. The physician pronounced her 
out of danger, tho' not so far recovered as 
to be removed without fear of a relapse, 
and Grace wavered as to the time of her 
departure. 

Mrs. Milbourne made Sir Matthew ac- 
quainted with the determination of herself 
and niece, but begged his permission to 
continue in the castle until Omphale was 
able to be removed. . 

Sir Matthew stormed with madness 



134 OWEN CASTLE; 

and disappointment, but calmed by the 
advice of his constant visitor, the Rev. Mr* 
Maskall. he granted their request for three 
days; that time was employed by Grace 
in preparing for her departure, and in at- 
tending Omphale, who hourly grew more 
convalescent. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 13S 



CHAPTER XVI, 



xJY the artful management and misrep* 
resentations of Mrs. Wallace^ Augustus 
had been induced to withdraw his favour 
from his aunt, and confer on her enemy 
the very estate on which her hopes had 
so long rested. A deed to that effect 
having been drawn up by an able lawyer, 
and signed by Augustus, which secured 
her independence, and happy in her suc- 
cess, she felt no stings of consicence at the 
trouble her treachery gave to the widow 
©r her orphan charge, but rejoiced at the 



136 OWEN gastle; 

opening prospect of her entre into splen- 
dour and dissipation. Little persuasion 
prevailed on her to elope with the ena- 
moured West Indian^ and they fled with 
precipitation together, launching into 
every excess of luxury and extravagance. 
Brighton, being then at its full season, 
was the chosen scene of action, and Ar- 
pasia^ surrounded by a brilliant establish- 
ment, shone in every circle as the bride of 
the wealthy West Indian. The reproaching 
image of Omphale would obtrude on the 
mind of Augustus, when free from riot, 
but the wily syren, by whom he was en- 
snared, and the pleasures of the gaming 
table, as quickly banished her. 

Attire time prescribed, Omphale was 
conveyed in a post chaise from Owen 



OR, WHICH IS THE heroine: 13^ 

Castle, to the humble cottage ia the forest ; 
a sorry accommodation for one reared in 
every splendour of the west. She was in- 
different to the abode, so it was not a so- 
litary one ; the recent desertion of her af- 
fianced lover, had given her a dread of 
being cast entirely on the world an un- 
claimed wanderer ; she clung to the two 
unfortunates, determined to assist and en- 
dure with them all the miseries that po- 
verty threatened. The pleasures of life were 
fled from her for ever in the loss of Au- 
gustus, who?e cruelty and ingratitude 
had sunk festering in her breaking 
heart. In the thick woven wood she 
would wander, absobred in gloomy 
abstraction, unmindful of rest or re- 
refreshment the entire day, observed 
only by the watchful Chloe, who not dar- 



138 OWEN castle; 

ing to advance, kept her within view. At 
times she called for vengeance on the 
sorceress who had beguiled her love, 
then in low murmurs fondly breathe his 
name, forgive, and pray to die. 

To Mr. Stanley, the worthy friend of 
the helpless widow, Omphale gave a dia- 
mond necklace of great value, to be by 
him disposed of to the best advantage in 
London, whither he was returning aftcF 
a short stay at home Mrs. Milbourne 
had but the small sum of fifteen pounds, 
when she left Owen Castle, and knew 
not where to procure a single shilling 
when that was gone; comfortless in mind 
and situation, she Hstened with anxiety 
to the sanguine schemes of Grace, who 
fed with hope, and in possession of health. 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINES 139 

looked through the dark perspective with 
cheerfulness and resignation. The wretched 
state of Omphale called forth their united 
love and tenderness, for by their intimacy 
with Mrs. Wallace, she had suffered 
greatly, and might have upbraided them as 
the cause of her desolate plight; but she 
gave the kindest afFeetion and disinterested 
confidence in return, with the share of all 
her little store, not blaming the guiltless 
for the wicked arts that had imposed on 
and destroyed them as well as herself. 

Rufus Marmaduke had caught the 
account of their flight from the castle, and 
with a beating heart sought out the fair 
Grace, to whom he meant to offer his 
hand and peaceful home In an humble 
cottage buried in the bosom of the wood. 



140 OWEN castle; 

he found her encompassed by misfortune^ 
yet not repining, only anxious to improve 
the dreary scene by industry properly di- 
rected. Rufas intreated her not to expose 
herself to insult by applying for any sort 
of employment from the little gentry of 
the village. "Their mean and envious souls 
Vi^ould rejoice in offering you igdignities, 
and you were not born to wait on their 
caprice, (said he in a beseeching accent,) 
then suffer me, dearest Grace, to presume 
on a long acquaintance, and offer my 
rustic parsonage as an asylum more deserv- 
ing your virtues than this hovel. You 
know the honour and delight I should 
experience in the blessing of your society ; 
the glory I should feel in protecting you 
from every danger, by the sacred name of 
husband. Tlie small independence I hold 



t)K, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? l4l 

of my own, exclusive of my clerical cha- 
racter^ gives me the means to provide the 
necessaries, and some of the elegancies of 
life, which yon, partaking with me, would 
heighten and enhance, beyond the super 
fluities greatness enjoys or could desire." 
Dear madam, plead for me," cried he to 
Mrs. Milbourne ; " be my advocate with 
this relentless decider of my fate" 

** My niece is already acquainted with 
my sentiments in your favour; and I hope 
she will have the sincerity to point out her 
own, and free you from suspense by her 
usual frankness." The widow left the 
room. 

" ^yhat am I to infer from this silence, 
dearest Grace, acceptame or rejection ?" 



142 OWEN CASTLE; 

said Rufus " Have the charity at leastto 
ease my mind on so tender a subject— -if 
you still remain obeurate." 

Grace, collecting firmness, thus replied : 
^^ Were I to say I did not prefer you to 
any other gentleman of my acquaintance, 
I should err widely from the truth ; but 
in that preference, no ardent love prevails; 
you know the distress I have but a few 
months recovered from ; then judge if my 
bosom, filled as it is with perplexit}^ for a 
future provision, can admit fresh tender- 
ness as yet. I should only deceive your 
warm affection, were I to accept your 
hand merely for a home, and basely 
embitter all your joys by cold indifference; 
then allow me time to calm my present 
fears, to better understand your wortli;, 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? l43 

and if after a few months I find myself 
adequate to return your love, i will not 
withhold it, but with candour confess 
my esteem, and give the portionless hand 
you appear to prize." 

" I am blessed by this noble confession, 
blest beyond utterance ; but I was no stran- 
ger to the artless innocence that harbours 
in that heavenly bo5jm ; and value more 
the free disclosure of your sentiments, 
than if you had feigned a passion equal 
lo my own, and instantly presented me 
your hand. If I have such a blessing to 
boast in future, I shall then be certain it 
was the gift of pure choice, undefiled by 
mercenary views though im merged in 
trouble and pecuniary embarrassment. 
The time of my probation will, I trust, 



144 OWEN castle; 

soon passj and in the mean time, I entreat 
no more than what I may deserve by the 
most zealous service, the fervent faith of 
an unchangeable heart.** He took his 
leave ; his mind was soon happily busied 
in making alterations in his elegant home, 
to meet the approbation of his love, by 
every praise worthy resolution to gain 
that jewel, which the treasure of the 
world was, in his opinion, too little te 
purchase. 



OH, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 145 



CHAPTER XVI L 



Amongst the very few, who had 
heard and lamented the change in the 
\vidow*s circumstances, was Lady Tem- 
perance Matthias, who though eccentric 
in her ideas, and recluse in her habits, 
had a heart to feel and a hand ever ready 
to relieve the unfortunate. She had an 
exalted consideration for birth and family, 
the high notions of noble blood were 
strongly imbibed by her from infancy, and 
whenever the descendant of an ancient 
and honourable house, had acted co\> 
VOL. u. H 



146* OWEN CASTLE ; 

trary to her opinion of right and nobleness 
of descent, she held them as an excresence, 
such as would frequently obtrude amongst 
her favouiite plants, fit only to be lopped 
ofFas a disgrace to the root from whence 
it sprang. To express her wrath at the 
conduct of Ssr Matthew to his kinswo- 
man, and to make an offer of her services, 
slie ordered her carriage to the forest, 
which drew up before the cottag-e, to the 
surprize of tlie inhabitants, who beheld 
her descending from the vehicle, from a 
small lattice window. She had a large 
hoop on, over which hung a pink satin 
qudted petticoat, a chintz flounced gown, 
a.id a brown doth skirt for riding ; a ca- 
lash whose size was so enormous as to 
conceal lier from the slioulders ; a j)air of 
green leather clogs, were drawn over a 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 14? 

pair of black satin shoes, with high 
heels and silver buckles ; a long purple 
satin cardinal^ lined with scarlet, and 
trimmed with thick fox skin flowered 
over all ; an extreme small white satin 
muff, trimmed with gold fringe, and 
green parrot's feathers^ from which peeped 
a little black cat, the present favourite of 
the old lady, completed her ancient ap- 
pearance. The honest dame of the cottage, 
threw open the parlour door^ ^ifying all the 
way, " This way, my lady ; your honour's 
ladyship, this way." " Thank you good 
woman/' said Lady Temperance, clack- 
ing with her clogs along the brick floor. 
" Announceme to theladies, good woman." 
"There is no need sure of announcing your 
ladyship, for here comes the lady herself." 
The widow appeared at the door, to wel- 
H 2 



148 OWEN castle; 

come her, and express her sense of her 
eondescension. 



'^ The purport of my visit, is to request 
the pleasure of your company at the 
Rookery/' (said the old lady, after some 
previous conversation. ) " 'Tis an old fash- 
ioned mansion, affording no variety, and 
can boast no fashionable adornments ; 
yet it is spacious, and not devoid of com- 
fort. Will you return with me ?" con- 
tinued she, looking on Grace. 

^^ I feel highly flattered by your con- 
siderate otFer,*' said she; '^ 1 cannot desert 
my aunt, good lady Temperance, or sit 
in easy indolence, but must prepare to earn 
something that may support us." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE r 142 

« Earn, ^ork f Did I hear right/' 
cried Lady Temperance;"a Fltzbeauchanip 
condescend to think of supporting her- 
lself by the labour of her hands ! How 
could you harbour so degrading an 
idea r" 

" Necessity, dear madam, is more ur- 
gent than the ancient pride of blood,*' 
said Grace. '* I have a talent for music, 
and accomplishments that may serve me." 
'' Music, did you say child ?" cried Lady 
Temperance, as if a sudden thought had 
struck her. 

" Yes, Madam, the harp, pianoforte, 
or!*' — Grace was going on when the old 
lady suddenly interrupted her. 



H 3 



150 OWEN CASTLE; 

^' I am heartily glad, my sweet child, 
that I can put you in a way to gain your 
humble wishes ; and in a manner, that 
may not expose you to the notice of the 
low, or, bring a blush in my cheek for 
the fall of a Fitzbeauchamp. You know 
the little church that lies north of my 
grounds, to which I lately gave a small 
organ ; for in my opinion nothing inspires 
devotion more than solemn music ; I have 
also collected a few rustic maidens to 
sing hymns, but their performance is 
shockmg : my ears are in misery, while 
they strain their untaught voices to the 
highest pitch of discord. Now if you 
would undertake secretin/ to instruct them, 
how to modulate their throats to harmony, 
and play my organ that is spoiling for 
want of use, I will take care that none 



OH, WHICH I§ THE HEROINE? 151 

shall know the musician ; my carriage 
shall bring you to the Rookery every 
Sunday, and we will go to church together; 
my pew is above stairs, and a single door 
only between the organ loft and it, by 
which means you can perform unseen ; 
the simple damsels shall be in waiting 
for you every Wednesday and Saturday 
evening, in my own apartment ; where I 
shall feast my delighted ears, while you 
warble forth a holy strain ; my carriage 
shall attend you when the weather re- 
quires, and on a fine day it is but a 
pleasant walk across the fields of about 
a mile and a half. Does it meet your ap- 
probation ?** 

'' Oh, IVladam!*' «ried Grace, *•' I know 
not how to speak my gratitude." 
H 4 



152 OWEN castle; 

" Gratitude ! child;* said the old lady, 
smiling and patting her on tiie shoulder, 
*^ the gratitude is on my side, / am the 
person obliged. I am odd^ they say, as 
most maidens are of m,y age, whimmy, 
and take delight in music and cats : it 
may be so, and saying thes^orst of these 
propensities they are innocent. I like 
oldJasMons^ and will not adopt modern 
ones^ until they are proved as conducive 
to solid happiness as the former; but 
amongst my other oddities^ I rank a strict 
adherence to justice, the principle foun- 
dation of harmony between man and 
man; aye, and woman too, madam," 
continued she, laughingly ; and going up 
to Mrs. Milbourne, said," I shall therefore 
submit my terms to your wiser conside- 
ration this evening ; but must now take 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 155 

my leave, hoping my desire to serve, has 
not been deemed a liberty, or my call 
unceremonious." The widow joined with 
Grace in proper acknowledgments for her 
goodness, and seeing her into the carriage, 
bade her a good day. At seven in the 
evening, a servant left a note for Miss 
Fitzbeauchamp, who on opening it, found 
it contained a twenty pound note, and 
the following words. 

'^ Lady Temperance Matthias hojoes 
Miss Fitsbeauchamp will consider the 
enclosed as an earnest for her future 
salary, which will be one hundred pounds 
per year ; if she conceives it to be ade- 
qate to the trouble the undertaking may 
give to her abilities. The honour of her 
self and friend's company to dinner at 
H5 



154 OWEN CASTLE; 

four o'clock to-morrow will be a pleasing 
gratification to her sincere friend. The car- 
riage will be at the cottage by three," 
Rookery, Thursday evening ^ 

Occupied in her new employment, 
Grace became tranquil and cheerful ; two 
months rolled away in peaceful frugality, 
scarcely felt by the woodcutter's tenants, 
until the severity of winter forcibly re- 
minded them of the comforts they had 
lost. 

The industrious Grace never failed to 
perform her duty, though the weather 
Sequent ly was a great obstruction to her 
undertaking even so short a jouney ; for 
Lady Temperance, either through for- 
getfulness, or some new whim, that drew 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 155 

off her attention from her promise^ would 
often neglect to order her carriage. This 
greatly inconvenienced our fair musician, 
for] rather than intrude on her ladyship 
for the fulfilment of her own proposal, 
jhe would brave the snow that thickly 
covered the country, and hung upon the 
frosted branches of the wood, through 
which she must bend her course. It was 
with soirovvful eyes, her aunt and Om*- 
phale beheld her delicate frame exposed 
to the bitterest inclemency of the season, 
and would often beseech her to relinquish, 
what teemed with such danger to her 
health. " Dear aunt,' she would say, 
with swi^etest affection in her k^vely face, 
** the poor must be diligent, nor is my 
pilgrim ige sa painful a^ you think, for it 
it to the shrine of duty of filial love, 
h6 



156 OWEN CASTLE; 

When the clouds lower, burdened with 
storms and darkness over my head, and 
all around looks dreary and disconsolate, 
I then thank my divine protector that I 
have even this humble roof to fly to; as 
the poor robin flies to its concealed nest, 
so do I long to catch the distant gleam of 
hght that wavers through the naked trees, 
reflected from the lattice of my home : 
I trudge over the crusted snow with re- 
newed activity, contemplating the blaz- 
ing hearth, at which my benumbed limbs 
will gain their wonted warmth ; the 
rustic equipage for tea, all ready set, the 
brown baked cake upon the wooden stool, 
the slippers set to receive my aching feet, 
with the kind smile of welcome to finish 
all. Oh! Madam," she cried, " my 
sensations then are more ^viable than 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 157 

the voluptuary's, reclining on velvet 
cushions, and enjoying the greatest lux- 
uries gold can command. Ah ! far more 
enviable, for he wants the gout exercise 
gives, the satisfaction of having earned 
the comforts he possesses." 

Omphale severely felt the change in 
her finances, as she wished to remove 
herself and friends to a more convenient 
habitation ; but was obliged to wait until 
the sale of her diamonds put it in her 
power. The violent grief she at first gave 
way to had settled into a sullen medi- 
tation; she saw the advances of Rufus 
to her friend with a jealous eye, but a 
strong wish for his success ; the loss of 
her society was the evil she dreaded most 
to encounter j yet she was silent^ and 



.f 



158 OWEN CASTLE; 

never expressed her dejection at the pros- 
pect of her friend's happiness, but watched 
its gradual approach with concealed tears 
of unfeigned sorrow, at the separation it 
would occasion between them. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE i* 159 



CHAPTER XVIII. 



JLT was on a Wednesday night, the hea- 
vens were of a pitchy blackness, the wind 
roared mournfully through the crackling 
brances of the forest, the cold was intense, 
and the snow had fallen in great abun- 
dance during the day. 

*• (jod protect my poor child ! what a 
dreadful night it is! she never stayed so 
late before ;" cried the widow, looking out 
of the door. 



l60 OWEN CASTLE; 

" Hur mayhap has had a mind to stay 
wi* my lady, madam, don't ye frighten 
yourself, hur be safe, I warrant, *' an- 
swered the good dame of the cottage. 

" She would not stay without contriving 
to let me know," said the widow, " and 
the snow having fallen greatly, the path 
must be filled up, and perhaps my child 
lost or buried in it." 

" For the love of mercy, don't ye 
scare a body so, good madam," said the 
dame, lighting a lanthorn and putting on 
her red cloak ; '' Til step wi' Taffy, hur 
knows every track of the forest, and 
perhaps hur will meet her ; so don't you 
put you in tribulations and frights, look 
you, for nothing, there is a good Cot in 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? l6l 

night, as dark as may be, and hur is safe, 
ril be sure. St. Winifred guide us'/' The 
widow insisted on accompanying them, 
but had scarcely got to the threshold of 
the door, when two rough looking men 
entered. 

" Cot bless us, what you want?*' cried 
the dame, terrified at their sudden appear- 
ance. 

" Only a lodger of yours," returned 
the foremost, " of the name of Mil- 
bourne." 

" I am that person," said the widow ; 
" I suppose you have got a letter or note 
from my child." 



l62 OWEN CASTLE^ 

" I knows nought about child or chil- 
dren," cried he, in a surly tone, " but I've 
a letter, or s< niewhat like it, for you, 
(shewirghera writ for two thousand pounds 
at the suit of Mrs. Wallace,) and if so be, 
you can't pav^, or bail^ I must take you 
with me to jail." 

^' Good heaven! what does this mean?" 
cried the widow, *' I owe no sum of that 
consequence, 'tis a false arrest." 

'^ False ; come that's a good one," said 
the bailiff, " but false or true, jest or 
earnest, you must come along with me." 

•^ You will not for the good Saint 
Matthew's sake, take her away this night. 



aR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 1 63 

(cried the poor dame beseechingly) to a 
prison where hur will die with cold." 

'* I must do my duty," said the man 
sulkily; " it is a bitter night that's certain, 
30 wrap yourself up well, old lady, and 
come along." 

The dame wrapped her cloak about her^ 
while a crystal drop of pity fell from her 
eye, saying " Cot a mercy help you, dear 
lady, and save hur from hur enemies! The 
door was suddenly flung open, and a pea- 
sant entered with the insensible Grace 
extended in his arms; the widow gave a 
piercing shriek, crying *^my child has pe- 
rished! she is dead, she is gone for ever. 
I hope hur is not dead/' said the peasant; 
I found hur almost buried in the snovr, 



l64 OWEK CASTLE; 

when I was looking after some stray sheep 
I had lost; I had often seen her, and 
knowed where she lived very well, so 
hoping her life was'nt gone, though 
mortal stiff with cold, frozen as I may 
say alive, I bringed her home.** 

" Come, madam," said the bailiff, '* we 
can't stay." 

" Must I ! just heaven T cried the 
widow clasping her hands, " must I leave 
my child a corpse before me ? Soften the 
hearts of these cruel men, good God of 
mercy V 

The dame had lain Grace before the 
hearth, her frozen garments began to 
thaw, and a deep groan escaped her bo- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? \6b 

som ; she then poured a small quantity of 
brandy down her throat, and with a warm 
blanket supphed the place of her upper 
dress. — Hur will live and do well^ madam," 
cried the overjoyed dame, " hur will 
live/' 

" Thank God !" said the widow fervent- 
ly, " all the rest I can endure," then 
catching her for a moment in her arms, 
invoked a blessing on her head, and fol- 
lowed by the bailiff left the roof. 

When Grace was restored to sense and 
feeling, she enquired for her aunt, but 
was told she had retired early to rest, not 
being very well, 

*'Then I will go to her," said Grace, 
" she will want me." 



l66 OWEN CASTLE; 

^' You must not, indeed you must not/*' 
cried the dame. 

" What mean you ? not see my aunt?" 

" No ! no^^ returned the dame weep- 
ing, " you cannot see her to-night ; 
besides you are sick yourself; do let me 
put you to bed, you look sadly bad, you 
do indeed, and must be weary, for the 
man said you went a deadly way out o'the 
road ; do ye sure now rest." 

Omphale would have aided this honest 
creature in keeping the wretched fate of 
the widow unknown to her niece^ had not 
Chloe inadvertently informed her of the 
transaction by running into the kitchen, 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE." 16^ 

crying, "oh! missy, missy, wicked man's, 
take your mother away, all in snow, to 
big place with iron bars^ de prison house, 
they say to me." 

^'Silence," said Omphale, frowning on 
her slave. — Chloe hung her head and 
shrunk away. 

^^ Iron bars," said Grace, " a prison, 
now I comprehend ; but who has dragged 
her hence, at whose suit was she taken ?'* 

" Mrs. Wallace ; her friend, de friend 
that has poisoned all our joys," returned 
Omphale. 

" She never was indeb'ed to her,'' cried 
Grace, "it cannot be, my suffering aunt is 
wrongfully taken away." 



l6S OWEN CASTLE; 

" Me fear not, for as I talked with the 
man who forced her from hence, he say to 
me that the arrest was for money due on th^ 
Whitford estate, w hich Mrs. Wallace as 
owner demanded; that Sir Matthew had 
put into an attorney's hands^ and ordered 
the writ to be made out. Oh! he very 
cruel man/' cried Omphale, her eye flash* 
mcr resentment and detestation. 

'f Why does Sir Matthew pursue her 
thus ?" said Grace, ^' Is it on my unhappy 
account, or to gratify a malicious heart 
that longs to destroy us. Heaven teach 
me what to do. " Here she paused, and 
the tears rolled slowly o'er her wan cheeks. 

^' There be but one way, bur can get 
out," said the dame, " and that is, bail. 



©R, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 169 

wliere is your good lover the pious parson, 
Mr. Marmaduke, look ye!** 

" He is gone to see his aged father/' 
sighed Grace, *' and will not return this 
week/' 

•* Then," said the dame, ''Sir Matthew 
will hold hur to hail, they will not refuse 
hur bail ; do you beg hur mercy, sweet 
lady, hur will deny you nothing." 

" I am distracted/' said Grace ; " the 
greatness of the sum, demands no trifling 
security, and I know none else that 
can release her ; yet to bend to Mm, 
whose inhumanity has joined with her 
enemy in persecuting her, is indeed a 
task ; but for such a parent as she has 

VOL. ii. I 



170 OWEN CASTLE; 

been to me, I would undertake much 
more humiliation. — I will instantly go to 
the castle, procure her release, and bring 
her to you, if possible." 

'^ You cannot surely think of going 
out to- night/' cried the dame ; " you had 
better rest yourself till the morning/^ 

'' What, and let my aunt lie in a cold, 
damp prison, when I could by my exertion 
take her from it ; think you I could sleep 
with that thought upbraiding my want 
of affection ; — no, I will instantly to the 
castle," cried she, starting up. 

"You will certainly gain your death," 
said Omphale, *^ and your life be on that 
monster of treachery's head; that female 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? I?! 

tyger, that delights in the agonies of her 
prey.*' 

"I shall escape the cold" said Grace, 
striving to smile " for I feel a burning fire 
in my hrain^ that the bleak wind cannot 
chill.'' 

Taffy, the son of the honest dame, a lad 
of sixteen years, carried a lanthern by her 
side, and with difficulty directed their 
steps through the forest. The three miles 
appeared six to him, but were not heed- 
ed by his urgent and persevering com- 
panion She rung hastily at the gate of 
the castle, and was readily conducted to 
the prese ce of Sir Matthew, v^lio with 
his friend, the Reverend Mr. Maskall, were 

I 2 



172 OWEN CASTLE; 

astonished at her sudden and wild appear- 
ance. 

'* I am come. Sir Matthew, (cried she, 
as she entered) to snphcate your mercy for 
my aunt, who has been so unfortunate 
as to fall beneath your heavy displeasure, 
for what fault unwilHngly committed, is 
known only to yourself, we are both igno- 
rant of intentional crime, and both suf- 
fering under severe misfortune ; then per- 
secute us not, have mercy ; let not her re- 
spectable venerable person, her refined 
mind, undergo the horrors of a jail ; con- 
sider she is your near kinswoman have 
compassion on her unmerited sufferings/' 
Exhausted by fatigue, and overpowered by 
the strength of her feelings, she leant on 
the arm of a settee for support ; the aged 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROIN t." 1 73 

inamorata gazed with transport on her 
as she stood thus agitated, thus subdued 
before him. 

" It was not my wish, as well you know, 
sweetest Grace," said he, approaching, and 
leading her towards the fire, " tliat vour 
aunt should experience the many diffi- 
culties she has b)^ choice embraced." 

"Alas! sir," said Grace, *' it was your 
command that she obeyed.*' 

" But whose unkindness was the cause 
of words rashly uttered, and as rashly tak- 
en up ? (said he, tenderly looking' on her 
face, and seating himself by her side,) 
you, dearest maid, were the cause ; it was 



I 3 



174 OWEN CASTLE; 

your perfections, your disdain, that hur- 
ried me to acts unworthy of my name." 

*'You relent then, (exclaimed she, joy 
illuminating her beautiful countenance) 
you relent." 

''1 do, (returned he,) and would willingly 
restore your aunt to ease and happiness, 
by providing for her in a way befitting 
her descent and former expectations, if ?/ow 
will not deny the conditions. Look here, 
read this deed (which I had drawn up 
ready to send her) and then judge if 1 am 
cruel or unjust." 

Grace with a trembling hand took the 
parchment, it ran thus ; — 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 175 

I, Matthew Fitzovven, Baronet^ of 
Owen Castle in the county of Merioneth- 
shire, do give to Mary Milbourne, my 
cousin, (relict of the late John Milbourne, 
Esquire) Dingle Farm in the said county 
of Merionethshire, with all the rents col- 
lected from the tenements affixed to itj 
which united with the farm, amounts to 
the yearly sum of five hundred pounds, 
with this proviso, and under this express 
condition, that the said Mary Milbourne 
do give on the receipt of this gift, a writ- 
ten consent to my marriage with her niece. 
Grace Fitzbeauchamp, must likewise sig- 
nify her willingness to become my wife, 
by signing her name at the bottom of this 
parchment, in conjunction with Mary Mil- 
bourne. The marriage ceremony to take 
place, if possible, at the time of presenting 
14 



176 

this deed of gift ; the agreement being 
duly signed before witnesses and fully ra- 
tified. These coiiditions observed, I do 
also bind myself, Matthew Fitzowen, Ba- 
ronet, of Owen Castle, in the county of 
Merionethshire, to pay the debt of the 
aforesaid Mary Milbourne to Arpasia 
Wallace, owner of the Whitford estate, 
the money due on it by the former's de- 
fault, being two thousand pounds ; which 
I hereby pledge myself to discharge, pro- 
vided the above articles are acknowledged 
in due form, immediately assented to, and 
legally accepted by the parties concerned^ 
as witness my hand and seal, this twentieth 
day of December, one thousand, eight 
hundred and fourteen." 

"Matthew Fitzowen.** 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 177 

" Signed and witnessed by the Reverend 
James Mask all, and Arthur Strawshoe, at- 
torney." 

She dropped the deed upon the ground, 
and clasping her white hands together 
stood in mute despair. 

Sir Matthew impatiently entreated her 
to Say if she acceeded to the conditions. 

" Is there no w^ay to free her, no ran- 
som, but my wretched person/' cried she 
falling on her knees before him ? 

" None," exclaimed he, exultingly ; 

" /zone, you alone can keep her from rotting 

for the remainder of her days in a loath 

some prison, shut out from all the vvoi td ; 

I 5 



178 OWEN CASTLE ; 

if you love her as you have so long pro- 
fessed, now is the hour to prove it^ before 
she^ with her dying breath, accuse you 
as her cruel murderess, that could have 
saved her, but would not." ''- Do not! do 
not! drive me mad," she cried, " by so 
dreadful a picture; do not, I implore/* She 
clung to him with the utmost earnestness, 
and in a piercing tone of anguish con- 
tinued, '' Oh have compassion on my mi- 
sery! snatch her from destruction, me 
from the crudest distraction, by a noble 
bounty, unfettered by harsh conditions, 
unalloyed by so harsh a sacrifice/' 

The bailiff who had taken Mrs. Mil- 
bourne from the wood-cutters was shewn 
into the room. " I have taken the lady 
your honour," said he, bowing with his 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? I79 

hat in his hand, '' and am come to know 
your orders, if so be you have any/' 

" How is my poor aunt ?" asked Grace 
in a tremulous voice, and lookinoj fear- 
fuHy on his unprepossessing visage. 

" Bad enough miss," returned he, 
" deadly worn with her long walk ; cold 
and wet^ for there came on a thaw, and 
the droppings from the trees of the forest 
have soaked her through and through^ and 
she be like to have no very ple'asant lodg- 
ing; for you must know, miss^ that the 
jail be but a very ill-fashioned one. as I 
may say, for it be more for felons than 
debtors, and 'tis seldom or never as any 
decentish {o\k be in it, much less gentry, 
there being no commondation for them^ 
16 



ISO OWEN CASTLE ; 

there being but two square flagged dun- 
geon looking places, without no bedding 
or fire places, so she will he but badly 
off. I shan't forget her look for some time 
when Sam the prison keeper, as rough a 
Jack as any, miss, shewed her the stone 
chamber, and said that was the debtor's 
part; then seeing her well nigh dead with 
eold, he took her to the hall, such a 
desolate black looking place with chains 
all round, like the aisle of an old tumbled 
down cliurch, without no grate, but turf 
burning on the hearth in a chimney like 
a porch ; so Sam ordered Black Robin 
out from the warmest corner, as was 
tried for horse stealing t'other assizes 
to make room for the lady, that she 
might dry her dripping clothes ; but he 
grumbled and rattled his chains so 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 181 

when he got up, as so terrified the lady^ 
that she turned pale as death, and shook 
as though she had got an ague. Roger 
the blacksmith, as is in for burglary, and 
Giles Dareing, was playing cards and 
drinking gin, while Bill the locker-up 
was singing a song, not by no ways de- 
cent ; the old lady groaned bitterly, and 
was scared so with their behaviour as 
she begged to go to bed, and to see a 
woman, if there was any as might give 
her some of her clothes, till her own 
were gotten more comfortable, but a-lack 
a-day ! she were come to a goat's house to 
look for wool ; there was none of the fe- 
male kind within the walls, nor no bed 
but Sam's, and he woud'nt give up his 
to no one, he is too surlv a fellow, so I 
left the lady in a cruel plight, miss, and 



182 OWEN CASTLE; 

think for sure, unless you sends her some 
clothes and a bed, with some victuals and 
drink, she won't live long there." 

" Great and beneficent God!" cried 
she, falling on her knees, with her hands 
and eyes upraised to heaven, " let not the 
bad woman who is the cause of that an- 
gel's sufferings, escape thy signal punish- 
ment ; let her vvith a guilty soul, endure 
the misery of my innocent aunt ; visit her 
undeserved enemies with affliction, that 
they may feel, a part of the agony I now 
bend under!" 

Sir Matthew turned aside his head, his 
callous breast was suiote bv a secret moni- 
tor, tl e jrarson passed his hand before 
his evf s, and the bailitt' wiped a tear away 
with the cuff of his coat. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 183 

Take me, (said she rising) take me to 
her. She put her white arm beneath the 
baihff's, and was drawing him away, 
when he with a smile of pity, cried '' Lord, 
miss, you be crazy sure, you can't get into 
the prison to night, all is barricaded up, 
and I know Sam woud'nt draw a bolt 
back at ten o'clock at night, for all the 
pretty ladies in the kingdom, be they 
never so handsome." 

" Crazy /" returned she, with a wild 
stare of grief, '' I fear. Oh ! I greatly fear 
I am very near it/' 

Sir Matthew ordered the bailiff to with- 
draw. " What !" she cried, startinsr to- 
wards the door, " is he gone without me ? 
Oh! inhuman! monstrous cruelty! can 



184 OWEN castle;- 

I not see her ; must she die without me ? 
Herding with wretches, who grimly glare 
around her ; her sacred ears insulted by 
vilest ribaldry ; her body extended on the 
eold flinty stones, without covering, 
change of raiment or food, this tremen- 
dous night! It is too much^ I cannot 
think on it without distraction : — tell me 
the means to save her, and I will do it-— • 
Yes, though it doom me to perpetual 
misery." There w^as a firmness^ a de* 
spairing energy in her voice and gesturse, 
that appalled them ; and Sir Matthev^ 
with an unsteady hand gave the deed into 
her burning grasp ; saying, " Loveliest 
and best beloved girl, aign that, and 
your aunt sleeps beneath this roof to- 
night. I have the power to force the gates 
that enclose her; on you she depends. 



CR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE." 185 

Think you see her." — She interrupted hiirt 
as he was about to describe her situation, 
with saying, " no more of that. — -Her sink- 
ing image is now before my aching 
sight, in all the horrors my imagi- 
nation can depict. Sir, I want not 
your illustration to make me feel it more ;*' 
then going up to the Rev. Mr. Maskall, 
with a solemn air, impressive aspect, and 
a voice nearly hoarse with contending 
emotions, said, ** 1 charge you by your 
hopes of mercy hereafter, your sacred 
office and probity as a christian and a 
mauy to answer faithfully to the question 
I now put to your conscienc and veracity ; 
\?>t\\\sdQedirealov fictitious? Does it con- 
tain the substance of justice, or its out- 
ward shew ? Shall I, by consigning myself 
to him (pointing to Sir Matthew) for 



1S6 OWEN CASTLE; 

life, save my aunt, the preserver of my 
infancy, from her present misery, and 
secure her from the like misfortunes while 
she exists ? Answer me, 1 implore you, 
as if I were now dying before you ; for 
well I know my reason and my health 
will not hold my body debtor long, they 
will vanish altogether soon." 

'' I answer," said he, touched by her 
energetic appeal, " that I have reason to 
believe the deed you hold \sjust and true, 
and that I have no doubt of Sir Matthew's 
performing every article with the strictest 
hberality; sign but the parchment, and 
you cannot fail of being happy.*' 

" Happy !" repeated she, with a sigh 
deep drawn from her bosom's monarch. 



OR, WHICH rs THE HEROINE? \S7 

^* but give me the pen." Sir Matthew 
joyfully placed it in her fingers. " Guide 
my trembling hand," ?he cried, ^' it is the 
first time it has belied my heart, and its 
new office is unwelcome/' Aided by the 
Baronet, her signature was clearly written. 
" Now fly/* she cried, " and snatch my 
parent from the horrors that surround 
her ; let me hold her in my arms once 
more, and in her affectionate thanks re- 
ceive a a recompence for the barter of my 
earthly happiness." 

The Rev, Mr. Maskall departed with 
the deed in the carriage for the prison ; 
in the mean time Grace was intreated to 
take refreshment ; with the lendcrest soli- 
citude Sir Matthew urged her complian ce 
and prevailed on her to swallow a Uttle wine. 



1S8 OWEN castle; 

She heard his expressions of eternal love 
and gratitude with cold indifference; de- 
jected and silent she leant her aching head 
upon her hand, not even breathing a 
sinjjle si oh to ease her burdened soul. 
At twelve o'clock the parson returned 
with the vvidovr, who flying into the 
arms of her niece, with a scream of joy- 
swooned instantly away ; she was put to 
bed, and every care taken to restore her, 
nor did Grace, worn and exhausted as she 
was, leave her, until she was convinced 
of her reviving powers ; she then retired 
to the chamber she had formerly occu- 
pied. She threw her harrassed frame upon 
the bed, in the vain hope of lulling her 
cares to bleep ; but the momentous events 
of the evening ould not, could not be 
banished from her agiatated mind. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE !^ 189 



CHAPTEK XIX. 



XjIGHT had but greyly dawned through 
her curtains, when she was roused by a 
gentle knock at her chamber door, and 
the voice of her former waiting maid, the 
simple Winifred, (whom her change of 
circumstances had forced her to dismiss) 
entreating entrance. When she got within 
side, she kissed the burning hand of Grace 
with affectionate duty and suppressed 
grief, crving, ''Ah! madam, poor NV'inifred 
is joyful at being sent for to attend the 
best of misstresses once again/' 



1^0 OWEN castle; 

^' How ! are you here Winifred !" said 
her mistress," I am glad to see you, but did 
not send for you ? 

*' Sir Matthew sent for me and David 
last nightj madam ; and I have been up all 
night, so busy you can't think, in getting 
your trunks from the cottage, unpacking 
them, and preparing every thing ready 
for your dressing this morning." 

" You were in great haste, Winifred ; 
it is very early, I have had no sleep, and 
feel so fatigued with the exertion of last 
night, that I could wish not to be dis- 
turbed just yet/' 

'' Dear, my lady ! I am very sorry ; it 
was not my fault, Sir Matthew sent me, 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? I9I 

he has been up these three hours, trotting 
about hke a troubled spirit; well, to be 
sure, love taken up in old age, is a sad 
wearisome siglit ; the parson and he are 
now in the oak parlour, si-niug and 
sealing." 

" What parson ? what mean you ?" 
asked Grace. " Oh ! dear me ! madam, 
you look sadly to be sure, I hope you 
an*t going out your mind again." 

^' Answer me," said her mistress, "for 
something dreadful floats in my brain, 
that I would fain disbelieve. Am I to be 
offered at the altar a sacrifice to the 
wiles of a female monster and her agents ? 
Am I to become the bride of Sir Matthew ? 



192 OWEN CASTLE; 

'' Oh ! lud a mercy ! my sweet young 
lady/* cried the maid, '^ I thought you 
knowed that very well. Yes, and that 
parson Maskall is to marry you before 
breakfast ; the steward is to give you 
away, and I and David, with the rest of 
the household, are' to witness the cere- 
mony, my dear lady." 

" Then it was not a dream, '*cried Grace^ 
" it was a cruel reality; the blossom of my 
life is overcast with storms, with never 
ending sorrow. Why, oh! just heaven, 
am I thus compelled to suffer?" 

'^ I will run and tell them you are very 
badly indeed; my lady, for you look woe- 
fully pale, and your eyes are red and 
swelled; you don't look one bit like a bride. 
I will go and say you won t be married.** 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 193 

" Stay/' cried Grace, '' you know not 
what you would do, — the conFequence is 
fatal to my aunt, if I retract; for her sake 
I yield, where is she?'* 

'^ Still in her chamber, madam. Sir 
Matthew gave orders none should disturb 
her ; to be sure he is mortal kind to her, 
and told the steward that her orders should 
be looked on as his own; and that all 
were to pay her every attention and re- 
spect ; but he need not have dons that, 
for every body does respect and love her^ 
from the bottom of their hearts." 

" This is just ; this is as it should be," said 
Grace ; '^ the terms are fulfilled ou his 
side, and I will not be less forward in ray 
part of the contract.*' 

TOL. II. K 



1 94 OWEN CASTLE ," 

She yielded to be dressed by Winifred, 
who viewing her lovely form, with ho- 
nest pride, exclaimed, ''You look beautiful, 
my lady ; tliis diess is tlie very one ihat 
uas made uj) for you to be married in 
to poor sweet Mr. Murray, when he was 
{ill of a sudden hurried away to that nasty 
Am^erica, where he had the misfortune to 
be killed/* 

*' In mercy, hold! your words are dag- 
gers in my breast; is this a moment to 
remind me of his loss? Oh! beloved spirit 
of my slaughtered Willian^ ! lock down 
upon thy unhappy Grace, with angel pity 
watch round her, while doomed to this 
earth. — Let thy guardian shade inspire 
her with fortitude to bear the trial that 
awaits her, and when her spirit fiies her 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? iQo 

wearied frame, may it be joined with 
thine in everlasting brightness/' 

Winifred was fixed in mute respect, 
during this fervent prayer of her lady, 
who lost in bitter remembrance, remained 
upon her knees, when a sudden knock at 
the door aroused her from her pious atti- 
tude. Winifred answered it, and informed 
her lady, that it was David, who com- 
missioned by Sir Matthew, came to desire 
her presence below. 

" I come," she cried, and was about to 
leave the chamber, when Winifred said, 
*' Dear my lady, here are the diamonds 
Sir Matthew bid me give you, please to 
let me tie them on." They were a small 
coronet for the brow, and earrings with 
K2 



196* OWEN castle; 

necklace, bracelets, and his picture set in 
brilliants. 



" Yes, adorn me," she returned, regard- 
ing with a tearful eye the glittering appen- 
dages of greatness that shone round her ; 
" let the victim do honour to the solem nity 
that robs it of life and liberty." She de- 
scended to the parlour, where the enrap- 
tured knight welcomed her with the wild- 
est joy. He conducted her to the Reverend 
Mr. Maskall, who stood ready to perform 
the ceremony. Her utmost fortitude was 
exerted to bear her through it ; as he pro- 
nounced the final benediction, he appeared 
as a judge condemning her to death ; the 
forcible similitude, came like thunder on 
her sinking frame, and she fell senseless 
into Sir Matthew's arms. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE." 193r 

^' This is the dismallest wedding I ever 
seed," cried David to Winifred, as they 
went towards the servant's hall, " no feast- 
ing, no fiddling, but all as still as the 
grave ; to my mind it is more like a 
funeral." 

" Ah! Davidj David !'* said she, shaking 
her liead, " you knows nothing of what 
a business this has been. Had you seen my 
ladyship, (as I must now call her) in the 
chamber with her aunt, poor old lady, as I 
did, you would never forget it. I heard 
her tell about Maskall the parson, forcing 
her to sign a deed before he took her out 
of prison, and then they embraced and 
fell a crying together, that it quite wrung 
my heart in two to see it. As for a funeral, 
to my thinking, madam Milbourne will 
k3 



198 OWEN castle; 

soon make one, for she is not able to leave 
her bed, and the saints only know when 
she will. Ah! welPs the day! little did 
I think I should see such turns, such ups 
and downs in a little year as have come to 
pass in this castle. — But I hopes, David, 
when you keeps your word with me, we 
shall have a lightsomer wedding than this 
is, for sure," continued she, wiping her 
eyes with the corner of her apron, and 
looking tenderly on him. 

" Ah! lass, (replied he) though we be 
poor, we be merry ; and though I can't 
put on thy finger a gold ring done round 
with diamonds, like the one Sir Matthew 
put on that sweet angel's fingers a w^hile 
back, yet you will have a good tempered 
lad with youth and comeliness, and an 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 19^ 

honest heart. Poverty is no such trouble 
as a bad conscience with a power of money. 
I warrant her young ladyship was happier in 
the wood -cutter's cottage, than now she 
is mistress of this fine castle with old Sir 
Matthew tacked to it, crabbed, iigli/j cross, 
gouty, and palslfied. It is a thousand and 
a thousand shames he should have so 
sweet tempered, handsome, and so young 
a wife ; — Well, I knows what he richly 
deserves, and if I were her young lady- 
ship, I would lead him a weary life/' 

** Out on you, you wicked man !*' said 
Winifred; " my young lady is an angel, 
and above all such baseness, and I won't 
love you, if you talk so," 

'^ Do not chide, Winifred, but kiss and 
k4 



200 OWEN CASTLE; 

forgive ;" he took it slyly and they separ- 
ated. 

Omphale mourned the fate of her 
friend with the deepest commiseration, 
but refused to accept the invitation wSir 
Matthew had sent her, her noble nature 
scorninsf to dissemble the dislike she had 
taken to him. Mr. Stanley had sent her 
the produce of her diamond necklace, which 
amounted to a thousand pounds, and 
begged her instantly to set off for London, 
where he had expectations of procuring her 
some provision from the inconsiderate 
youth, whose blind partiality for his 
seducer had driven him into an act he, 
in his cooler moments must abhor. He 
added, that he had taken lodgings for her 
in Sloane Street, Brompton, where she 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 201 

would see the former guardians of August 
tus, and gain their intercession in her 
behalf. 

This measure coincided with the cher- 
ished wish of her bosom ; for notwith- 
standing his sudden desertion and love 
for another, Augustus was still dear to 
her heart; to be near him, to see him 
was transport ; this was the real motive 
of her journey, pecuniary affairs not 
weighing an instant in the balance of her 
enterprizing mind. An artificial joy took 
shelter in her breast, she gave an affec- 
tionate adieu to her beloved friends, 
Mrs. Milbourne and Lady Fitzowen, 
and attended by Chloe, embarked upon 
her adventurous travels. 

K 5 



202 OWEN castle; 



CHAPTER XX. 



J^xRS. Wallace and Augustus were set- 
tled in their town house, in Portland 
Square. The superb magnificence of its 
decorations, their retinue, and sumptuous 
entertainments, were the never ending 
theme of novelty s admirers. The West 
Indian's wealth shone in voluptuons ele- 
gance, the envy of tiioiisands, and asto 
nishment of all. As Mrs. Milbourne, Ar- 
pasia's thirst for ambition was highly 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 203 

gratified, it being supposed she had come 
over with him, and that she was his wife; 
as such, she was received every where, 
and universally countenanced. — Oh mam- 
mon I mammon! how thy glittering vest 
conceals the vile from scrutiny. No won- 
der the wicked court thy smiles, for 
without them their vice and deformity 
would be naked to the eye of virtue, dis- 
gusting and contemned! Augustus was 
borne down the stream of dissipation, 
whirling headlong through its destructive 
maze, regardless of the fatal precipice 
folly often leads to. 

Rufus Marmaduke, on his return from 
paying his duty to his a^^ed father (whose 
approbation he had obtained for h.s mar- 



k6 



204 ©WEN CASTLE; 

riage) was anxious to behold his lovely 
Grace to hear her Ions; withheld confes- 
sion of approval and receive the blessing 
of her hand, which his unremitting atten- 
tion might justly expect to be given to 
his pleadings. Bouyant with love and 
hope, he sought the cottage, where he 
learnt with astonishment and dismay, the 
rocent marriage of his love, with every 
previous circumstance that had confined 
to force her to the fatal step. When the 
good dame had finished, he struck his 
forehead, exclaiming, '• Oh 'twas a well 
laid scheme ! her coward enemies dared 
not have tormented her, and so wretch- 
edly enthralled her, had /been present. 
My absence left her open to their vile 
machinations^ but the hoary assassin of my 
peace shall answer for the theft ; he shall 



ORj WHICH IS THE heroine:' 205 

not triumph in her misery, and my de- 
spair. Frantic he rushed from the cottage, 
aud regardless of appearances, presented 
himself suddenly before the baronet, who 
with bis wife were sitting in the oak 
parlour. 

" I am come to demand reparation, (said 
he, accosting Sir Matthew, who had risen 
on his entrance) for the vile theft you 
have committed in puiloining that be- 
guiled angel from me,'' pointing to Lady 
Fitzowen, who stood covered with fear 
and confusion, by the side of her aged 
husband. 

<^ Do you address yourself to me, sir?" 
cried Sir Matthew, regarding him with 



206 OWEN castle; 

contempt, " or are you madly ignorant of 
the words you utter." 

*' I do not come, sir, to parley on a sub- 
ject so replete with villainy. I come to 
demand the satisfaction due to one you 
have so deeply injured. If you refuse my 
challenge, you are unworthy the name 
you bear." 

^' Be assured I will not flinch from 
supporting it with honour to myself,*' re- 
turned Sir Matthew; *' but what is the 
injury of which you accuse me?** 

" Did you not, by the most artful 
plan, inveigle and betray tiiat suiiering 
angel into marriage wiih your Force her 
into an act repugnant to her feehngs? Was 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 20^ 

it not base, selfish and despicable to tram- 
ple with relentless power on her happiness 
for ever beneath your feet ? To see her 
beauty, virtue, and felicity, wither in the 
grasp of infirmity, is oiFensive to nature 
and to God," cried Rufus impassionately. 

" What right. Lady Fitzowen, has this 
gentleman to task me for my conduct? 
Are you under any engagement to him?" 
asked Sir Matthew sternly, regarding 
his terrified wife, who with a faultering 
voice, replied, " Had not my marriage 
with you, sir, prevented it, I might have 
been his wife. His ardent love and cease- 
less attention had won on me so far, as to 
sanction his addi esses, but not to pass my 
irrevocable promise to be his." 



208 OWEN CASTLE ; 

" Do I retain my senses while hearing 
this?" cried Rufus with the tenderest look 
of gratitude on the alarmed wife, whose 
bosom bled for his anguish ; and turning 
a frantic eye of vengeance on the baronet, 
continued, " You hear from her own lips 
theelysium that was intended to be mine; 
from this heavenly height of bliss unutter- 
able, you have hurled me down the black 
abyss of endless despair. — Bloody only 
blood! can wash out my wrongb — then 
take the warm current that flows within 
my distracted heart, and end at once 
a life burdensome to the lost retainer. 
He here took two loaded pistols from his 
pocket, and thrusting one into the hand 
of the baronet, retired to a little distance. 
Grace, shrieking with horror flew to him, 
and catching his arm flung the pistol oa 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 20^ 

the ground, exclaiming, *' stain not your 
pure conscience with murder ; for my 
sake forbear ! Reflect on what you would 
do ; the dreadful consequences to one of 
your sacred oflice. Disgrace and infamy 
fall on you head, never to be removed ; 
an outcast you would wander, unknown, 
unpitied, and 1 oppressed with the agoni- 
zing reflection of being the cause. Oh 
spare, dearRufus! spare me the guilt of ha- 
vingbeen your destruction." ''Dear Rufus, 
(returned he, gazing on her pale features, 
distorted by fear and tender regard) dear 
to thee, undone loveliness ! oh, am I dear 
to theer 

*' Lady Fitzowen !'* cried Sir Matthew 
in an angry voice, and burning with jea- 
lousy, ^' quit the room, I command yon'' 



210 OWEN CASTLE; 

" Never," returned she, inspired vvitlt 
courage and the dread of leaving them 
alone, "never will I be calmly subservient 
w^hen murder is the foul intent. — Oh! 
RufuSj on my knees I beseech you, throw 
not a life so precious, away upon so un- 
vs'orthy a cause; forget a wretch who has 
not long to live, for she is summoned to 
her great account above. Load not my soul 
with the blood of others, but resign your 
dreadful purpose, and instantly depart." 

" To die is all I wish, and since the 
jewel is torn from nje, I prize not exis- 
tence. You, sir, will not withold the 
honourable means of giving the death I 
covet," said Rufus, with a stern determi* 
nation in his voice and aspect. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 21 1 

*•' You are right, sir," replied the Baronet, 
and you will follow me to the planta- 
tion." 

" Inexorable men ? insatiable destroyers 
of each other, hear ! hea?^ ! (cried Lady 
Fitzowen) the voice of reason." She clung 
to Sir Matthew, who shaking her with bru- 
tal strensfth from him. dashed her feeble 
body on the floor, and vanished from the 
room — .Rufus lingered for an instant, 
caught her in his arms, and with terrifying 
fervor imprinted kisses on her lips, then 
ejaculating a blessing on her beauteous 
head, darted after the baronet. 

A faint scream, and full of supplication, 
followed his receding figure from the swoon- 
ing wife. 



212 OWEN castle; 

When arrived at the plantation they 
took their ground ; the enervated hand of 
Sir Matthew shook as he drew the trigger 
of his pistol, and the ball only grazed 
the corner of his antagonist's hat, while 
that from the pistol of Rufus had a surer 
aim, and lodged in the shoulder of Sir 
Matthew, who groaned and fell. 

Rufus supposing him dead, fled, shel- 
tered by the darkness of the evening, 
unperceived by the attendants that had, 
alarmed by their lady, and the report of 
the pistols, hurried to the spot which 
witnessed his revenger. Sir Matthew was* 
taken into the castle, and a surgeon sent 
for who extracted the ball, but entertained 
great doubts of his recovery. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE.*' 213 

The Reverend Mr. Maskall determined 
not to let the matter rest without satisfy- 
ing the malignant propensities of his 
envious soul. — Long had he borne the 
youthful ecclesiastic a secret hate for his 
superior advantages ; to the bishop of the 
diocese he immediately wrote, and by 
layivig down the crime of the unfortunate 
Piuius in the blackest colours, awoke the 
vengeance of the church, which stripped 
him of his gown, and issued stricl search 
for his person, that lie might be appre- 
hended and brought to justice (should Sir 
Matthew die) for the wili'ul murder of 
the baronet. 

For this humane piece of service, Mr. 
Maskall was rewarded with a rich living 
in the gift of Sir Matlhew, whose life 
still hung in a precarious state. 



214 OWEN CASTLE; 

The ruin of Lady Fitzowen's peace^ 
sacrificed for her sake, and the unhappy 
fate of the noble Rufus that joined it, 
fell with such weight on the broken heart 
of the widow, that she no more held up 
her head, or could support the encreasing 
debility of her system which was daily 
undermined by grief and self upbraidings, 
for she looked on herself as the prime 
source of the calamity that pursued the 
beings she most loved. She sunk a resistless 
victim to her secret sorrow into the 
sudden grave injustice and treachery had 
prepared for her. 

*'Was it for this! (exclaimed Lady 
Fitzowen, as she leaned over the coffin 
that inclosed the inanimate frame of her 
deceased aunt,) that I gave myself up to 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 215 

the arms of age, and reclined on the bo- 
som of the man I hated ? Was it for this I 
I brought the njble Rufu? to disgrace and 
infamy, bowed down his venerable father's 
head with shame, and compelled myself 
to eternal wretchedness. Oh! why was 
thy life snapped short by relentless fate, 
when it was so dearly bought? Yet why 
should I repine, she is happy now, secure 
she wings amidst the heavenly choir, a 
happy spirit in the realms of everlasting 
bliss." 

Thus did she reason with her poignant 
grief and bend in submission to the de- 
crees of her creator. Her meek spirit 
yielded to the afiiictions heaped upon her 
without repining, but the silent and cor- 
rosive anguish that settled on her heart, 



21 6 OWEN CASTLE; 

wore her frame to a corLsuniptive shadovr 
of its former beauty. 

Ompbale and her fiiithful Chloe had 
been settled in Sloane-street, three weeks, 
but nothing material had occurred with 
respect to the settlement Mr. Stanley- 
laboured to procure for her. — She felt 
desirous to learn how Augustus pioceed- 
edjfrom Mr. Stanley, but her pride forbade 
an enquiry tending to the developement 
of the weakness that still lurked for him 
in her bosom. — The })apers described his 
brilliant fetes, and the beauty of the 
supposed Mrs. Milbourne, in such enco- 
miums as filled her with despondence, 
and added to her grief. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE.'' 21^ 



CHAPTER XX. 



-LtJ-R. Stanley, much out of spirits, called 
earlier than usual, to read to her a letter 
from Lady Fitzowen, that gave the account 
of the death of her aunt, and the impend- 
ing Fate of the unfortunate Rufus, who 
had hitherto escaped detection. This 
nielancholy intelligence was keenly felt 
by Ouiphale and Mr. Stanley, who 
mingled tears of commiseration over the 
pathetic lines of one so valued, so lowed 
by both. 

VOL, II. L 



218 OWEN CASTLE; 

" Is not the monster who occasioned 
this, condemned of heaven, (asked Om- 
phale, her eye darting fir^J and deserving 
the relentless vengeance of those whose 
lives she has en:ibittered r" 

'• To heave?! we must leave the })ovver 
of vengeance, 'tis not for weak and sinful 
moridls rashly to wrench it from the su- 
preme disposer of all events ; he has his 
own wise purposes to answer, and in due 
time will avenge theinjured; they only need 
submit their cause to iiim and bend in re- 
signation to his will," said Mr. Stanley, wish- 
ing to impress her with his o wnpious and pa- 
tient perseverance in the hour of trouble. 

"Ah! (cried she) you good man, but no 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 2 19 

feel as me do ; did he not leave me a stran- 
ger in foreign kingdom, without support, 
to perish ? 

"Your own mistaken nobleness ofmind, 
(said he, of which the much regretted and 
departed widow informed me, was the 
cause of his desertion. Had you but given 
that instrument into my hand when I first 
entreated it^ you had not now been left upon 
the mercy of the world, but would have been 
the wife of him I perceive you still adore/* 

'* While he love another, ??o," cried she, 
rising and pacing the room with indigna- 
tion ; "me scorn, me despise so mean an 
act ; me rather perish a thousand limes, 
than on such terms be wife to one me 
did once love better than existence." 
L£ 



220 OWEN CASTLE; 

" It is a pitty such disenterested atiec- 
tion should be so barbarously abused/' 
said he, '^ but listen to me while I relate 
the success of my application in your 
behalf; sure I was born to mislead with 
hope, all who call for my assistance/* 
He then with some circumlucution de- 
livered the following: information to Om- 
phale, who lost not a syllable of his de- 
tail. " After busthng through a croud 
of laced lacqueys, I was conducted to a 
superb boudoir, furnished in the eastern 
style of costly extravagance; being tired 
with my walk, I took the liberty of seat- 
ing myself on a new fangled squab, with 
a ^n^ dangling drapery which hung over 
it ; the softness of my couch, and the heat 
of a good fire that burnt in a iiigh po- 
lished 5t€'el grate, drev/ me to sleep, for 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 221 

I guest; I had taken about a quarter of an 
hour's nap, ^vhen 1 heard a door open, 
and I saw a gentleman enter, that I 
knew to be Captain Wallace, who dis- 
abled by the loss of an arm, had returned 
by permission to his native country. He 
did not see me, for he stood with his 
back towards the fire in a profound re- 
verie. Presently Mrs. Wallace appeared, 
when a dialos^ue ensued between them that 
opened to me a new scene of villiany." 

^' So, Arpasia, you have at last attended 
to my summons,'* cried Captain Wallace, 
in a surly key, " where is the money ?" 

" I have none," she coolly replied " Do 
you suppose I pick it up in the streets 



l3 



222 OWEN castle; 

Where should I find money to supply your 
continual demands r'* 



" Arpasia, you have yet to learn/' said 
he in an authoritative tone, ** the power I 
possess over you ; you know my agree- 
ment, when I first consented to your plan 
of plucking the rich West Indian of his 
wealth, was, a full half of the plunder, 
and not a guinea o^ your share have I yet 
touched ; refund, or I will instantly throw 
off the name of Irwin, you hare forced 
roe to assume, and take you by an hus- 
band's right from your paramour." 

** I defy your right/* cried she, " and 
shall not wait your time for flight, but 
decamp whenever I find the moment ripe 
for such a step. Talk not to me of your 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ."' 223 

power, who can in a moment lay open 
you and your associates. Have you not 
now in your hands, India bonds, and 
bills, to the amount of twenty thousand 
pounds, forfeited at hazard and the bil- 
liard table ; yet yoxi come to 7ne for money, 
when I declare I have not a single note 
in my possession." Here she let fall her 
imperious voice to something like a con- 
ciliatory accent, 

" What have you done with the last 
sum Augustus gave you ?" cried he, in an 
interrogating strain. 

" Tis gone half the world over I dare 
be sworn by this time," replied she care- 
lessly. 



L 4 



224 OWEN CASTLE; 

" Then you have no money by you r" 
said he. 

" None indeed ; I have vahaable trinkets, 
all that I saved out of the wreck of his 
fortune! You see how little I have thought 
of myself; making no provison at all, 
while you and your comrades have reaped 
the golden harvest. Am I not an excellent 
wife to cater for you, thus charminglijy 
and neglect myself;" said she laughing. 

*' Arpasia, be honest for once in your 
hfe/* cried he, regarding her with dis- 
gust, " and confess vour hidden trea- 
sure.s" 

" That you may roh me, (returned she 
with a low cartsey,) your humble servant. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE f 225 

Come, be content, it is not every wife that 
could put twenty thousand pounds into 
your pocket." 

" But zounds, madam, (cried he at her 
easy indifference,) I have but a third'' 

" Well, piano, blustering Captain, (re- 
plied she, mocking him,) a third is 
mighty well." 

*^ D ation! (exclaimed he,) but I 

am rightly served for entering into so 
vile a scheme. Would to heaven I had at 
first scorned your tempting project ; 
forced you from him, and compelled you 
to obedience and poverty, thou witch, 
thou artful decoyer of my honour and 
integrity." 

l5 



226 OWEN CASTLE; 

" Honour /" she returned, with a sneer, 
« I like that." 

" Yes, honour, madam, the soldier's 
dearest possession has been forfeited to 

your d nable wiles. Had, you on my 

return to England been a wife, such as I 
could have with joy acknowledged, this 
infamy had been spared me. I had not 
yielded to your soothing promises of for- 
tune (that my shattered finances required) 
and have leagued with sharpers to de- 
stroy an open unsuspecting heart." 

" You relent then, gallant Captain,'* 
cried she contemptuously curving her 
lip. 

" I do relent,** said he, '^ and ever shall 
blush at the stigma my base compliance 



OR, WHICH 13 THE HEROINE? 22^ 

to ' our seductive p^ans 1 ave thrown on 
my cloth ; and will give the injured 
M 1 bourne the satisfaction due to him, by 
refunding mn share at leasts of the spoil/' 

" Fool, as well as knave !" returned 
she, enraged at his threat. '' Would your 
pallry seven thousand pounds save him 
that isruined for twenty times that sum ? 
Go, hide your coward spirit, that meanly 
would slnink from the completion of a 
crime so eagerly begun ; you are not 
fit to join the enterprizing genius I 
boast." 

*' Curse on such genius! So pernicious, 

so diabolical a ])ro}jensity. The devilish 

inclinations of your so-.il are enough to 

poison and corrupt an hundred. You have 

lG 



228 OWEN CASTLE; 

enthralled me beyond the power of re- 
treating, and spite of my reluctance, I must 
remain your /oy/ /" cried he, striking his 
forehead with force, and by his countenace 
seemingly severely hampered, 

" You own my superiority, (exclaimed 
she with acrimony,) and that for once a 
lord of th.e creation may be inferior to k 
woman in wit and management.' 

" In sti^atagem diXid Jinesse, they excel 
us I grant; (replied he,) the art of trick- 
iiig is natural to most of them. Woe to the 
man that endeavours to cope with a 
woman who lost to virtue is so enriched 
with wit. She is a dangerous opponent, 
and should be shunned as destructive to 
his race/* 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 22^ 

'' Mighty fine ! (said she scoffingly) 
but reverse the glass, and see how Jew 
men fall by the artitices of womankind, 
compared to the havock they produce 
amongst the credulous race oi Jemales. 
My hfe on% but it is ten to one against 
the males* But time is precious, and we 
will leave moralizing to a space less 
occupied by sinister concerns. I will 
wave all reserve with you, and candidly 
declare my present predicament with 
Augustus, whose fortune I have sported 
with the greatest eclat ; but now it fails I 
shall— 

" And are you so lost, so dead to 
shame, (cried he interrupting her, and 
reddening with disdain) as to attempt 
to confess your vile intents to me, with* 
out even a palliating blush?" 



230 OWEN castle; 

" Why should I blush ; I never con- 
sidered you in the character of a husband; 
convenience joined us, convenience must 
continue us in friendship. Renounce your 
legal claim on mc, and be assured I shall 
not condescend to consult you with re- 
gard to my affairs ;'' returned she with 
malicious irony. 

^' I do renounce it, for ever renounce it, 
(exclaimed he, rising) and will prevent 
your diabolical machinations proceeding 
to a further height/* 

" Sign your renunciation this instant, 
(cried she joyfully) exonerate me from 
the power a superstitious ceremony, sup- 
ported by dreaming monks, and doating 
prelates has given you over me, and you 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROIVE? 231 

will confer a lasting obligation on your 
humble servant." 



" He had taken a pen in his hand, when 
I thought his repentance demanded a re- 
ward, and that it was a pity to let him 
remain in ignorance of her having the 
Whitford estate so snugly hid up from 
him — so owing her a grudge, I pretended 
to give a loud sneeze, stretched myself as 
if awaking from a profound sleep, and 
drawing back the drapery, presented my 
face full to the view of the amazed 
pair, who with open mouths, fixed eyes, 
and mute wonder, stood gazing on me, 
while I coolly took a pinch of snuff^ 
settled my wig, buttoned my coat, took 
up my hat and stick, and was leaving the 
room with the greatest sang-froid, secret- 



232 OWEN CA.^TLE; 

ly chuckling at their astonishment, when* 
the vixen stepped before me, and shutting 
the door with a hearty smack, asked 
what business I had in the house." 

" I felt not the least abashed^ but consi- 
dered within myself that I had no com- 
mon person to deal with, so had recourse 
to dissimulation^ for 1 thought it hard if 
a lawyer was not a match for the best 
woman in Christendom. " You are no 
stranger madam," said I, '^ either to my 
business or person, you have met me, I 
believe, at Ow^en Castle." 

'' She held up her glass, and after deli- 
berately looking at me from head to foot 
said ^' Oh yes, you are lawyer Stanley, 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 233 

the ami of the sentimental widow, are you 
not?" 

" The assurance of this speech had hke 
to have thrown me into a great passion ; 
it was with an effort of wondrous self- 
command, I rephed, " Every one must 
respect that departed lady's virtues, and 
I am proud to say I was not deficient in 
doing homage to them, or devoid of gra- 
titude for the favours 1 had received. 
All were not of my cast ; you, madam, un- 
derstand me, said I, fixing my eyes with 
reproach and asperity on her, who with- 
drew them in detected confusion. J like- 
wise fancied that she turned white in de- 
fiance of the rouge that thickly flushed 
her cheeks ; her voice lost its importance. 



234 OWEN CASTLE; 

as she said, '^ And is she dead; is ■Mrs. Mil- 
bourne dead r" 



" She is, madam ; she is gone to a tribu- 
nal of justice where her cause will be 
heard and avenged ; retribution will over- 
take her enemies ere they are aware." 

" Miss Fitzbeauchamp is now adorned 
with a title, (cried she, passing off a sigh) 
is Lady Fitzowen, on whose account Ru- 
fus Marmaduke fought with the crazy 
baronet, wounded him, and is no where 
to be found. I saw it all in the papers ; 
she has gained much notice. 1 assure you 
her beauty is already talked of. I wish 
the old fellow would die, and her ladyship 
would come to town amongst us." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE.'' 235 

*When Lady Fitzowen does London 
th e honour of her presence, she will be (I 
can venture to assure you, madam) select 
in her circle of friends/* 

" I make no doubt of it, sir/' she jeer- 
ingly replied. 

*' You cannot make a doubt of it," said I, 
" from the principles she possesses." 

" If you are come here to preach, sir, 
I'll alarm the house, (cried she ringing a 
bell, when a pert fellow of a footman an- 
swered it) you shall not long be in want of 
a congregation. William, shew this person 
to the street door, but first tell me how 
he came here r" 



236 OWEN castle; 

" He enquired for my master, madam, 
about an hour and a half since ; I conduc- 
ted him here, until he was at leisure to 
speak with him/' 

''Why did you not give me notice of 
company being in my boudoir, sirrah r" 

" I forgot him, my lady, I thought him 
of no consequence.'* 

''You may now depart, sir," cried she, 
with the fruits of your curiosity " I won- 
der a conscientious man like you, should 
meanly listen to the unguarded discourse 
of unsuspecting persons/' 

" This way, sir," cried the footman, 
with a broad grin on his insolent face/*^ 



23r 

*' I made no more to do, but struck him 
with my cane, saying, henceforth, mon- 
key, know when to laughatyour superiors. 
lie did not wait for another taste of my 
quahty, but skipped away hke a jacka- 
napes as he was ; then turning to her lady- 
ship, 1 said, it was by accident, not in- 
tent, madam, that I was ediiied by your 
conversation and nefarious practices, for 
which you have my hearty contempt. 
Captain Wallace, your rei.ientance does 
honour to you ; and to prove the high 
sense you merit by your magnanimous 
sentiments, I now inform you your wife 
has secreted a charming estate at Whitford^ 
the revenue of which is eight hundred 
pounds per annum. I advise you to seize 
it by a husband's right ; since it is lost to 
the right owner, 'lis tit you should have it. 



238 OWEN CASTLE ; 

Should you want further information, here 
is my card, you will find me ready to serve 
you. I then made my bow to the lady, 
who recovering from her stupor, (for my 
disclosure had greatly confounded her) 
cried, '' You suppose this malicious dis- 
covery of your's extremely clever, but 
learn, sir, I have it in my power to return 
the compliment ten- fold ;" she then cast 
on me a menacing look and darted out of 
the room. 

'^ As she departed Augustus entered. His 
salutation V, as very courteous but reserved ; 
Captain Wallace returned me histhankg 
and withdrew. I then stated your exact 
situation; itappeared to affect him greatly ; 
he confessed tha this folly andextravagance 
had bereft him of the power to provide 



OR, WHICH IS TH£ HEROINE? 239 

for you. He asked on what you at present 
subsisted. I said, the sale of |>art of your 
jewels had kept you from want ; — he 
remembered that his mother had t)et^n 
bountiful; he then informed me, that an 
execution was about to enter the house, 
and that he was devoured by creditors. 

" My career has been short, Mr. Stan- 
ley," said he, in a mournful tone, a crimson 
bhish tinging his now sallow cheek, ^' very 
short, but /am not the sole cause of the 
wreck that lies around me ; I have nourish- 
ed vipers^ that leech-like have sucked my 
essence from me, but it will soon be over. 
Tell Omphale she is revenged ; the relent- 
less sting of ill requited love I planted in 
her bosom, transfers itfelf to mine, and I 
writhe under the severe smart with the 



240 OWEN CASTLE; 

consciousness of having deserved it. Pro- 
tect her, and may heaven reward you. — He 
shook me by tlie hand and hastened to a 
summons sent from an assemblage of jews, 
brokers and creditors^ that waited with 
impatience for his appearance. 

^^ I, with a heavy heart, sought you, 
madam, to yield my sad budget of news." 

" Ah ; cruel Augustus'' cried Omphale, 
meUing into tears at the recital of his 
ruin, " me forgive you, me forgive you !'* 

" That is right," said Mr. Stanley, "and 
like a good christian.'* 

^' lie don't know where me live!" cried 
she, betraying her desire to see him. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 241 

^' Yes, he does/' answered he, " but 
told me he could not take courage to meet 
your eye/' 

" He might," returned she, with, a hea- 
venly smile beaming on her face, " he 
might come, for in his poverty and repen- 
tance Oraphale forget her wrongs/' 

Her narrow finances obliged her to 
remove from her expensive lodgings in 
Sloane-street to a lodging near Hornsey, 
which her present landlady recommended ; 
there she determined to wait until the 
spring of th.e year, which would promise 
a more favourable voyage to her birth 
place, than the present inclement season ; 
she likewise hoped that Augustus would 
collect the shattered remnants of his for- 

VOL, II. M 



242 OWEN CASTLE; 

tune and return with her to his former 
plantation ; the sale of her diamonds, with 
frugality might heal the wounds his pro- 
perty had received, and they be restored 
to former love and competency. This 
plan she communicated to Mr. Stanley, 
who promised to seek Augustus^ and point 
out the efficacy of it. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 243 



CHAPTER XXL 



oHE had been in her humble lodgings 
about two months, when a letter from 
Mr. Stanley conveyed the affecting intel- 
lij^ence that Ausrustus had recourse to the 
intrigues of the sharpers that had helped 
in his ruin, and was obliged to fly (Mrs. 
Wallace accompanying him ) no one knew 
whither ; that he feared her plan of selling 
her jewels was a sacrifice he would never 
merit, and as a true friend advised her 
to banish him forever from her mind, 
M 2 



244 OWEN castle; 

This was a blow to her fond hopes, 
her sanguine scheme for happiness, that 
sunk her spirits to the lowest ebb of 
despair ; hope fled at once, when Au- 
gustus seemed so lost to former honour, 
as to link himself to a band of concealed 
sharpers ; and above all, to continue in- 
fatuated with a designing woman that 
had undone him— there lay the agony of 
all. " Still he love her," she would say 
to the attentive Chloe, '' still he no re- 
nounce her — yet she no love him ; she 
destroy him ; no, she have not the heart 
of me.'' 

Another letter from Mr. Stanley, who 
was ever on the watch, in hopes to save the 
rash youth from entering into further ex- 
cess, informed her that he had heard 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 245 

Aumistus had been seen vvanderinf]: in a 
very forlorn state near London, bereft of 
every support ; and that the last place 
of his resort was near Camden-town, at a 
mean public house, he having took the 
fictitious name of Herbert. 

'* Oh! my poor Augustus! (cried Om- 
phale, her heart bleeding with sorrow at 
his wretchedness.) I will never abandon 
thee. Fly Chloe, seek out the master you 
once served, snatch him from the jaws of 
destruction, we will fly together and yet be 
happy.Thejoy that illumined hermistress's 
dejected face, was a grateful sight to her 
obedient slave, who anxious to reunite 
persons she so affectionately regarded 
set off to Camden Town, directed by 
the son of the landlady, a boy about 

M 



^246 OWEN CASTLE; 

twelve years old. Omphale saw them 
depart with the delight of a person 
about to perform a meritorious action ; 
anticipating the joy Augustus would feel 
at her being his timely fiiend. The 
evening passed away, the night drew on ; 
it was dark and stormy, a higrh north 
wind roared round the slender habitation, 
and shook it to the foundation ; she lis- 
tened for the returning steps of her slave, 
or the rattle of a carriage, but in vain; 
no sound but that of the moaning blast that 
burst through the bending trees, met her 
ear ; the clock struck one, the poor wo- 
man of the house had some hours gone 
to rest, and Omphale was the only one 
whose perturbation of mind would not 
permit her to repose ; she had spread be- 
fore her the treasured jewels, saying, as 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 247' 

she viewed each costly ornament, " this 
will sure bring one hundred, this a thou- 
sand pounds, and so on^ until she had 
summoned up the extent of her posses- 
sions. The candles by a sudden draught 
were extinguished. Alarmed she raised her 
eyes, and beheld by the light of the fire the 
figure of a man entering at the window 
masJced,2ind of a savage appearafice; a faint 
shriek escaped her lips ; she laid her trem- 
bling hands upon the gliitering gems, gasp* 
ing with terror, her eyes fixed on the in- 
truder. He made to the table, and draw- 
ing a clasped, but sharp pointed knife, 
held it at her throat. The feeble flame in 
the nearly empty grate gleamed along its 
blade with frightful light, shewing at once 
the horror of her situation. Speak not 
or you die J said he, in a hoarse and des- 
M.4 



248 OWEN castle; 

perate voice ; then siezing the precious 
treasure on the table, was about to depart, 
when the rich bracelet on her arm, in 
which was set the minature of her beloved 
benefactress, caught his avaricious eye. 
H.e returned, and roughly snatching at her 
arm attempred to break the picture from 
it. Desperate with despair she struggled 
violentlj^, imploring mercy, and screaming 
for help. In her agony she grasped the 
ruffian's hand ; it was damp, and a tremor 
shook his daring form ; the mask fell off, 
and dreadful to relate, the convulsed 
countenance of Augustus glared on her. 
^^ My God! (she cried,) Augustus! My 
adored Augustus T *' Yes, (he returned) 
it is the outcast Augustus, who driven 
to the verge of madness, now preys on 
plunder. Resign that bracelet, or this mo- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 2^9 

ment is your last, " Never ! ( she cried 
falling on her knees, and embracing his 
feet,) never will me part with it, oh ! un- 
natural Augustus! It isT/our mother* sidLQQ it 
bears ; can you behold her and not forego 
your cruel purpose r" '' Woman ! you 
urge me m vain, '' he exclaimed, grasping 
her throat with iron firmness, and wring- 
ing the bracelet from her ; the blood 
rushed to her head, her eyes started in 
their sockets, and in a hollow stifling groan 
she murmured, " Do not murder Om- 
phale." 

" Murder ! (he cried, releasing his 
hold, and staring widely round,) ivho mur- 
ders ? I am not i/et a murderer." 

" Heaven be praised, (she exclaimed 5 
M 5 



250 OWEN castle; 

forgetting her danger and throwing her 
arms round his neck, strove to awaken his 
former tenderness ) my Augustus will not 
murder me, he will not rob her who 
seeks to save him/' 

" Off, off! (he cried,) you cling to 
your assassin.'' He flung her on the 
ground. 

"Give me, oh; barbarous man! give 
me the picture, (she cried, frantic at his 
brutality, and nearly stunned with the 
fall, still clinging to him) " or my cries 
shall awake the dead." 

" Since you provoke your fate, (he 
hoarsely cried) the guilt be on your own 
head." He relentlessly struck the knife 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 251 

into that bosom, Vrhich in spite of cru- 
elty and outrage, doated on him. The 
blood spouted from the wound, and with 
a deep groan, she said, " Your oa^.h, 
your oath — oh ! remember that ! and sunk 
into a death like insensibility. 

" My oath ! (he echoed) ai/e^ it is re- 
gistered above, a damning proof against 
me, where thy murdered spirit flies ac- 
cusing me as thy baneful destroyer !'' He 
wrung his hands and bent in agonizing 
repentance over her inanimate body ; he 
threw himself at lenfrth by it, and ra- 
vingly invoked horrid blasphemies on his 
head. 

Ron zed by the loud and strange voice, 
the landladv awoke, and was descendinsr 

M 6 



252 OWEN CASTLE; 

the stairs; he heard her advancing foot- 
stepsj and leaped with his blood-stained 
prize from out of the window. He ran 
with desperate speed to the edge of the 
wood, where in a post chaise, Mrs. 
Wallace waited to receive him. He 
threw himself into it, and assisted 
by her, disrobed himself of his dis- 
guise, and flinging it unseen by the driver 
from out of the chaise, retained not a 
vestige of the ruffian, when enveloped by 
a fashionable great coat. Day light found 
him reclining in the vehicle a prey to 
anguish and remorse. 

^' They are lovely sparklers ! (cried 
Mrs. Wallace, gazing with delight on the 
diamonds,) but what is this that stains 
them and deadens their lustre. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 253 

" The innocent blood of the murdered 
Omphale (he returned in a deep dis- 
cordant voice, and looking with horri- 
ble meaning in her face). Areyounow sa- 
tisfied ? My soul and bodi/ both are now 
condemned to perdition ; a dreadful pur- 
chase for your gratitude and love'* 

" Murder! (cried Arpasia, recoiling 
from him) and did you murder her ? Was 
her resistance so great as to force you 
to that ?*' 

" Her cries alarmed the people of the 
house, and for self-preservation — but say 
no more, or you will drive me mad," he 
replied, stamping with violence and co- 
vering his face with his hands. 



254 OWEN CASTLE; 

" Do not give way thus to your regret. 
What's done can't be undone, (cried she, 
eiideavourhig to soothe him) consider our 
lives depend on prudence and conceal- 
ment ; I will remove these crimson drops 
at a fit time and place from these pre- 
cious stones, and then no trace will be 
left to remind us of the deed. " Come 
smile," she continued, locking the dia- 
monds up in a small leather box. 

^^ Smile ! (moaned he) I shall never 
smile again.'' 

" You don't know that, (said she, pour- 
ing out a bumper of brandy from a 
bottle taken from a basket of provision 
she had provided) here, swallow this and 
your spirits will be cheered.". 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 255 

" Is it poison/* asked he? 

''Do you think I would poison you?' 
she cried, looking tenderly on him. 

" You have poisoned my peace for ever, 
and why may I not suspect my body to be 
in the like danger." 

"Can you suspect the strength of my 
attachment when even my life is risked 
with yours? Had I not loved you^ I should 
now have been in ease and safety. Did I 
not quit my husband to fly to you?" re- 
plied she with reproachful eyes turned on 
him. 

"Yes, to lure me to the blackest deed of 
hell. I curse, Oh ! how bitterly do 1 curse 



256 OWEN CASTLE; 

the moment of our meeting. You found 
me innocent, surrounded by affluence, 
blest in the reciprocity of pure love, when 
yoii, fiend like, coiled your snares round 
my open unsuspecting heart, and I, vain 
sens! ee$s idiot, selfishly^ unnaturally bhnd 
ed by passion of the basest nature, yielded to 
them." — Here he appeared in a paroxysm 
of grief, his teeth gnashed, his eyes rolled 
frightfully, and deep groans wrung his re- 
pentant breast. 

"I thank you, sir," she haughtily re- 
plied, and when we are arrived in Paris, 
I will dissolve our ill assorted partnership. 
Spare your present sentiments on my con- 
duct, and compose your distracted air to 
something like calmness, or shudder at the 
consequences," 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 257 

" By all the ills you've heaped upon my 
head, I swear I will never lose my hold up- 
on you ; we will live a mutual torment to 
each other ; die as we have existed, in riot, 
guilt and murder r 

*• The frenzy of his ghstly eye, and 
workings of his sallow face, greatly shocked 
her ; she remained silent during the rest of 
their journey ; when arrived at Dover she 
called him Mr. Stephens, and took pas- 
sage from thence the next day for Calais, 
from which they travelled with g^eat 
swiftness to Paris, the intended scene of 
action. The diamonds were quickly dis- 
posed of, and they commenced their specu- 
lations by taking elegant apartments at 
one of the most fashionable Hotels. 



258 ©WEM castle; 



CHAPTER XXI I. 



A. HE landlady found Ompliale welter- 
ing in her blood; extended on the floor 
deprived of sense ; an alarming spectacle. 
She instantly roused her neighbours, and 
two men, with constables, went in search 
of the robber; while the woman procured 
the assistance of the nearest surgeon, to 
dress the wound Omphale had received. 
It was long ere she gave any signs of life; 
a succession of faintings, with the most 
violent struggles, occasioned by her fright, 
gave doubts of her recorery. 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 259 

A cry was set up in the village, that the 
robber was taken. It was in vain he pro- 
tested his innocence of the crime they 
charcred him with ; his asseverations were 
disregarded. When broudit before the 
magistrate^ he refused to state his name, 
abode, or business ; this convinced the 
magistrate that he was of a doubtful cha- 
racter. His accusers stated, that they 
found him wandering in the wood, and 
that he fled at their approach. The ma- 
gistrate ordered him to prison, for further 
examination. 

The faithful Chloe returned on the fol- 
lowing day, weary and disappointed in 
not having succeeded in her embassy; 
but fresh sorrow awaited her, on beholding 
her mistress on the verge of death : she 
was loud in iier threats against the assas 



260 OWEN CASTLE ; 

sin ; and when, with joy, she whispered 
to her enfeebled lady, as she stood beside 
her bed, that she had the satisfaction to 
tell her the wretch was taken, she was 
amazed and confounded to hear a scream 
of agony escape the quiveriijg lips of her 
mistress, who, starting up in the bed, 
caught her hand in both of hers, with a 
frantic imploring countenance, and in a 
convulsed tone, said, " 'Tis Augustus ! — 
oh ! fly ; save him 1 — oh ! save him !" 
She fell back, overpowered by the etfort 
she had made. 

Chloe could not believe it possible that 
her master was so great a villain, and 
feared the attack her lady had undergone, 
with the feverish symptoms that hovered 
about her, made her remembrance incor- 
rect. After seeing her revive, and leaving 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 26l 

her to the care of the landlady, she hast- 
ened to Clerkenwell prison, determined to 
ascertain the truth, by the sight of the 
person imprisoned. She was admitted ; 
and with astonishment beheld the sup- 
posed robber in the noble form and open 
aspect of Rufus Marmadiike : they started 
at recognising each other ; he explained 
the falseness of the arrest, and begged her 
lady to free him, as guiltless of the charge. 
She hastened home, and with cautious pru- 
dence secretly disclosed to her mistress 

the discovery she had made. 

•J 

The generous spirit of Omphale, while 
rejoicing in the escape of Augustus, la- 
mented the mistake that had degraded 
one for whom she had so high an esteem ; 
and immediately dispatched Chloe to the 
magistrate, informing him that the person 



262 OWEN CASTLE ; 

in custody was no way concerned in the 
robbery, and implored his release. But 
he returned for answer, that as he 
could not give a clear account of him- 
self, he should remain until her lady 
was recovered sufficiently to appear 
before him, and make oath he was not 
the person ; that only could give him his 
liberty. 

"Take me, then/' said she; " let him 
not linger one instant, when me can save 
him." Her slave remonstrated against her 
leaving her bed, least the wound should 
break afresh, and she bleed to death ; but 
she was resolute, and would pursue her 
benign intent. The landlady and her 
faithful Chloe, much against their will, 
obeyed her strong desire, by dressing and 
supporting her into a chaisCj and upheld 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE r 203 

by them, she performed her short journey. 
Rufus was brought Hkewise, but when 
before the magistrate, her strength failed 
her so much, that she could not articulate 
loud enouo;h to be heard. When ihe 
-bible was ^iven into lier hand, she raised 
her eves to heaven, bent over it in pro- 
found reverence, then p^essc^d it devoutly 
to her pale lips, pointed to Rufus, and fell 
into the arms of her slave ; the wound 
re-opened, and gushed in a rub3^ stream 
through her garment. Rufus sprang to 
her bide, inspired with pity and gratitude, 
for the great effort she had made to release 
him. A surgeon was instantly sent for, 
who bound up the wound, and applied a 
powerful styptic, which, in some measure 
restored her to sense and feeling, though 
-very languid and helpless. 



264 OWEN CASTLE ; 

The justice was touched by so affecting' 
a scene, and instantly dismissed Rufus as 
innocent oF the charge. A beseeching 
look from Omphale, whom he longed to 
question concerning his beloved Grace, 
invited him to accompany her to her 
lodgings. On their arrival, a letter from 
Lady Fitzowen was put into her hand ; 
and though she was delighted, and anxi- 
ous to peruse the contents, yet she was 
obliged to obey her affectionate slave, who 
conducted her, exhausted by fatigue and 
loss of blood, to her bed ; but first she 
gave the letter into the nervous hand of 
Rufus, who remained below, and covering 
the well-known hand with kisses, eagerly 
devoured the intelligence it contained. 

END OF VOL. II. 



