Edric the forester: or, The mysteries of the haunted chamber: an historical romance
EDRIC. THE FORESTER, CHAPTER XXII. Lax^y Jane now thought of con¬ sulting Ethelwald what measure it would be most prndent to adopt He did not however arrive so early as was expected, and it was quite evening before he came, when he informed Lady Jane that he had been out on particular business for the Baron the greatest part of the day; who had been in a most violent passion, but \ould not say exactly for what; still at times, execrating the name pf El- a 2
giva, and vowing vengeance whenever he met her arain. Ethelvvald advised Lady Jane to prevail on Elgiva to disguise herself carefully, and to loa\e the Castle. Shrewsbury was but a few miles off, where she could procure a eonvcNam e to take her to any of her friends, w ho would undoubtedlv come to relieve her mother. " I think/' said he, '* if the young lady can have sufficient cou¬ rage, it will be most prudent ibr her to go alone ; for two people being to¬ gether will subject them to observa- tion; and, rely on it, Fitzosric has spies every where to intercept their flight. You, most revered Lady Jane, nor your friend, will cast off your de- pendance on Providence, when you
resign this amiable young lady to its protection. Fear not—the good can have no fear." f: But how can she leave the Castle}" said Lady Jane ; 4t tell me, good Ethelvvald: fur I am all anxiety —how can she possibly leave this place unobserved]" " There rests the difficulty—it is totally impossible for her to go out at the portal. Were I the person who guarded the door, it would be no easy ta*k, as there are ceutinels on the draw-bridge : but the gate has two new attendants, most determined and daring men—new coiners ; and it strikes me, that the Baron has some desparate deed in hand, as he is fre- a3
quently in consultation with thera They are sometimes changed for two others of equal ferocious aspect—so that I am convinced the Baron medi¬ tates something, which he studiously conceals from me : and for whv 1 think so, I will give you a reason. " This morning, when he arose, he seemed very angry that he had slept so late. While I was preparing some¬ thing which he ordered, I missed htm suddenly. After about a quarter of an hour's absence, be entered the chamber in a violent passion, so that he could 'not articulate a word ibr rage. The idea immediately struck me, that you had released this lady; but from what he attempted to utter I could not collect any thing satisfac-
tory. He often pronounced Elgiva, threatening what he would do: and when he was able to speak, he said : <s If she had fled from the Castle, which he believed it nearly impossible to do, there yet remained a way to be revenged ; for it was still in his power to wring Elgiva's heart at every pore." " Elgiva's heart!"—exclaimed La¬ dy Jane, " what could he mean by that? —If they fly beyond his barba- roius reach, how can he be revenged?'' '* Of that I know not," said Ethel- wold ; " but be assured, there is something dreadful in his mind. But f will proceed, and you must judge w hcther my suspicions are ill founded, a4
He ordered me to take horse imme¬ diately, and go to ——— on some business, and return as soon as pos¬ sible. 1 obeyed. 1 suppose 1 was gone about three hours; and when I carne back, was informed the Baron was in the drawing-room. Thither 1 hastened lo acquaint him with my re¬ turn ; but, to my surprise, found the door fastened on the inside, and the Baron was talking very loud. What he had been saying 1 know not; but I heard a strange man's voice answer him these words— " < Were I as o?»ce you knew me, you would as soon have entered a lion's den as to have dared to treat me thus. You 1 have not offended. You pretend to serve the same king as 1
do. What then is my crime? An¬ swer me, Fitzosric: for only by the insidious arts of unmanly treachery could I have fallen into your unjust power.' " ' Away with him—the villain ! Treachery!—Does he dare say this in my presence?—Choak the word in his throat!' said Fitzosric. " * Are you a man/ resumed the stranger, e to treat a prisoner thus?— My hands confined, unable to defend myself against your assassins. Let me tell you, Baro.n, this inhuman deed will reflect eternal disgrace on you. My wrongs will mount to heaven, and ask for vengeance there; my life you A O
may rob me of, but my honor is un¬ tainted. 7 " A confused noise now rung through the apartment. I heard the clank of chains, but could not clearly distinguish what was said. At last all was silent, and I retired from the door, fearful he should discover me listening. Whoever the prisoner was, he was conveyed out at the other door. " Soon after, the Baron called for me. When I approached him, I per¬ ceived he was much agitated, and his mind so much engaged on what had happened, that he seemed quite in¬ attentive to what I said ; and thus has passed the time till now."
" Who can the prisoner be, Ethel¬ wald ? My heart is solicitous to know his destiny. Is there no means?" said Lady Jane. " Alas!" replied Ethelvvald, " you see I am not in his confidence. The men I before mentioned are his assis¬ tants in this affair; and you know it will not be prudent to inquire any thing of them. My life, I dare say, would be the forfeit." " What is to be done ¥* " Submit with patience to all Heaven's rigid decrees; for in this unfortunate man's cause I can do nothing; nor where he is confined I a6
know not. , For IJlgiva-r-as there does not.remain the least, probability of her escaping at the Castle gate, let her, when night has wrapt the Baron and all the inhabitants of the Castle in deep, go into the garden. I will leave the door she entered this place at open. Give her this key; it will open a,door about half way down the wall on the left hand side, which will immediately communicate with the road toward Shrewsbury, if she turns to the right; and my prayers, if the prayers of a sincere penitent can avail, will be for her safety." Lady Jane took the key with thanks, and he departed. She then returned to the ladies to inform them
of her proposition, and to prepare for Elgiva's departure, which took up some time and consideration. Elgiva's heart throbbed with transport at the thought of releasing her mother, and bringing friends to vindicate the wrongs which Fitzosric had heaped on them; and she knew she could now quit the castle with more satis¬ faction, as her mother was safe under the care of Lady Jane. That amiable lady she hoped soon to see restored to the world and her rights. While Elgiva, with a joyful heart, was preparing for the expedition, Lady Jane mentioned what Ethelwald had related concerning the prisoner, and wondered who it could be. She
uttered a fervent prayer for his safety, and sincerely wished him freed from Fitzosric's cruel power. Elgiva's cheerfulness received a severe shock as Lady Jane named another prisoner. She called to re¬ membrance the mournful sound that proceeded from the watch-tower, and vibrated on her heart when she met Fitzosric in the garden. She called to raind the agitation and surprise he appeared to suffer, when he observed she took notice of it. The sound was still in her ears, and she related to Lady Jane the etfect it had on her mind ^ beseeching her, if it wag in her pewer r to search into the mystery e£ the concealed unfortunate in the
watch tower; and trusted, through Ethelwald's means, to discover who the prisoner was. Lady Jane assured her no pains should be spared to discover and assist the prisoner to the utmost of her power. The Castle clock had struck eleven, and the inhabitants of the Castle were retired to rest, Elgiva's heart beat with unusual agitation, as the hour of her departure drew near. Sometimes her spirits sunk, and she dreaded to leave her mother. Then again cou¬ rage assumed its empire, knowing that by her going, it was the only way to save and release her. Thus
agitated between hope and fear, she took the key that was to lead her to safety; and, wrapping herself up in a long dark cloak given her as a dis¬ guise by Lady Jane, and embrac¬ ing them alternately, quitted them, while the tears started in their eyes at parting.
CHAPTER XXIII.
Before we proceed to follow the steps of Elgiva, it will be necessary to revert to the unfortunate Edric, After having been treacherously seiz¬ ed, and dragged to a dismal prison, he knew not whither, nor could he form any idea of what could be the cause of his confinement, unconscious of any crime. Day after day passed on without his being able to ascertain where he
was, or by whose order he was con¬ fined there. He was constantly at¬ tended by two men, sometimes more, who regularly brought him food, though it was of the coarsest quality. If he spoke to them, he was always answered in an insulting and vulgar manner. He soon perceived they were too much the creatures of their wicked employer for him to attempt gaining his liberty by the promise of any future reward. His door was strongly secured, and his window at too great a distance from the floor to permit him to ascertain the situation in which his prison stood. In this miserable manner passed away several weeks. Day after day lingered away in the same dismal uncertainty. Edric grew melancholy, and his health ap-
peared evidently on the decline; and want of sufficient nourishment soon brought him to a very ill state. At length the day arrived that he was led to suppose, by the conversa¬ tion and manners of his keepers, that he should be liberated; but he was rather astonished to find, when they were going to lead him to his expected freedom, that his hands were not re¬ leased from his chains, and he was conveyed down stairs, and along a covered passage till he entered the drawing-room of St Egbert's Castle. Here his amazement was redoubled, and his heart beat with unusual pal¬ pitations. There was something in the appearance of that room that was perfectly familiar to his eye and reeo!*
lection, though he knew not how to account for it: for at that time he did not know he was in St Egbert's Castle, or in the power of the Baron Fitzosric, though he firmly believed he had fallen into the hands of a dan¬ gerous and designing enemy. Yet the paintings in this superb apartment claimed his attention ; and a secret veneration, mixed with anxiety, filled his heart, and caused him to sigh, for reasons he could uot account for. After he had waited about half an hour, the haughty Fitzosric entered. Then—and not till then—did he dis- cover who had so treacherously way¬ laid and detained him: but could form no conjecture why he had acted so, as Fitzosric had sworn allegiauce
to the Conqueror, and had withdrawn himself from the confederacy. How, then !—or why—servants of the same king, fcould Fitzosric dare to secure and detain him? They started at si^ht of each other; and the Baron expecting to crush the youthful war¬ rior with a display of his greatness and power, insultingly began to load him with invective and reproaches; all which Edric received, and replied to, with as much patience as could be expected from a person in his situa¬ tion. A part of this interviey^, and the conversation that ensued was over¬ heard by Ethelwald, though he did not know who the prisoner was, And ' Fitzosric was so exasperated witli-
rage and disappointment for the un¬ accountable disappearance of Ellen, that he was almost going to sacrifice the unfortunate Edric to his resent¬ ment with his own hand. A moment's thought, however, brought a tempo* rary respite, and with disdain he ordered him from his presence; while his heart was bursting to be revenged on some one for the disappointment of his wishes. The mysterious escape of Ellen tortured the guilty Fitzosric to the soul. He could not frame the most distant idea how it could have been effected. No one was privy to the plan of her confinement; he himself was the only person who had ever attended her; the key of her prison
was never suffered to be out of his pocket. He found il there when he awoke; and he found the doors ex* actly as he had left them the preced¬ ing day. To account for her miracu¬ lous disappearance was impossible; yet he strove to fancy she was some¬ where concealed in the Castle; for which reason he searched every place he could think of. He then went to the room lately occupied by Elgiva, where he found Agatha at needlework> who, unknowing what was the cause of his coming there, came in for her share of passion and resentment; for he did not know who to vent it on -j and began to think, if there was such a thing as witchcraft, Ellen could have escaped by no other means.
All the day he continued thus dis¬ turbed, vowing vengeance, if either Ellen or Elgiva fell into his hands again. It was in this fit of rage that he ordered the prisoner Edric to be conducted to him ; resolutely deter¬ mined that he should suffer for all ; and to reek his vengeance on him for the disappointments he bad met with from Ellen and her daughter. He really was about to plunge the dagger into the breast of the unhappy youth, when a moment's recolleetiou made him drop his hand ; for, during this interview, he had gazed on Edric with sensations unfelt before ; and he imagined in bim he beheld the ghost of his once-loved friend, (for every fea¬ ture of Lord Wallinford glowed on his
countenance), unnerved his arm, and prevented his giving the blow. He ordered Edric from his presence, yet determined he should die; and he im¬ mediately suggested the idea of giving him poison. After the men had re-conducted Edric to his prison, they returned to know and receive Fitzosric's orders* He quickly revealed his intentions, desiring them to give him a powerful poison in something which he usually drank; and when dead, to let him know, that he might consider what was most proper should be done with the body. Thus commanded, the men departed to obey his orders—which were immediately put in execution.
Vol. hi.
CHAPTER XXIV.
i Ei-0iVA, possessed of the key, which she fondly flattered herself would soon deliver her from the Castle of St Egbert, hastened to obey the direction given her by Lady Jane ;—anxious, atso, to give liberty to lier mother, and to leafrn some tidings of her father, and her beloved Edric. She directed her steps through the o-arden where she had met Fitzosric, and remembered once having: heard
a voice seemingly in mburoM com¬ plaint, which appaf&frtly prodeeded from a w&tch-*tower at the fkrt|iesTeir- tremity of the garden, and* at a con¬ siderable distance from the castle. She did ««rt immediately recollect the Way Fitzosric led her towards the tower; but when she reached the garden of the Castle, the complaining voice re¬ curred to her memory, and she sighed a wish that it was in her power to assist the person she supposed was there confined, suffering some hard* ship from Fitzosric. But her' own liberty was her dearest object, and too precious to neglect, or think of any thing else; and she ranged about th# garden, hoping to explore the 1 outlet described by Lady Jane. b 2
She pursued her way beneath the garden wall, fancying it to be the right path ; but was surprised to find it soon terminated, and the avenue leading therefrom conducted her into a thicket of trees, almost inextricable, into which many walks joined as a maze, which greatly perplexed her, and she began to imagine there was no end to the pursuit. She had walked for near an hour, and grew much fatigued with her ex¬ cursion, and at that time fancied her¬ self far distant from the Castle; for her mind was too much occupied by her own troubles to make any particu¬ lar observations; when, suddenly rais¬ ing her head, she observed the tower
of St. Egbert's Castle, and perceived .she was just entering the avenue of trees leading to the back gate ; there also appeared a light in Fitzosric's chamber, and one in that she lately occupied. Fearful of approaching too near^ she again quitted the Castle, wonder¬ ing by what strange chance or neglect she had returned to it, and soon found another walk, which she was deter¬ mined to trace, hoping it would be more fortunate than the former. But, iu the end, proved of as little effect as the preceding; for after a walk of some length, she again saw she was within a few paces of St. Egbert's Castle, and the light still remained burning iu Fitzosric's room. aft
Her vexation was now extreme, and she began to imagine, if there was a possibility of enchantment, that the Castle must be under its influence; for the farther she believed herself from it, the nearer she always found her- self. Fatigue obliged her to find some place where she might sit down to rest, and sorrow and disappointment claimed their ascendancy, and pressed to be indulged. She therefore retired for a few minutes to an arbour to vent her te*ars, and rest from her fatigue, where she hoped she might not be observed. The night was unusually serene— the winds had ceased to blow—scarce a leaf nodded on the trees—all nature seemed lulled to soft repose. So calm
a silence prevailed, that the least noise might be heard ; and as Fitzosric often walked out by night in his garden, her tears redoubled lest she might be dis¬ covered, and again feel the iron rod of his arbitrary power: but he had re¬ tired to rest-—his tyranny slept—his vengeance was satiated on his unhappy prisoner, and at that moment he cared for nothing else. When a little recovered from her grief and fatigue, she again determined to seek the outlet described, and make her escape. She had every thing to fear; for if she had a wish to return to Lady Jane, or her mother, she could not find the way, as it was only by an accident she ever discovered her. In her situation there was no retreat, and b4
the necessity of pursuing her first and chiefest desire, appeared every mo¬ ment of greater consequence. Unknowing which path would lead her to the desired place, she yielded her cause to Providence, and took the first path that presented itself. Ac¬ cordingly she entered that opposite to her, and found it wound by a variety of turnings to the left It was entirely overshadowed with trees, inasmuch as the light of a brilliant moon was un¬ able to penetrate ; and she traversed the deepening gloom with secret dread —fear accelerated her steps, and she swept the ground with uncommon rapidity. Again the unhappy Elgiva was
doomed to meet with disappointment; for the path did not reach the inclos¬ ing wall, as she hoped to find it would ; but, to her infinite surprise, she perceived it was terminated by the Watch-tower, which she believed to be at the farthest extremity of the garden ; and, looking back, the Castle and lights were not to be dis¬ covered. Breathless with terror and despair, she thought of resting herself for a short time on the steps ascending to the watch-tower, to gain composure; as also to endeavour to ascertain where the door was situated in the wall, that would favour her escape from the garden of St. Egbert's Castle,
b 5
She was just going to scat herself, when her apprehensions were most powerfully alarmed on observing the door was open. The wish to escape, and the hope that there was a proba¬ bility of doing so this way, induced her to embrace the opportunity before her. She entered the tower, and turned to the left, where appeared a small room with one window, the case¬ ment of which was open, and looked towards the river Severn ; a chair was placed near the window, as if some one had lately been contemplating the beauties of a calm moon-light night, and the soft murmuring of the tide as it flowed against the shore. Over¬ come by various conjectures, she sunk down in the chair, hoping to tranquil¬ lize her troubled spirits. She observed
the moon playing on the bosom of the water, as it softly rippled beneath ; all was hushed as death, excepting only the slight svvell which rolled towards the shore, now some way retreated from its banks, and whose gentle mur¬ murs soothed her troubled spirits into a melancholy calm. A few minutes elapsed, and she heard the Castle clock strike one—and it sounded at a great distance. While she was attentively watch¬ ing the motion of the water, and listen¬ ing with eagerness to the most trifling sound, she fancied she heard a small noise. Her heart beat with unusual alarm, fearful that her retreat had been discovered* The distance from the window to the ground was too great b6
for her to attempt to jump thence with safety ; yet she determined to do that, if there were no other means. She listened to convince herself; she was sure the sound could not be fancy. It approached nearer, and her heart trembled with every dreadful appre¬ hension. She now distinctly heard the sound of footsteps near her; she therefore arose and drew near the door, close to which appeared a wind¬ ing staircase, illumined only by the moon. She drew aside from observa¬ tion, and stood behind the door, to ascertain the cause of her alarm. She then saw two men cautiously descend the stairs, bearing another, apparently lifeless, on their shoulders. Al this mysterious transaction, terror almost overcame every faculty: but all her
hopes of liberty, perhaps of life, as also that of her mother, depended on the exertion of the present moment; and she summoned all the courage she was mistress of, to assist her in a time which appeared so full of evil. When the men had reached the foot of the stairs, they opened a door which led towards the river, and they again descended several steps. Elgiva was too much concerned at this strange spectacle, to omit observing its termi¬ nation, happy that they had left the door open, which, in all probability, might favour her escape. She there¬ fore crept softly down the steps, cau¬ tiously watching the men, who were making towards the water : but when she reached the pathway that the
^vater had not long left, she ran as swift as possible, impatient to leave the Castle of the detested Fitzosric, yet mindful of what they did with the body, which she could by no means neglect. She therefore crept behind a tree that was fallen upon the shore, beyond the observation of the men, whom she saw precipitate the body they were carrying into the water. They then hastily returned to the watch-tower; and she fancied she heard them bar the door of that place. And, although she knew not which way to take, she was happy to find herself beyond the inclosure of St. Egbert's Castle. Now her anxiety and curiosity was drawn, towards the body^ which she
saw floating towards her; and she could not leave the spot till she had elucidated the truth of the mysterious affair she had just witnessed. She had not a doubt but this was the unfor¬ tunate person mentioned by Ethelwald to Lady Jane; who, at her departure, she requested to examine into the na¬ ture of his confinement, and to use her efforts to extricate him from the wrath of the cruel Fitzosric. She now ima¬ gined it was more in her power to know, than ever it could be in Lady Jane's. While she was revolving this am¬ biguous affair in her mind, the float¬ ing body passed her, and a soft wave washed it on shore at a short distance from her, and there left it.
Elgiva wrapped her cloak round her, and flew to the spot to see if she had any recollection of the unfortunate object of her concern. But what words can convey her astonishment and distraction, when she found it was the body of her beloved Edric! Frantic, she dragged his sad remains farther on the shore ; then knelt beside him, giving way to the most heart-felt anguish and indescribable agony. .. She kissed his lips..she invoked his dear name. .repeatedly she pressed his hand to her bosom..her only friend was lost, .for, in the hopes of finding Edric, were all their expectations of liberty centered. While Elgiva was thus employed, she felt a warmth glow about Edric I
it might be fancy; but she thought she heard him sigh..." Perhaps he is not dead!" exclaimed she, "he might yet be restored ; but, alas! there is no one to assist me! Heaven, in its mercy, aid me to save him, if life yet lingers about his heart." Again she pressed his hand. His pulse beat strong. .her heart experienced a ray of hope; for he had been such a short time in the water, that if he was not dead before he was cast in there, she flattered herself he might yet be saved. The distressing situation she was in, and the ardent desire she had to save him, gave her increase of strength.., She raised him from the earth ; and, leaning his head against her shoulder, was convinced she did not mistake. The dear object of her care sighed
heavily; which made her again call upon his name. The sound of her well-known voice recalled the almost fleeting spirit of Edric ; he opened his eyes. .looked wildly round, and said.. " Where am I?.. .who are you ?.., sure it is all a dream !"«*.* i i New terrors new assailed Elgiva ; she was afraid the m&i might return from the watch-tower, and they would be both again taken. Her joy at hear¬ ing him speak was nearly productive of as bad consequences as when she thought he was dead. Edric soon dis¬ covered her under thedisguise, and, as well as he was able, returned thanks to Heaven for sending her to him. With some difficulty she assisted hifn to rise; and then it was that she experienced a
happiness unfelt before ; she led him to the tree, where he rested a few seconds, while she hastily told him what she had seen, and urged him to fly from that spot as soon as possible, lest tliey should be pursued, Edric's clothes being wet, Elgiva dreaded that, for want of sufficient change, his life might yet be endan¬ gered. "That," replied he, "shall soon be done; only let me cast my eyes around, that 1 may ascertain what part of the country I am in, and I shall soon find friends to relieve my wants. I know who detained me! my most in¬ veterate enemy, Fitzosric 1" " At St Egbert's Castle?" replied Elgiva, " therefore you know the river that Hows at our feet is the Severn. Oh t
let us bless the Mercy that preserved you; and let us haste, my beloved Edric, from this place, if you are able, for I have much ta reveal; and much to dread." •« St. Egbert's Castle," said Edric, " is not more than six miles from Shrewsbury; there J have friends that shall soon revenge my wrongs* and level the castle of the proud tyrant with the earth." " First you must hear what I have to relate," replied Elgiva, " and then take your measures accordingly: I have just escaped thence in hopes of finding you to redress our misfor¬ tunes, and there my dear mother awaits your coming to release her."
" I can walk now," he eagerly re¬ plied, scarcely able to articulate ; fot his heart swelled with anger, when he found Elgiva had escaped thence, and that the amiable Ellen Rosenberg was there waiting his powerful arm to redress her grievances. The idea in¬ spired him with strength—"let us be¬ gone," said he; " there is no time to be lost; the treacherous Baron shall soon experience my vengeance." Without saying any more, they rose to depart; and soon as they tra¬ versed the shore beneath the impend¬ ing cliffs, they came to a road, which* to their great satisfaction, Edric im¬ mediately recollected, " We have but dne thing to con*
sider, Elgiva," said he ; " and that is, that hearer than Shrewsbury we can get no accommodation with snfety ; do you think you can walk there? You see our situation; there I shall be in the bosom of my friends ; and there I can lodge you securely." " Undoubt- edly, n replied Elgiva; " for since I have found you, I feel no fatigue; let us proceed as fast as possible." They pursued their journey with all possible despatch, and fortunately arrived at Shrewsbury at four o'clock in the morning. Edric went to a friend's house, who arose to receive him, and welcomed him with every demonstra¬ tion of unfeigned joy and friendship. " Allow me," said Edric, " a change of apparel, for I have been nearly
drowned, and have walked six miles in my wet clothes. This is my Elgiva, whom you have often heard me name, and for whose mysterious loss you have witneKSsed my anxious solicitude. But I can say no more till I have had rest, and recovered from what has hap¬ pened." Sir Bernard Melbourne and his Lady had risen to welcome the fair stranger and his friend. A warm bed was prepared for Edric, which he thankfully accepted, and, bidding El¬ giva adieu, he retired to change his clothes, and obtain a few hours' rest. Although he was anxious to hear all Elgiva bad to say, be thought it pru¬ dent to suspend his curiosity and in-
quiries till he Was a little recovered* Lady Melbourne conducted Elgiva to a chamber, where, bidding her good morning, she left her to repose.
CHAPTER XXV.
EttsuvA rested from her fatigue J but the events of the last six hours prevented her from obtaining sleep) and she could not sufficiently return thanks to the Almighty for her being the instrument in providentially pre¬ serving the life of her beloved Edric* She now found that the prisoner in the watch-tower was no other than him* She remembered the groan that issued from that place the night she met Fitz* osric in the garden, when her bosom VOL. hi, c
experienced every agonizing thought As she fancied, she was no stranger to the sound, though at that time she did not dream that their only hope, their dear Edric, was in the power of that same tyrant Baron of whom they expe¬ rienced such dreadful apprehensions. A short slumber enveloped her, and robbed her of some uncomfortable thoughts till towards, noon, when she arose and joined Lady Melbourne in the parlour, anxious to hear how Edric was. Sir Bernard had just been to see bimi and informed her he was in a profound sleep, and seemed to rest ^eryeasy r K but expressed a wish that ^§ should aipt be awaked, as it might
be of the most salutary effect after what he had undergone : " For," said Sir Bernard, u he is much altered since we saw him last; I looked on him as his head rested on the pil¬ low, and I thought, poor young man! his countenance looked almost worn oat with fatigue -—and sure, much must his heart have suffered to have caused such a visible alteration. He has been missing now above three weeks from us, and I know the most diligent search and inquiries have been made after him all over the kingdom. No trouble nor expence has been spared •—all his friends have united in his cause—Lord Rosenberg is almost dis¬ tracted for the mysterious loss of his wife, his daughter, and his excellent son. You, Madam, I understand, are c 2
that daughter for whom he feels such anxiety; and it will be a happiness I despaired of enjoying, to let him know you both are found,,and glad his heart with tidings of so much joy." " Indeed, Sir, you glad ray heart to mention my father," said Elgiva ;-— ** pray when was he here?" " About a fortnight ago," was the reply. " And was he well ?" " Well in health," Sir Bernard an¬ swered ; " but in spirits much de¬ pressed, having, as he thought, lost, by some strange event, all he held dear*'
" We will remove the anxiety I am certain he feels," said Elgiva, " as soon as Edric awakes." Breakfast was now served to El¬ giva, and she and Lady Melbourne had much conversation. They then walked in the garden,-and admired its beauty, as its parterres were decked with the most blooming flowers which perfumed the air. Aftet Walking about an hour, they returned ; and Sir Ber¬ nard informed them Edric was dress¬ ing; and would soon appear. 1 He also said he was happy to find that he did not seem to suffer any ill consequence from the aceident of the preceding night. This intelligence was a cordial to c3
the afflicted spirits of Elgiva, who dreaded every ill. Her fond affection for that deserving young man had created the most alarming doubts of bis recovery, especially when Sir Ber¬ nard mentioned the alteration in his looks. She had not observed it herself; for the joy of finding him, and his being restored to life, when she ima¬ gined he was dead, took from her all thoughts of examining how he looked m y tp her it was sufficient he was alive. And now every moment was burdened with anxiety; her heart beat as she expected his approach. He entered the parlour—Sir Bernard's remark was verified—a visible dejection was on his features—a paleness and languor shaded that noble countenance, once beaming with health and animation;
and he was also considerably wasted in his person. Elgiva looked at him as she rose up to welcome him, and could not refrain tears. « Why does my Elgiva weep?" said he, fondly pressing her to his bosom ; " I am not ill—you see, it has pleased Heaven that the water should have no effect on me," " Oh ! you are so changed!—You look ill, Edric—you must have suffered much since I saw you last. Oh! let me be acquainted with all that has happened to you since we parted." Edric led her to a seat, and placed himself in a chair by her side;" he then breakfasted, and endeavoured to c 4
rouse himself from the languor his frame visibly experienced. Sir Ber¬ nard was sorry to see his friend ap¬ pear so ill. After the repast, he re¬ lated what had happened to him since he had been absent; taking Elgiva's hand, he said—- " My beloved Elgiva r from tie moment I missed you and Ellen Rosen¬ berg from the cottage, where I fondly trusted I had left you in a place of safety, my bosom has been a stranger to rest. Whatever occurred in the interval between that time and when I was torn from my friends, was in¬ different to me. Your father, when he learnt that your mother and you were missing, I need not wound you by saying how severely he lamented a
misfortune, which I much feared would shorten his days; as your loss, and the uncertainty of what might be¬ fall his adored wife, were sensations that bore a far too powerful ascen¬ dancy over his mind to admit of miti¬ gation. " The state of affairs which obliged him to be in London made him ex¬ ceedingly unhappy; for, although I promised, and I trust he could believe me, that I would make every neces¬ sary search, and find friends to assit me; yet he still feared no one would continue the search with such un¬ wearied assiduity as himself; for he certainly knew that (myself except¬ ed) no one could be so much in¬ terested. cS
. " Lord Rosenberg c^nie to Shrews¬ bury to me; we made every inquiry, and used every exertion human power could do tp discover where you fyad gm& Sometimes we vainly imagined you had fled, fearful of any new dan¬ ger, to London, as the troubles of the times were every way alarming : but then we thought, if you had fled for security, you certainly would have eased our anxious hearts, by letting one or other of us kpow what had caused your removal from the cottage, and where to find you. " In this uncertainty your father was obliged to return to London, and trust to my unwearied diligence in finding you out; 1 was to let him know
the instant I had discovered where you had retired. " But previous to this I must re¬ turn to the battle., which we hourly expected ; my duty now claimed a more particular attention; but my cares were divided: for, in the heat of battle, instead of thinking of the dan¬ gers that surrounded me, my whole soul has been taken up with thinking of you, your mother, and Lord Rosen¬ berg. After the battle was over, I determined to revisit the cottage, to see if any tidings had been received of you. I cannot express my feelings, when I found that the old woman had returned to tlie place, and assured me she did not know what w&s become of you* » ^hep she one day was re* c6
turning home, she found the cottage door open, and the place deserted; and since that time she had neither seen nor heard from either of you. a I now trusted, that, fearful of being discovered, you might have fled to London* to Lord Rosenberg for protection. Anxious to resolve my doubts, I hastened to London; but found you had not been there* I cannot express the distraction my sad intelligence gave him; for the situa¬ tion of affairs prevented his quitting his office. I instantly departed on my restless and unhappy search. I saw the anxiety that swelled my friend and father's heart, and judged of his suf¬ ferings. It will be needless for me to mention every thing particular. I
visited every place where I could form any fancy that you could be re¬ tired to; but vain were all my efforts, and, broken-hearted for your loss, I returned to my army, which still was at Shrewsbury. " Here I gave way to sorrow, Crief had gained so great a power over my mind, that its oppression was visibly noticed by all ray friends. Here 1 received a visit from Lord Rosen¬ berg, whose mind was equally op¬ pressed. I was grieved to see him suffer such affliction ; but the ill suc¬ cess of my fruitless search made me very unhappy, and I had not the forti¬ tude, or confidence, to inspire your father with any flattering hopes. Your loss was very singular; but I trusted
that, .when it pleased Heaven, your being found would be in as mysterious a manner. " After I had been about three weeks at Shrewsbury, my uneasiness every day increasing, till it amounted almost to distraction, I resolved to go once more to the cottage, flattering myself at intervals that the person who inhabited it might have heard something from you. To my great grief, when I arrived there, the woman could give me no farther information than I had received before. I was returning to Shrewsbury in the most distracted state of mind, rendered still worse by being unable to give your worthy father any hopes. + «
" About half way on the road, as I was ruminating on, and indulging my melancholy thoughts, I was sur¬ rounded by several men, who, though I made as much opposition as possibly my single arm was able to do, they seized me, and, wrapping something round me, conveyed me 1 know not whither. It was in vain I asked them the reason of their violent proceed¬ ings ; I had only the most insolent and taunting speeches in reply. " Some time elapsed before 1 found they stopped, and opened a door. When they had brought me within side, they took care to fasten the door, and then they conveyed me, I per¬ ceived, up stairs; and, when in the room they designed me to stay in, took
off the cover which had prevented my seeing to what place they were carry¬ ing me. " I then made several inquiries, to know why I was taken away in so strange a manner; but I could get no satisfactory reply. They had the in¬ solence to tell me, to make myself con¬ tented, for there I was to remain as long as I lived ; and, loading me with chains, left me to my own dreadful conjectures. " A few days convinced me it was impossible, either by remonstrance or any other means, to ascertain where I was, by whom detained, and for what reason. I gave up the point, and silently submitted to my unavoidable
destiny. However, from this strange transaction, I firmly believed some one must have serious designs against tny life; or why was I privately taken away 1 If 1 had done any thing to offend my King, surely, I thought, when he had the power of advancing or deposing me at his pleasure, he would not have acted so very incon¬ sistently as to secure me privately, without saying in what manner he felt himself displeased; of course, if I suffered by his displeasure, I ought to have been taken to some public prison, and have known for why, " My own misfortunes lost all their poignancy, when I considered Lady Rosenberg, yourself, and your father. Who was now to seek for you? Who
was to alleviate the anxious cares of my esteemed father and friend ? Ah! he could not tell why I was so cruelly silent; he knew not that I was a pri¬ soner in a most mysterious and under¬ handed manner; and there was no way left to convey the melancholy in¬ telligence to him \ I was also absent from the army. .how was I to account for desertion? What could be the common opinion of my quitting it un-* authorised and unknown at such a cri¬ tical period? Here, grief..or those ideas that want a name, drove me almost to distraction ..the baleful in¬ fluence preyed incessantly on my heart • .the more so as you and youT mother were never absent from my thoughts. u Week after week passed away in
the same dull round of anguish. I knew not who was my oppressor.. my accuser..or the cause of ray confine¬ ment. I began to think we all suffered under the same wicked power..but tortured my idea to imagine who it was likely would act so base, and so inhumanly. " My provision was of the very worst quality, which from being un* used to, I soon grew very ill, and in* deed apprehensive of my life. I ate with caution, and very sparingly ; for I often thought it was tinctured with poison, from a strange sickness that sometimes affected me after I had eaten. Those suspicions, and want of proper nourishment, soon brought me very low; and my apprehensions and dis-
tress for your safety, brought me to aa very ill state of health. " Time brought on me a settled melancholy; want of food reduced me to a languor, which it will take some time to remove. Grief for the sake of those I so much loved, increased the depression that had seized me. I was regularly attended by thfree or four men, w f ho took particular* care I" should, not make my. escape. They only entered ray abode to bring my provisions, and retired to the*-outside of the door, which they always fastened, and I could hear them talk. My window was too high for me to reach, ' that I might form a conjecture where I? was. I knew I was not very far from Shrewsbury; but I would have
given the world to know where niy enemy had secured me. " A lapse of time passed away; which, in my deplorable situation, seemed an age; and all my flattering hopes had quite forsaken me.*when, yesterday, I was suddenly hurried away to appear before my enemy and m y j u dge, as the subsequent behaviour seemed to indicate* tl My chains were* not removed. Attended by four ruffians, I was con* veyed through various apartments till 1 advanced into a very superb room, the appearance of which struck me with unusual awe ; for it was familiar to my remembrance, though I cannot tell where; and after looking about me
with admiration and wild astonish* ment, in hopes to Tecover my recollec¬ tion, for some time, I saw the Baron Fitzosric «nter, which convinced me into whose hands I had fallen, though I could not frame a thought what could make him my enemy, as he was now a friend in the cause of William our King. " It will be needless for me to re¬ peat the scandalous manner he treated nie with. I could never h&ve thought that any one, much more the renowned Fitzosric, would have so insultingly behaved to a person who was totally in his power ; the more unmanly, as I w>s in my chains, and surrounded by the wretched beings, who, for his pay> consented to become the Vilest of the
human race. Were it not for those chains, would I have borne his inso¬ lence one moment? I would have trusted his single arm to mine, and have acted like a man. But Fitzosric's conduct is mean and dastardly ; never till yesterday did I suspect he was ca* pable of acting with such injustice. "After he loaded me with re¬ proaches, and drawn his sword with an apparent intent to sheath it in my body, a sudden recollection seemed to cross his mind, and made him change colour several times while' he was speaking. At length, he haughtily ordered me from his presence. His r order was immediately complied with, and I was again hurried to my prison, ,
" Being secured) I was left to in* dulge my distracted thoughts and fears alone, for about an hour; during which time, and for the first time, I began to think that you and your mother had fallen into his hands, which redoubled my afflictions, as I, being a prisoner, could not endeavour to re* lease you; nor had I power of com¬ municating my thoughts to your father, either to implore friends to rise in your defence or mine. u While I was musing on those melancholy reflections, two of the men returned, and, after a short time, took off my irons. I was in hopes they were going to liberate me: but when I asked the question, one of them
insolently replied, 'It is the Baron's tirder; and I suppose he thinks those irons w r ill be in the way.' I could not imagine what could be the reason of so strange an action; but supposed there was some ill meant; and I de¬ termined to lie on my guard, " Soon after, another man cathe in, with two goblets of wine, and they began drinking. I had not tasted any thing but w r ater during my confine¬ ment. They entered into conversation with each other, and soon almost emptied their glasses, when one of them, turning to me, said—' Indeed, Sir, I heartily pity you; you hav6 lived very hard since you have been here ; and I am sorry it has not been in my power to make it bstter.~Will you VOL. HI. D
please to drink with tis V I expressed my thanks, and drank what remained in, one pf the glasses ; when another of them s$id-^ Oswy, you have three or four bottles below— give master ,o»e*-4he Baron shall never know he has had any thing but water for me; and I wish, with all my heart, it may do him good; for he seems horridly cast down of late, and I am sure he wants something to cheer him.* " ' Aye, willingly,' replied the first; and away he ran to fetch it. He soon returned, and, drawing the cork, said — c There, Sir; you will acknowledge you never tasted better in all your life:'—and he began pouring some out. I again expressed my thanks ; but said 1 did not wkh for any more at present;
if he would leave me a glass, I would help myself presently—as I hoped it would be a means of procuring me a night's rest, which, from the trouble I had experienced, I stood much in need of. " My request was complied with. They set me a glass, and, very cheer¬ fully bidding me good night, soon after retired. I did not see any one till about two hours after."
d2
5
CHAPTER XXVI.
" As soon as they left me, my sus¬ picions were very busy. Their amaz¬ ing kindness in giving me the wine, and assuring me of its goodness, created apprehensions that there was something more than ordinary in their so suddenly pitying my distressed case. I began to fancy the Baron knew of all this, and that his design was to take me off by poison. Suspecting this, I was determined to be very cautious, and, if there was possibly a way of
deceiving them, to dive into their in¬ tentions. I poured out some of the wine—I examined it—it looked very thick—I tasted it, and found my sus¬ picions were just; for there was a very nauseous taste when it was pallated. Yet I wished them to believe I had drank some; and, for this reason, 1 poured out a full glass, and, stepping on the chair, my hand just reached the window, and I poured the contents through it; and so I served a second. " When Oswy entered my prison, it was near dark. I thought he ap¬ peared visibly disappointed when he saw me sitting there. He took up the bottle, and, looking at it, shook his head very craftily— ' Aye, Master,' said he, * it is no use giving you wine; you dS
have not drank much, I see.'—* My friend,' I replied, ' I am fearful of its hurting me. You well know I have been long unused to it; but I dare suppose 1 have drank almost a pint, and mean to drink another glass be¬ fore I sleep, which will not be long, for I never felt so drowsy in all my life.' " c I thought I perceived a secret pleasure spread exultingly over his face, when I told him I felt drowsy. My mind felt so confident that what I suspected was just, or I should have been shocked at suspecting any one would have been guilty of what my wretched situation prompted me to imagine. c Well, then,' said he, * I will bid you good night; and do not be sparing of the wine, for I will try to bring you some more to-morrow. 3
" I thanked him, and returned his wish of good night; and he left me. " Still it run in my mind that some design was going forward—Os- wy's looks bespoke it. The surprise he felt at seeing me—his examining the bottle—the scrutinizing eye he cast, when reproving me for not drinking more—and the pleasure he seemed to feel, when I told him I was drowsy— made me believe my suspicions were confirmed; and I determined to try some artifice to develope the meaning of this extraordinary sudden kindness. " I poured out another glass, and served it as I had done the two former; then about half a glass, and set it by my bed-side; and, throwing myself d4
down in my clothes, waited the event; for I resolved not to suffer sleep to* close my eyes, till I discovered whe¬ ther my suspicions were just or unjust. "I heard a clock at a distance strike twelve, and I thought I heard voices whispering at the door, which confirmed me that my conjectures were right; for it was an hour that they never before had come to me. Time went on, till I suppose it wanted about a quarter to one, when Oswy and another cautiously entered with a lamp, and set it on the table. " Oswy then said, ' All is safe, I find, and he is secure. Look, Lucius, he has not left above half a glass in the bottle; and see, he had not power
to drink any more, for there stands the glass with some by his bed-side. Now sleep secure, Baron Fitzosric, for thy enemy is as dead as a nail. Had he fifty lives, what he has drank would silence all; for I put enough in, lest he should fancy something by my kindly offering him the wine; and therefore half a glass would have quieted him if he had touched no more. " ' I long to finger the reward,' said the other; " but what is to be done with the body? Are we to bury it? Have you dug a grave V " ' A grave, you fool! What! and run the risk of being asked what we are doing! No — the Baron and I have contrived a better scheme than i)5
that. The tide is now going out, we will carry him down stairs, and threw him into the river; and then, if his body is picked up, his death will seem by accident, and we shall be rid of the crime.' " 'That's a good thought,' said Lucius, rubbing bis hands ; i come, let us make an end of the business as quick as possible.' He then advanced towards me, and touched my hand— * Oswy,' said he, * he is not yet cold !' " ' No matter,' replied the other; 'perhaps that is because he lays upon the bed; but he can never come to himself again, that I am sure of; and when We throw him into the river, why
there is an end of our troublesome charge—so come, help him up/ " They then lifted me up, and I, aware of their intentions, let them take me, as if I were really dead. I was happy to hear they meant to throw me into the river, because I could swim well, and hoped soon to be beyond their reach. " The clock then struck one, and they descended the stairs with me; then down another flight, and walked down to the water, where they threw me in, closing the execution of their plan with a few oaths about my being so heavy. " When in the water, I held my dO
breath, and floated a small distance,, fearful that they might see if I made any exertion. At length a wave, and a little effort of my own, cast me on shore. I opened my eyes to see if the men were there; to my comfort they were not; but 1 found somebody ad- vancing towards me, and> fearful the person might be one of Fitzosric's people, I closed them again* and lay as if I were dead, " But how shall I express my astonishment and joy, when the person approached, to find by the complaint, it was the voice of my long-sought Elgiva. Fearful of being observed, I allowed her to imagine me dead for a few seconds, till I ascertained that we were entirely alone; and then I rose^
and though wet, we sooa after set out on our journey hither; where, thank Heaven, we arrived in safety." Thus Edric concluded the recital of his sufferings, since last he parted from her and his friends. The whole party expressed their happiness at his miraculous preservation ; and admired the goodness of the Supreme Being,. who had protected him through every danger, and defeated the vile inten¬ tions of his oppressor. Now, anxious to learn what had befallen Elgiva and her mother during their long and painful separation, she gave a minute detail of every particu¬ lar, and all the mysterious occurrences that had happened in the Castle of St.
Egbert during her stay. Edric's heart swelling with rage and indignation, frequently interrupted her by declar¬ ing the detested Castle should be stormed, .and the murderous villain compelled to submit. " Hold, Edric," said Elgiva, " while you breathe re¬ venge for our injuries, you forget that my mother, and our dear friend Lady Jane, are there; and perhaps might fall victims to Fitzosric's fury, if he could not escape your just resentment. But listen, I have more to tell you, if your impatience will hear me. " I have related to you how, in flying from Fitzosric, I discovered the retreat of Lady Jane, till then believ¬ ed to be murdered, and every one firmly supposed her wandering spirit
walked in the Castle. I have ex¬ plained my terror, and her good¬ ness, in preserving me, and restor¬ ing mv mother. Now, Edric, some- thins: I have discovered that con- cerns yon nearly. Lady Jane, widow of Lord Wallingford, is-----your mother. You are the child, which on her second marriage with the wicked Fitzosric, gave him such con¬ cern, as you stood in his way to the estate, and therefore it was necessary you should fall a victim to his avarice and ambition," The countenance of Edric exhibited every mark of astonishment, anxiety, and joy. He doubted his senses—he fancied it all an illusion—the remote Edric, the heir of Lord Wallingford!
—Oh! it was too much to credit—too much to support the amazing emotions if it were true. -Then the many afflic¬ tions., the cruel treatment Lady Jane had suffered, which made his heart sink while Elgiva related them. .Now that much wronged woman was de¬ clared to be..his mother!—His heart was breaking at the recollection of her sufferings, and the tears rushed to his eyes as he vowed to redress her wrongs. Sir Bernard Melbourne congratu- lated him on the discovery of his family, and advised the youthful warrior to cheek his impetuosity, as the lives of Lady Rosenberg and Lady Jane, whom he wished to release, might fall a sacri¬ fice to his fury, if they attacked St
Egbert's Castle by assault. Asalsa that that noble mansion, by Elgiva's account, was his paternal domain ; and therefore it,would be destroying his own property to endeavour to take it by storm. " In this case," added he*. " let me, who have numbered more years than you, be an adviser. En¬ deavour to gain admittance by strata¬ gem. Take with you a chosen band, in whose fidelity you can rely. I will be one; and let your assault be at night, when all in the castle are hushed in sleep. Elgiva says she had the key of the garden given her to let herself out; that .will let us in unobserved ; and we will take care to be of sufficient force to repel their attacks/' Measures were accordingly agreed
©n ; for no time was to be lost. They. first despatched a messenger to Lord Rosenberg, desiring his immediate at¬ tendance, as Lady Rosenberg, and her daughter were found, but could not command time to say more. v Sir Bernard's proposal was to call together* about fifty friends, to enter the c&stle garden if possible, A body of troops were then to surround it, to assist if those who had gained the in¬ terior met with opposition, and, upon a signal given, to commence an attack upon the Castle. Elgiva explained as well as she was able the way she was directed to find the gate; but which she could not discover the preceding night; and, by
the unerring hand of Providence, was miraculously led to the watch*tower. By the direction in which the watch- tower stood, they supposed the gate was in the wall proceeding thence to the Castle; and as it was defence¬ less at low water, thought ta defer their operations till midnight, when they might more easily reconnoitre the situation of the place, and attack it while all were sunk in sleep. Sir Bernard then smilingly said to Elgiva, " we cannot hope for your at¬ tending us, unless the great affection you have for your mother should in¬ spire you with courage, and the hope to release her. I can scarcely desire it; but, perhaps, when in the garden you mentidn, you miglit be able to
conduct us more easily into tho> Castle." " It w r ould grieve me," replied Elgiva, " to suppose you could for one moment imagine me wanting in affec¬ tion or desire of preserving my mo¬ ther; as also the inestimable Lady Jane, in whose cause I feel as if in¬ spired ; and begin to fancy myself an instrument in the hands of Providence to redress her wrongs, and restore her to that property which is her own. I endure the greatest anxiety to return to them, to share their distresses, to cheer perhaps their solitary hours. Yet my heart is happy in the idea, that our situation is known, for that was all we wanted ; knowing, that iC my father or yau were acquainted with
otir confinement, you wOuld soon dome to our Telief. Therefore I will attend you. I know no tnoTe of the entrance into the garden of St. Egbert's Castle, than that from it I was desired to seek the gate in the wall on the left hand, that I could not discover; btit the watch tower terminated the last path I pursued. If we should be so fortunate to gain admittance into the garden, perhaps I could not be able to enter the Casfle; however, 1 will willingly accompany you. If I can render Lady Jane or my mother any service, I am certain Edric will endear vour to save me from any danger." " You shall be my chief care," said Edric, " if you can so far conquer your fears, as to lead me to the Castle
in defence of your mother and mine. I will not doubt you, after having re¬ lated what you undertook to liberate her. To explore the dreadful apartments of that place alone, must give you more distress than accompanying me» But only let me confirm my right to the Castle of St. Egbert, and I will soon sweep superstition from its walls." Sir Bernard undertook to raise a competent force of friends to accelerate his views ; and planned the attack on the Castle by the side of the watch- tower. The tide would be retreating at midnight, and the moon would be only rearing above the turrets of the Castle ; so that whoever passed be¬ neath the wall, would be in the shade, and they could walk on the shore un-
^perceived. Edric, Elgiva, and Sir Bernard, with a party of friends, w r ould explore the gate in the wall, and if they could get admittance there, force their way into the Castle. The party that were to surround it, were to take every one prisoner who attempted to escape. The plan being thus adjusted, Sir Bernard left Edric to his ease while he went to collect his friends ; and when he returned in about four hours after, assured him he had a very formidable force waiting to attend him. The day was passed in mutual ex¬ planations of various subjects, whilst at intervals their hearts beat with the most anxious expectation for the ap-
^proaching eVent, that would give lr* 'Iberty to two amiable women, and place the rightful owner on those domains, which had been so cruelly wrested from his possession. About half an hour after ten, Sir Bernard introduced a number of friends, to the amount of forty, all per¬ sons of distinction ; who beheld the long absent Edric, their favourite leader, with every mark of respect and affection ; and each vowed to support his cause. The situation of the watch- tower was explained ; and they pro¬ posed to wait the arrival of Edric at the end of the lane leading to the river. Edric, Elgiva, and Sir Bernard were to go on horseback, because they
were fearful for his health, after being for such a time in so weak a state. Besides, if so many men were to go on Jiorseback at that hour, it would be a means of spreading an alarm, if they were seen proceeding towards the Castle. Every necessary arrangement was made, and, trusting their cause to Heaven, who is the protector and avenger of the innocent, they departed, to reach the appointed place, where they were to wait the arrival of their friends.
VOL. ill.
CHAPTER XXVII.
Elgivaj with a cheerful heart> pre* pared for their enterprize, wrapping herself up in the disguise given her by Lady Jane \ she mounted a horse, fervently praying and trusting they should succeed. Sir Bernard and Edric mounted their horses, and placing Elgiva be¬ tween them, hoped a speedy aud happy termination to the singular cause they were engaged in. Bidding adieu to
Lady Melbourne, to whom they pro¬ mised to send a messenger of their success, they departed. The night was uncommonly beau¬ tiful., the moon shone with amazing lustre .. and illumined the country around. Their conversation during their ride, was entirely occupied by recent events, and the flattering hopes of those to come. At length they reached the end of the lane terminated by tlie river; where> on the shore, they met their friends, who were faithful to their pro* mise. Elgiva recollected the painful sensations that oppressed her the pre¬ ceding night, when she and Edric were making their escape from the
Castle, and contrasted them with the present. Edric's might be supposed the same, when we consider how long he had been imprisoned by Fitzosric. Dismounting, they left their horses to the care of some attendants, while they proceeded to search for an en¬ trance into the garden of St. Egbert's Castle. As they passed the watch-tower, the Temembrance of what had taken place there, and his miraculous escape, struck Edric with awe and devotion .. Elgiva with wonder and admiration. They could not pass it without falling on their knees, and returning thanks to their Almiglity Preserver, as well as to implore his future protection.
After uttering their fervent prayers, they rose from their supplicating atti¬ tude, trusting in that support that never leads us w r rong. They then proceeded along the wall, examining every pier they came to ; but no door presented itself. The lofty towers of the Castle of Fitzosric in sullen ma¬ jesty now reared above their heads, and they feared they had passed the door. But upon examination, they found an apparent breach in the wall, which made them suppose it would open into the garden. The key in Elgiva's possession was applied, and, to their infinite joy, it opened into the garden of the Castle; and, by its near appertenance, Elgiva was certain she had passed it the e %
night before, previous to her appro- bending that she had mistook the path that led thereto. Edric, Elgiva, and Sir Bernard, with about forty friends, entered the gate; and those friends were deposited in the adjacent arbours, in case of any alarm. The path into which this gate led, w f as immediately against the door of the Castle that screened Elgiva when she fled from the Baron ; and she was astonished to think how she could miss it when she wanted to effect her es¬ cape ; but, upon examination, it was painted so exactly like the wall, that the difficulty of discovering it was easily accounted for. She advanced alone to the door of
the Castle. Hope animated her spi¬ rits, and gave her strength; but, to her great distress, the door was fastened. Edric and Elgiva returned to the recess where they left Sir Ber¬ nard, to consider how it was most likely to succeed, While waiting there, she fancied she heard the door open, and, looking, thought she perceived it close. She dreaded Fitzosric ; but did not appre¬ hend he would advance from that part of the Castle. However, she again ventured to try the door; and, to her infinite joy, found it yield to her hand. Elgiva, followed by Edric, Sir Bernard, and three others, found en¬ trance to the Castle, and easily pur- e4
sued their way to that part of it which led to the north chambers. While they were pursuing their course up stairs, Elgiva fancied she heard the sound of footsteps, which echoed on the marble pavement Ap¬ prehensive of their danger, she be¬ sought them to stand aside, fearful it might be Fitzosric, who was the person ever uppermost m her thoughts, if she suspected any danger. They drew aside, and plainly heard the sound of footsteps approaching more near. At length a form appeared, sufficient to overcome the firmest heart with terror. It Mas Lady Jane. She had been for a walk in the garden, after all the inhabitants of the Castle had
retired to rest; and, returning, had surprised Edric and Elgiva, who re¬ tired on her approach. Elgiva whis¬ pered Edric, that she was certain it was Latly Jane that passed them, and she was determined to follow—and instantly pursued. " Oh, my dear Lady Jane!" said Elgiva, casting her¬ self into her friendly arms ; " I have brought friends to redress your wrongs. Numbers now environ the walls of the Castle: several are with me to give you liberty and peace. Oh! I have much to say ; let me present to you our adored Edric. These are his friends; and many more await the signal to advance and crush the des¬ troyer of your rights." The sudden surprise staggered the e o
fortitude of Lady J&ne; for she had no idea that Elgiva could have conveyed the discovery to Edric in so short a period, muck more that he had col¬ lected any friends to assist him. The swelling tide of joy bore down every other sense, and she sunk into Elgiva*s arms, unable to giv6 that welcome to her beloved, long-lost son, she so ar¬ dently wished. A few moments recalled every re¬ collection and observation of Lady Jane: for when Edric precipitated himself at her feet, he bore so great a resemblance to Lord Wallingford, that, had not Elgiva previously mentioned who the expected Edric was, Lady Jane would have discovered a simili¬ tude, although she might sot be able to account for it.
It will be needless for me to repeat the meeting of Lady Jane and her beloved son Edric, witnessed only by Elgiva, Sir Bernard Melbourne, Sir James Taunton, Arthur Lord Belville, and Sir Aubray de Vere. Lady Jane raised the young warrior — Nature strongly pleaded in her breast; for the form of Edric wanted no testimony to declare who he was—he appeared so exactly like Lord Wallingford when he was about the same age as Edric, Elgiva had previously related the mys¬ terious events relative to him from the time he was found by Rosenberg; it only wanted him to appear, to confirm the authenticity of those events. Oh I who shall express the happiness of the long-suffering Lady Jane at the res¬ toration of that son so long supposed
dead, as she pressed him with rap¬ ture to her bosom, and fervently re¬ turned thanks to Heaven for its mira¬ culous preservation bestowed him. Lady Jane now led her son and the party to a superb apartment, and requested them to be seated; when, throwing off her disguise, she em¬ braced Elgiva, and welcomed her with eviery degree of affection and friend¬ ship a heart sensible of obligations eau bestow* " My dear Ladies/ said Sir Ber¬ nard, ** let your transports subside for a short time; for we have very weighty business in hand: the Castle is sur¬ rounded, and they only wait our signal to commence the attack. Consider—
we must be brief, lest any danger falls to our friends. Let us but secure you and Lady Rosenberg, whom I am taught to expect to find here; then we will assist onr young friend's right to the name and estates of your late worthy husband, and restore you to your usual state, to liberty and life." " First let me behold my dear Lady Rosenberg," said Edric ; " let me see her in safety, and I shall be happy: a few moments will satisfy the anxiety of my heart—then let us pur¬ sue the destroyer of their peace, and secure him before he has an opportu¬ nity to escape, or the power to design further evil." Lady Jane immediately conducted
them to Ellen Rosenberg, who joy¬ fully welcomed the return of her daughter to her relief, as also her deaT Edric. Time would not admit a recital of what had transpired within the last twenty-four hours—it was too precious to bestow in vain repetitions of what might be explained at a more convenient opportunity; and the thought of having gained access to the Castle elated the whole party. " Now where is Fitzosric, the destroyer of my family—the would-be murderer of the hapless Edric ? — let me secure him before he is capable of doing further injury"—said Edric. " He has retired to rest," Lady Jane replied; " therefore he will easi¬ ly fall into your power."
" Elgiva," said Edric, " lead me the way, that I may redress our wrongs —the usurper shall uo longer triumph over me—persecute you—nor imagine he is free from the supposed murder of my dear mother. — Come! lead on, my love." Elgiva trembled at the thought of being instrumental to the Baron's mis¬ fortunes, though he had so very much ill-treated and insulted her. However, the cause of justice was at stake, and she complied. They left the chamber, Lady Jane and Ellen praying for their safety, being previously led by Lady Jane to the door that opened into the north gallery, where one solitary lamp served triflingly to illuminate the cheer¬ less gloom*
Just as they were departing, their attention was called by sound of voices ascending the stairs leading from the garden. They put themselves on the defensive ; but soon found it was their friends, who, impatient of delay, had entered the garden, (Elgiva having left the gate open,) and, fearful of any accident happening to their friends had rushed forward with impetuosity to* assist them. Assuring them that nothing had transpired to give any unusual alarm, they left them with the ladies, while they proceeded to the chamber of Fitzosric; where, sunk in sleep, he dreaded not that he was on the point of answering for all his horrible crimes.
Having passed along the north gallery, and the folding doors, they entered the illuminated gallery,, in which the chamber door of the Baron was situated. Elgiva pointed it out, and was going to retire ; but, anxious to know what passed, she could not withdraw, but remained in ardent ex¬ pectation of what might ensue. Though Edric assured her she need he under no apprehension; for they only meant to confine Fitzosric, and bring him to justice. They then entered his cham¬ ber, and Elgiva returned to her mother and Lady Jane in the north gallery. Fitzosric was in a profound sleep, iu which state Edric might have sacri¬ ficed him to his just resentment, and the murder of his father, as also that
(he supposed) of Lady Jane; but, dis¬ daining to take a mean revenge, he called him to awake. The Baron, raising himself on one arm, sternly demanded who so dar¬ ingly interrupted his repose ) « Wallingford! thy friend ¥> replied Edric. On this* day twenty-one years ago* do you remember? he and you headed your forces to oppose the Danes. On that fatal day Walling¬ ford received his death... .by whose hand ?... .Fitzosric !. .time may have worn it from your mind. .habitual evil deeds may have banished reflection from you ; but I must tell you Wal¬ lingford died by the villanous hand of the treacherous man he esteemed a
friend! Arise!..l am now here to avenge his foul murder.' 1 The Baron was rather taken un¬ awares, but rising to take his sword, perceived there were more people in the room than the person who spoke to him, else he would have considered it a dream. The figure of Edric struck terror into his heart, and he gazed on him with wild amazement At length he gained sufficient courage to say, " Who are you that dare to name Wallingford?..Thy looks re¬ semble the murdered Edric, my foe!.. What! have the waves cast thee again upon the earth to torment me!. .Last night thy life was forfeited to my ven¬ geance. . .Am I deceived 1 * .or art thou the ghost of Edric? for both you re¬ semble,"
" I have not time to waste in idle words," said Edric, " nor to answer such ridiculous inquiries—Arise! and know, proud Baron, that the period of thy lawless usurpation draws nigh to its conclusion. Thou, who could basely murder thy most valued 4 friend, Lord Wallingford. .who could marry the widow, only to deprive her and her infant son of their rights. .that could destroy that son, the lawful heir of these estates; and after innumerable iilsy murder the hapless victim, Lady Jaue. These., these wrongs are enough to make Wallingford, or Edric, rise from the grave to oppose such tyranny, and place the rightful heir in the, domains of his aucestors. Yes, there is another Wallingford! The cliild you supposed dead, has been
cherished to oppose you ; and now he comes, the instrument of avenging Heaven, to crush you/* The Baron Fitzosric looked with sullen cbntempt, yet with teridr, on Edric, as he spoke; for he had been assured that Edric was dead, by his people, who had attended him diiring his confinement in the tower, and had administered the poisoned wine; as also that his lifeless body had been thrown into the river. Rememberinff which, he firmly believed the person who had spoken «uch truths was a spectre; for no one creature, as he imagined, could have obtained the un¬ welcome information that fell from his lips. The resemblance he bore to Lord WalKngford, the -certainty that he
was the exact representation of Edric the Forester, he thought if it were possible for spirits departed to re-visit this earth, it was surely him. And being unwilling to rise, and fully per¬ suaded in his own mind that the ob¬ ject before Mm was only the errors of a fearful imagination, he turned his head away, and hiding his face with Ms hands, exclaimed—" Depart!—de* part! and trouble me no more." Edric not supposing that the real cause of the Baron's wish to turn his eyes from him, and to remain in bed, wa& that his guilty soul imagined the injured shade of the unfortunate Edric was now before him, demanding ven¬ geance for his wroags. And the re¬ semblance he now bpre to the late
Lord Wallingford, took away his strength and almost his speech; for how was it possible to avoid Edric, if the grave yielded up its store to tor¬ ment him. The idea that it might be possible for Edric to be alive never once entered into his mind, assured that the assassins he employed would not deceive him, nor fail to execute his horrid command. A living object he had no dread for, because his power was too strong to bear any opposition; but when those appeared before him, whom he firmly believed were dead, then the guilty conscience, toa big to be confined in the narrow limits of a human body, accused him of all the evils he had ever done; and he would have given the world to have been nothing.
Sir Bernard said, " my Lord Fitz* osric, we must be obeyed; you must rise immediately, there is no time for a de* lay ; as you must be brought before a court of justice to answer the various accusations alleged against you." Thfe Baron now contemptuously looked round, and perceived there were several persons waiting for his dressing, He rang for his attendants to assist him. Ethelwald and some others came to him, to whom he explained the vio¬ lent intrusion of the party present, threatening vengeance on them for suf¬ fering las repose to be disturbed* When be was dressed, Edrie said, 46 Now i must inform* you 1 who I am. Too well you know I am Edric the
Forester, whom you could not subdue by fair means; but, like an unmanly traitor, confined me—almost starved me — treated me with insult—when you knew I was in chains in the powder of your assassins, and thereby unable to defend myself. Your murderous arts thought to have poisoned me last night. Providence interposed and fcaved me from adding another to the list of murders your conscience is clouded with. I was cast into the river, and miraculously escaped." Fitzosric started..and bit his lips in anger and revenge; but without deigning to speak. His haughty soul was bursting to reek his vengeance on the unexpected Edric, but he found him surrounded by too many of his VOL. |Ii. f
friends to gain his point, else he would have plunged his sword into the bosom of his adversary. "My more immediate business," said Edric, "is to compel you to re¬ store two ladies, Ellen and her daugh¬ ter Elgiva. They Jiave been confined in this castle -many weeks, and vio¬ lently separated from their friends. The discovery has certainly been very mysterious; but I should have found them long ago, no doubt, if you had not so basely confined me. I demand that they be immediately delivered to me, and permitted to leave the Castle." ** It is all a scandalous falsehood," said Fitzosric; " I know of no such people—they are not here. Why am 1 to be insulted with such inquiries ?"
%t By your leave we will walk into another apartment, Sir Bernard," said Edric, " where we can come to the rights of this affair. I affirm that the two ladies I mention, are somew r here in the Castle, and I insist on their being restored to me*" Tlie Baron was secured, for fear he should make his escape; and by col¬ lecting a force (though in a wrong cause,) he might yet be the means of much mischief. They therefore re¬ paired to the drawing-room.
f 2
CHAPTER XXVIII. As they entered, Edric said, "this is the room, my friends, where Lady Jane was poisoned. And after that act of wickedness no person has ever seen her, exoept, &s traditibn ^oes, her restless spirit winders, to strike the guilty soul of her murderer with horror." At this moment Lady Jane, anxi¬ ous to observe if her son was likelv to receive any danger, entered the dfaw- irig-room, to the great terror of Fitz¬ osric, who shook every limb: but she soon retreated, and walked in the north
gallery, while her bosom throbbed with the strongest emotion. The Baron struggled with contend¬ ing passions, and friding it impossible to elude the persons in whose power he was, after some consideration, began to regain his natural duplicity —sometimes with haughtiness, that spoke the contempt he felt for those around him. But finding all his arts of no effect, to torn the determined mind of Edric, he again solemnly as¬ sured them, that he knew nothing of either of the persons Edric had alluded to ; then disdainfully asked if he had any thing else to say. "Much," replied Edric;* * &nd iirst, I claim this Castle iiad its lands F3
as roy right, which you have so many years usurped. I am the lawful heir of Lord Wallingford. In me behold . Edric!. .that child whom you designed to have murdered, to secure to you his estates. Providentially I escaped the snare, and by a miracle am now before you, to demand my rights; which, if you deny, my Sovereign will compel you to resign." Fitzosric looked sternly on him while he spoke * ,he shook with terror; as the resemblance he bore to his mur¬ dered friend was extreme. A thousand thoughts rushed on his tortured mind, and he now perceived the cause why he always so much hated Edric the Forester more than any other com- mander in the King's service; and up-
braided Heaven and Fortune that he was ignorant who he really was, or he would not have lived to humble him in the manner he had, in the sight of so many, at the present period. At length he recollected, that Edric awaited his reply, and he said, in a haughty accent, " the Castle and estates of St. Egbert I never will re¬ sign till, as you threatened, the cause comes before a superior power than at present demands it. It is true, you bear a resemblance to my deceased friend ; and some one, I suppose, has spirited you on to act as you have done, and form an illegal claim to this my property. I never will believe that you are the son of Wallingford ^there¬ fore remove from the Castle, and learn. ? 4
to revere my clemency, and bless my forbearance that I do not strike you dead at a blow.,a vile impostor as vou are. V " I can bring proofs," said Edric, " substantial proofs ..., whereby my rightful claim can be asserted! they are in the possession of Ellen, whom I hav& demanded." " Oh! the traitress!" cried Fitz¬ osric in a rage, "had I known that, she should not have existed one hour •!" " A few minutes ago," continued Edric, " yon said you knew of no such person ! You see, my friends, our in¬ formation is well founded ; but now 1 thave possession of this place, 1 will
search every part but I will discover where you have concealed her." " 'Tis false!" exclaimed Fitzosric, recollecting Edric's having made a claim of the Castle, " and I would not believe that you w r ere his son, even if him you say was your father, or Lady Jane, were to rise from the dead !" Lady Jane had been listening at intervals to all that passed, and un¬ willing longer to delay declaring Edric's right to the Castle, entered the drawing room, and addressing herself to Fitzosric, whose terrors he was en¬ tirely unable to conceal, said, "The time is now arrived that calls me to declare the truth, and restore the law¬ ful owner to the possession of his rights, f 5
which have been too lon^ held from him by fraud?, murder^ and oppression. The young man present, is Edric my son!. 6 the only heir of my murdered Lord Wallingford . .murdered by the hand of his treacherous friend, Fitz¬ osric ! The son of Wallingford is now before you ...him, whom you hired as¬ sassins to destroy, the night we re¬ turned from Bretheren!. .the Almighty would not suffer those assassins to lift their murderous hands against an un¬ offending innocent child !.... .mysteri¬ ously he has been preserved till this hour^ and shines forth the champion of his Sovereign ; when it could scarcely be supposed, the obscure offspring of a forester could be capable of atchieving such deeds. He now appears before you as the champion of suffering inno¬ cence ! the Lady Ellen, who for seve-
ral years he believed to be his mother. To demand his lawful possessions.* to claim retribution for his father's cruel murder..and the death of his mother. .with all the wrongs you have made him suffer." Fitzosric started at the sight, and the terror of her discourse. He firmly believed it was the spirit of Lady Jane rising to defend her son's cause. The thought almost drove him to distrac¬ tion* for he i found himself beset and exposed on every side ; and covering his face with his hands, he threw him¬ self on a couch, and gave way to the «■< pressing agony of thought that in¬ volved him* While he was indulging his own*- f 6
oppressive sensations, Lady Jane pro¬ ceeded*. "It is now no longer neces¬ sary for Conceal ment.. let me declare the truth . .and take one murder from the guilty soul of the Baron !. .he has always thought I suffered by poison, and was buried in the garden !. .but Heaven thought proper to frustrate his design! j I have lived a disconsolate ted solitary life in a remote part of this Castle, thirteen years ; watching every action of that perfidious..that ungrateful man !. .and, thank Heaven, live to assert my son's claim, and see the usurper meet the reward of his crimes!" Fitaosric, with rage and anger, struggling in his countenance, ex¬ claimed, "Ha! I have been deceived!
..bring the traitors forth, that dared to conspire against their master..! will have them suffer death for im¬ posing on me.. and first on you, Madam, for the many terrific moments you have caused me and my servants, with your supposed phantom !" Then rushing towards Lady Jane, would have sacrificed her to his fury, if he had not been prevented ; and Lady Jane took shelter in the midst of her son's friends. Any further conversa¬ tion, they considered would be useless at the present time ; and calling to the servants of Fitzosric, demanded to be conducted to a place of security, to keep a traitor safe till morning, when he would be conveyed to Shrewsbury gaol.
, ^Confine me in thia place," sai<r the Baron, " but L solicit it as a fa¬ vour,,. and r eertamly expect you will grant it* that, you will.not. convey a person of my rank,to a public prison, till my crime is known..or my inno¬ cence cleared up.".. .The,request was complied with ; and the.Baron was led to a secure apartment; where, fasten¬ ing: the door, and leaving.six of Edric's friends to guard it, they repaired with Lady Jane to the north chamber. v
CHAPTER XXIX.
They were met at the door of tha haunted chamber by Ellen Rosenberg and Elgiva; who, with the friends that remained with them there, waited with impatience to welcome Edric's return, as also that of Lady Jane, for no persuasions could prevail on her to remain in the north chambers, as she was apprehensive Edric's safety might be endangered if he followed the im¬ petuosity of the moment, by rashly en¬ tering the chamber of the Baron... Her extreme anxiety urged her to fol? low him, and listen attentively to what
passed there and in the drawing room. No longer able or wishing to conceal herself, when the Baron Fitzosric in¬ voked the injured spirits of Walling¬ ford or Lady Jane, to speak in behalf of Edric, she thought it a proper oppor¬ tunity to appear and declare the truth. Lady Rosenberg and her daughter, Who had suffered such insult and de¬ tention by him, could not help Te- joicing to think their oppressor was secured, that they could now leave the Castle in safety. Her anxiety to see Lord Rosenberg, after such a long and painful separation, claimed every thought; and every moment seemed to hang on leaden wings, till she set out to meet him; especially as she had been informed he might be expected.
in a few days • at Sir Bernard MeU bourne's, at Shrewsbury; as an. ex¬ press had been sent to him, to come there as soon as possible. And Elgiva was equally anxious to see her father; and, in expressing her joy at seeing him again, relate the mysterioua aecw dents that had prevented that happi¬ ness so long. Lady Jane now requested Edric's attention to what she had to relate, and her joy at seeing him, as well as that experienced by Lady Rosenberg, was extreme. Lady Jane would haveibeen willing to acknowledge Edric the Forester, the son and heir of the de¬ ceased Lord Wallingford, without the testimony of the paper, and corro¬ borating circumstances revealed b^
Ellen; for he bore a remarkable re¬ semblance to that nobleman. The night was passed in mutual* recitals, and explanations, which made those extremely happy who. were most concerned in. the wonderful event;, which proved;, that the immediate hand of Providence always attended every circumstance and. action, oi Edric's life, Rwas eight ^clock in the morning before any one thought of the fatigue of. the preceding day. Lady Jane bade Ethelwald-prepare chambers for as manias, could'be possibly accom¬ modated, as, she judged it necessary to obtain a short repose previous to the. h4i£ines3 of the day*
Edric enjoyed a slight slumber, and soon arose, wishmg io see Ethelwald, and have a private conversation with him concerning many occurrences- which had happened during the long period of hte supposed death. The Ladies could not receive much benefit from their repose, for their minda were too crowded with recollections of the preceding day, to taste the comfort of sleep, and too much overjoyed in the recovery of Edric, and the hopes of being restored to liberty and their friends. Lady Jane also, impatient to see Edric, still having more to commu¬ nicate, and also to propose a proper escort to attend the Ladies to Shrews¬ bury, lest they should fall into the hands of Fitssosric's people, for she re¬ membered Ethelwald had told \m\
that the Baron had despatched his people in all directions, to intercept their flight. Edric ordered the Baron's carriage tp be prepared to convey Ellen and Elgiva to Sir Bernards, there to await the expected arrivai of Lord Rosen- herg. They were to be escorted by ten of their friends op horseback, in ease they met with any opposition tram :$e Baron's party. Edric was sorry 4o parft with them so soon after their Jbeing found; but judged it best to «ead them to Shrewsbury, wthtle he settled the business at the Castle. He wished Lady Jane to accompany them; but she declined, saying, she did not inow but Ja^r presence might be ne* cessary at ithe Castle, aud ahe could
trot bear to quit the place while she harboured the smallest thought of hfc* son's being in danger. The ladies therefore took an affectionate leave, and set out on their proposed journey ..elated with the hope of being* re* stored to Lord Rosenberg, as also that they enjoyed freely the benefit of the fresh air, without apprehenskn of the tyrannic controul of the Baron Fitz* osric. Lady Jane now ordered Agatha to be conducted to her. Ethelwald had explained, previous to the interview, that Lady Jane, who was supposed dead, had only retired to the north chambers to secrete herself from the tyranny of the Baron, and to wait an opportunity of asserting her rights—
that it Was no spectre, but the lady herself, who so often walked about the Castle: but so igreat wa& the super* stition and fear of every one that had beheld her, even Fitzosric himself, had not sufficient courage to speak to her. He found some difficulty in per* suading Agatha to accompany him, especially to the north chambers, 5 of which place she still felt uncommon 'dread. She had heard something of the bustle in the Castle the preceding night; and knowing that her master, when enraged, cared not on whom lie vented his fury, was under the most alarming apprehensions for her own safety, and had prudently retired out of the way, considering that self-pre¬ servation was the first law of nature.
The strange manner that he had some* where concealed Ellen—the myste¬ rious disappearance of Elgiva — the passion in which he returned to her when Elgiva was mtssing-^the tin- merited reproaches she received from him on that account, were still fresh iu her troubled memory.; and she dreaded what might be his design to¬ wards herself. Then, suddenly, the recollection of the astonishing account which Elgiva related, when she was searching for her mother. The skele¬ ton which she found concealed in the * couch, and which she herself was thoroughly convinced was the body of Lady Jane, made her doubt the words of Ethelwald; and knowing he was greatly in favour with the Baron> tiay, bis confidant in every action* dreaded
that the present request was all a fic¬ tion, and for some reason only meant to delude and imprison her also. . Etbelwald observed the terror which was struggling in Agatha's bosom, and which was so strongly pourtrayed on her countenance; and the more he persuaded the more she was alarmed. At length he told her, that Edric, Lady Fitzosric's son by Lord Wallingford, was alive, and that it was he, who, coming to the Castle io assert his claim> had put the place into such confusion; that he had se* cured the Baron, and was now in the Castle, The novelty of seeing this wonder¬ ful young stranger, now caused Aga*
tha to be full pf her inquiries, concern¬ ing what sort of a person was Lady Jane's son?—where he was found?— by what means he escaped, when every body thought he was dead ?— where he had been all the time ?—was he handsome?—and a number more inquiries, that Ethelwald thought her tongue would never cease. " All this," Ethelwald replied, " I cannot at present give you any par¬ ticular account of. I always flattered myself he was alive, though no one but myself believed so. As to his person, Agatha-^he is very handsome, and of a noble commanding look— about twenty-one, I suppose—and the exact resemblance of Lord Walling¬ ford. I, you know, have seen his VOL. 111. G
lordsMp, andtlbe pMuire in fliedraw- i^g^rDo^i is extremely like hiinl"— « 0h#fctfr!" said Aga^ia, interrupting hka, " I n^^lr fe^uld bear to look at thsftpictulrein my Iffe, because I had been told he was it&rllered. Once, I Wtfw, I ventured, after my lady had been describing him, to look at it, 1 saw it was drawn for a very handsome man ; but the eyes seemed to fix on me so strong, and so seriously, 1 was frightened, and ran out of the room ; and ever since, when I go into the drawing-room, I turn my head away, and never look at it." " Silly Agatha," rejoined Ethel¬ wald, " I did not imagine you could be so led away by romantic folly: but I must infom you tnore of this Edric.
Young as he is, he has been for three years the terror of the country. He is that very Edric, sirnamed the Forester, that carries terror in his arm, and has been every where victorious. He every¬ where opposed the Baron; and you know we have often longed, to see him, though we dreaded lest he should at¬ tack this place. For fear of that, the Baron withdrew from the cause he had espoused. And by some strange, un¬ foreseen event, the certainty of which I am not at present acquainted with, he has heard his mother is alive, aud then came suddenly to the Castle to vindicate her wrongs, and assert his lawful claim," Agatha's countenance sometimes expressed the most animated hope, g2
then suddenly changed to chilling fear; for she could not flatter herself that Lady Jane was really alive. However, anxious to see the hero, that had often been mentioned with admiration, at other times with terror, she suffered herself to be led by Ethelwald along the north gallery: but when she arriv¬ ed before the door of the supposed haunted chamber, all her courage for¬ sook her, and she fancied Ethelwald had deceived her with false reports; for the padlocks still remained on the door, the keys of which were either buried, or put out of the way, so that no one could find them. Ethelwald opened the door on the side, which admitted them, to the astonishment of Agatha, who never
dreamt of such an inlet It led them into a noble apartment; but in that they entered next, she beheld her dear Lady, whom for thirteen years she be¬ lieved to be dead, and wjiose remains she would have declared unburied, (^rounding her supposition on the re¬ lation of Elgiva), sitting in conversa¬ tion with a handsome young man, who (according to her slight survey of the much-dreaded picture) entirely an¬ swered Ethelwald's account—the exact resemblance of Lord Wallingford's portrait, when apparently about his own age. Agatha's feelings overcame her. The jo£ she experienced at seeing Lady ;J$ue restored from the dead— her son also, that she had long thought g 3
lost, never to be returned—took away every power of utterance and sense. Lady Jane perceiving her falling, flew to assist the terror-struck maid ; and when she recovered, she found herself, not in th% arins of an often-dreaded spectre, but supported by Lady Jane. This wa» joy indeed for Agatha, who sincerely loved her mistress* She uttered innumerable inquiries in a breath; for her anxiety and impatience would scarcely allow her to hear any thing in proper order. Agatha had much to say, as well as to hear; but the cxtacy of the mo¬ ment bore down every other sense. She rapturously welcomed Lady Jane's return, and that of Edric, whose noble
deportment and handsome person had quite overwhelmed poor Agatha with surprise, admiration, and awe. , She waited to attend auy command to her fellow servants: many, she knew, high¬ ly valMsd Lady Jan^ l?nt who. would mot,believe m woird Ethelwald^said on the subject, and was happy to be the herald of good news.
a 4
CHAPTER XXX.
The guilty conscience of Rtzosric, during the absence of Edric and his friends, wanted no other monitor. Too well the appearance of Edric con¬ vinced him he was the son of Lord Wallingford, to offer any opposition to his claim. The appearance of Lady Jane drove him almost to distraction. For her to be alive! he knew Ethel- wald must have deceived him ; as to no other he imparted the design of her death, though he did not say for what cause. Ladv Jane had also now presented
herself in behalf of Edric's rights! There had been a hint too given, that Lord Wallingford had been murdered! Then he reflected on his base conduct towards Lady Jane, who, to do her justice, he confessed to his soul had never given him any kind of offence, except the day when Birtha Siward was killed ; then, and then only, she had dared to speak what she thought her duty not to conceal; and, con- \i need of her husband's infidelity, in¬ gratitude, and injustice, it was a proper time for an unoffending wife to assume her reason, and acknowledge she was wronged—wronged in every ten¬ der point!—for had Fitzosric been only her husband, (without the sus¬ picion of unfair dealing with his friend Wallingford, her first lord—without g 5
tlie idea that her child had been also destroyed by him,) how could he jus¬ tify his conduct in concealing a female in the house, whom he had dishonoured and preferred to his most injured and unhappy wife, the greatness of whose soul had attempted to soften the mis¬ fortunes of a poor, unfortunate, and afflicted rival. To sustain his charac¬ ter, and conceal all those disagreeable and dangerous proofs that Lady Jane appeared to be possessed of; which, if but whispered, might endanger the world's good opinion of him, he had determined to Sacrifice to his rage, and disappointment of his continued inter¬ course with Birtha, as also that she might toot be able to reveal his con¬ duct, or the ill treatment she received F to any one.
Stiil he bop$d that something would occur to prevent Edric's accu¬ sation and claim taking place ; and he began to think, if the rumour of this affair was spread, he might be ashanied of looking his friends in the face. AU he hoped, was, that the affair might be privately adjusted, without his going to a public prison; for he did not know what the generality of people might think of the business. Old Siward, he knew, was yet alive, and had often reproached him, as much as he dared, with the loss of his daughter Birtha. Sensations never felt till now op¬ pressed the Baron, He,who had so artfully deluded, concealed, and im¬ prisoned others, was now a prisoner g 6
himself, unable to ascertain the extent of his misfortunes. He resolved, if his case should be driven to extremity, ra¬ ther to put a -period to his own exist¬ ence, than suffer by the hands of the public executioner; and therefore re¬ signed himself to fate: but not with¬ out hopes; for he flattered himself that he, being so powerful a Baron, should overwhelm and confound all their accusations, and continue to en¬ joy his vast estates without molestation. While various troublesome thoughts occupied the solitary hours of the Baron, Edric was not idle. He 5 at¬ tended by Laidy Jane and 'a few of his friends, made an examination of every part of the castle. . Lady Jane led him to the apartment where the un-
buried remains of Birtha Siward still called the pitying heart to lament her destiny, and place her unfortunate body in a decent grave. This Edric de¬ clared should be immediate, as he could not bear to have so wretched a spectacle remain in such a horrid state in any part of his possessions- Orders were immediately given for her funeral, which he determined should be performed with every solem¬ nity and respect due to her misfor¬ tunes. Lady Jane gave way to the feelings of her heart by a flood of tears, when]she called to mind Birtha's sufferings, as well as her own un- Merited ill-treatment, from one of the most ungrateful men that ever pressed the earth.
Edric led Lady Jane from a scene that shocked hi$ heart, when he con- sidered that the murdered unfortunate now before him, was the victim of lawless oppression, deceit, and un¬ controlled passion. From Lady Jane's sympathising ^nd affectionate account* he could not find any .thing designing or to blame in Bertha's conduct. She might have remained virtuous and happy, but for the licentious designs- of Fitzosric.. the comfort of her father'^ age, instead of bringing his grey heirs* with sorrow to the grave. The hap¬ less girl that called forth their pitying tear*v bojre an excellent character. Them was no one who could accuse her of fevity <rf conduct, or wishing,- (which too frequently happens), to attract the attention of the pt&er sex,
which is too often the bane of every fe¬ licity, while a false pride and grandeur silences the upbraidings of conscience when they are well provided for. Lux¬ ury, ambition, and ignorance turns many an humble girl's brain, in the vortex of licentious intercourse, till she finds herself neglected, despised, forsaken, and not till then is the idea open to conviction. Birtha was none of those. .she had not a wish to please, unless it was the person destined to be her husband. Religion and duty, with a conscience void of offence, or design¬ ing to offend any one, was her simple character. She knew the Baron was married, and therefore knew he could not act honourably by her—and to her accustomed horror of an illicit con¬ nexion, she deemed it the most cruel
wrong and insult to any woman to accept the regard and' enjoy the love of a married man. Often w r ould she say, both before and after her being betrayed by the BBron,, that she could not-conceive it ever possible for such a soul to know ease, imagining that, however involved in a guilty con¬ nexion, there - must be sometimes a moment of serious reflection, that would en*bitler every enjoyment, if such a one was not wholly lost to every sense of virtue, especially when a vir- tuous, unsuspecting, and affectionate wife was made the dupe of cruel arti¬ fice, and base ingratitude. And she would have preferred the scantiest pit¬ tance of homely fare^ with innocence, to all the rich and pampered luxuries of the great, without its approving
monitor, virtue. The idea of doing to others as she would be done by, was so strongly impressed on Birtha's mind, that, though compelled by the Baron to submit to her sad destiny, she grieved as much for Lady Jane as for herself, knowing how afflicting such a misfor¬ tune would be to her, if she was a wife, and the object of her affections, unmindful of his sacred vows, pre¬ ferred another to herself. Lady Jane related the sketch of Birtha'^ character, and the unfortunate affair that terminated her life, to her son, while he was pensively ruminating on the subject; then leaving the cham¬ ber till the time appointed for the fune¬ ral, they walked lo other parts to make a more particular survey.
Passing along a small gallery, he thought be perceived a man, as if cau¬ tiously wishing to avoid him, glide towards a door, and disappear. Edric recollected who he was; and now at ]ite*^ fl«* after hira and seized him- Tha fellow fell on bis knees overcome wkh terror; for he thought whea ikst h^ saw him, that the injured spirit of Edric had risen to demand veageance for his cruel mutder. It was Oswy I— He begged Edric to spare his life, and he would confess all. Edric, anxious to know the extent of the Baron's w ick- edness, iwrdered Oswy to be secured, happy that he had discovered so pow¬ erful a witness in his behalf. The confession of Oswy was made in the presence of Lady Jane and
Edric with his friends, and was— That the Baron had designed to sacri¬ fice Edric with his own hand, but was prevented by the great resemblance he bore some one of the Baron*friends: that himself and three others were* to have a great reward for securing the person of Edric, which was to be doubled, if they undertook to give bias poison, so that the Baron might be free from an enemy he dreaded. The poison was accordingly administered ; and when" they informed him that Edric had drank plentifully of the wine, he ordered them to throw the dead body intathe river Severn, that, if found, it might carry the appearance of accident (the account of which has already been related by Edric). Oswy was then secured in a proper place till
the time of the Baron's examination took place. Lady Jane now took up her habita¬ tion in the inhabited part of the Castle, and only retired to the haunted cham¬ ber to offer up her prayers, and return thanks to the Almighty for its affording her a shelter to save her from intended destruction. The funeral of Birtha Siward was about the fourth day after Edric> being in the Castle. She was conveyed with every mark of esteem and respect to Shrewsbury; and Ellen and Elgiva being informed of the event, joined the mourning party, and wept the tears of sensibility, grief and pity, over her grave*
A plain white marble protected her remains, and while it bore her name, expressed her melancholy fate; on which the weeping maids of the vil¬ lage where she dwelt, have often shed tears of sorrow and regret, while they prayed to escape a similar misfortune. It encouraged them to continue in the paths of virtue—to shun the glittering allurements of the great—nor lift their thoughts too much higher than their own sphere — as generally ruin and disgrace attends a too easy belief of a lover's vows, especially when fortune places too great a bar, or that the lover is already married—for what but ruin and shame can attend an intercourse with a married man.
CHAPTER XXXI.
On the fifth night of Ellen and her daughter being at Shrewsbury, they were surprised by the arrival of Ro¬ senberg ; for it could scarcely be ex¬ pected that he could be there in so short a time. But his impatience to see his beloved Ellen, and his dear daughter, prevented him from feeling fatigue; and he travelled night and day to behold those dear objects, that he feared were lost to him for ever. His ecstacy at seeing them safe is easier conceived than described. Ellen now engaged his attention by a minute detail of every thing that had happened, since her being unfortu-
nately driven from her house at Elles- mere, till the arrival of Edric, so un- expectedly, to her relief. Elgiva had given her mother an account of her mi¬ raculous meeting with Edric, and the relation be gave of his confinement and intended death ; she had now to repeat it to her father, whose astonishment is not to be imagined. They all passed a very happy even¬ ing ; joyful indeed, in being restored to each other, after so long and painful a reparation. In the morning, Lord Rosenberg, impatient to see his esteemed Edric, made him propose a journey to St. Egbert's Gastle, to congratulate him on the accession to his title and pater¬ nal domain ; as also to pay his respects to Lady Jane, and congratulate her with the acquisition of so truly valuable a young man as was her son Edric.
But first he said he had a little inci¬ dent to relate to Ellen, which, he flat¬ tered himself, would give her unspeak¬ able pleasure, as it would not only be a means of leading her from obscurity, but doubly add to her happiness as well as his own. Lady Rosenberg had been so truly happy in being restored to her hus- band, and the brightening prospects that seemed to smile on Lady Jane and her son, that she did not think she could experience an increase; how¬ ever, she requested Lord Rosenberg to proceed. " My cares," said he, " became so strangely divided, and my time so en¬ gaged, that I could not seek after you according to my wishes. The loss of Edric, my only hope, (as he had as¬ sured me he would exert every effort to discover you,) was such an affliction,
that I sunk almost beneath its weight. About ten days ago I bad information sent me, that Edric was at Waltham Abbey in confinement, for some oflence he had given an officer. I immediately asked leave of absence, and made known my business, for every one was anxious, like myself, to know what was become of Edric the Forester. My request was granted, and J set out for that place, but met with a severe dis¬ appointment when I got there ; the information was true, with regard to * the name : a gentleman named Edric Conway was confined there for the be¬ fore-mentioned offence; I desired to see him, which was granted, for the King had honoured me with an order to see the prisoner. I was rather dis¬ appointed in not seeing our beloved Edric ; but the gentleman's behaviour was so obliging, and explained the nature of his present misfortune wkk such accuracy, that I promised I would VOL. HI, H
lay his case before the King at my re*- turnf and, if possible, obtain his re¬ lease. He thanked me, and I-took my leave. . : - — Returning homeward, my mind, as usual, oppressed with thoughtv even¬ ing advanced, as 1 was about three miles from town, and I saw a person laying in the road apparently lifeless. I alighted from my carriage to see if any accident had befallen the person who clairued my pity and attention. He lay on his face, and a quantity of blood lay round him. As I lifted him Up, good Heaven 1 what were my feel¬ ings, when, at that moment, I beheld (de not be alarmed my Ellen, fot now he is #ell, thank God Q my former friend and patron, niy (ever-esteemed LordJKaby.-He had been attacked by robbers; who had? wounded him ih iheee places^ teavihg H|ihn ! for de&d, Jand; a short tiaicj would h&v# j)Ut ; a pe-
rlod to his existence, if good fortune had not led me to assist him. ic As 1 supported him in my arms, my servants brought water, which seemed to revive him ; we lifted him into the carriage, for I was afraid he wanted better assistance than what was in our power, and there was no advice to be got nearer than London* " Having doneoitr best endeavours to bind up his wounds, I ordered the driver to proceed as fast as possible home: we were not long before^we reached my house, where I ordered him to be put into my bed, and went myself for tlie most skilful surgeons to attend him, " When they arrived, they fare me very flattering hopes; I and «the next day had the satisfoetion of hearing him speak. He l^new me; but I w«te Mraid n2
of mentioning any thing about you, lest it might make him uneasy, and prevent his recovery. *' The day after, he conversed freely, thanked me fot my care and timely as¬ sistance, with great fervor, but still avoided mentioning you. I thought it was occasioned by a continued resent¬ ment on his side, and for some time forbore speaking of you. But when I considered we were happy in the sta¬ tion in which it had pleased Heaven to place us; that we wanted nothing ; I thought it very wrong not to speak of you. " I asked him if he knew how his daughter was ? he shook his head:— < Alas! Edgar,' said he, * blinded by ambition, and unmindful of her happi¬ ness, I insisted she should marry a fo¬ reign BftMeman; and about ten days after I drove you feonnny house, the
marriagre was to be celebrated. The evening preceding which, Ellen ab¬ sconded, no one knew how, or where she went to, (but every one believes she took refuge in a convent abroad); 1 sent every where in search of her, and all possible inquiries were made, but without effect. I have been confirmed in this idea by all my friends; because no person that 1 know, either relations or acquaintances, have seen her; and it is something singular, if she lives, and is not in a convent, that she has never been to see any one that belonged to her.' cv ' Poor Ellen,' said I, ' she has suffered much trouble and anxiety since you saw her last, I dare believe.' " i And mine,' replied Lord Raby, ' can equal her's, Ah! Edgar, I was much to blame in preventing her mar¬ riage with you, when you enjoyed her
affections. I have often wished it was in my power to make you both happy, Forgive me, Edgar—were it possibly to recall,past events, there is not a being on earth I would sooner bestow her on than yourself; 1 am very sorry, but have given up the hope of ever seeing my Ellen again.* " He sighed. .1 said, < My Lord, did you ever hear of the honours I have received? I have held the situation I enjoy about three years. .1 could have been superlatively happy, if your fair daughter had enjoyed it with me.' " < Yes; replied Lord Raby, < I heard that one of the name of JRosen-* berg was highly favoured. 1 came to London to convince myself whether it was my once favourite Edgar. I asked after his wife—for something struck j»e, that as I had never heard from you any more than from Ellen, you mights
have been married for aught 1 knew, and gone together abroad. But I was informed, you were married to the daughter of a very poor man, and that your wife still attended her father's declining years ; therefore I was cer¬ tain it could not be my Ellen. " * I haveoftendesigned to speakwitli you; but as soon as the recollection came into my mind, that the error of ambition had made me deprive myself of my daughter, and the pleasure 1 once took in your company; and. thinking it w r ould only cause me fresh grief of heart to repeat events that hap¬ pened so many years ago, I forbore coming to you ; though, when the king, honoured jou with a title, I would fain have congratulated you on the acqui¬ sition, as I sincerely believed you was worthy of it. Add to that, you will find by roy will, which I made several years back, that I did not forget you;« h4
for I have adopted you my heir, if Ellen does not return, and that I begin to despair of; and the title of Raby I have designed shall descend tc you. " I dropped on my knees, and re¬ turned him sincere thanks. My heart was full., Lord Raby could scarce re¬ frain tears. I asked if he would be happy to see Ellen, and forgive her. * Willingly!' he exclaimed; ' But, alas ! I fear she is lost for ever!' My tears rushed to ray eyes; for I sincerely believed you were lost, indeed, for ever I " I then related to him the whole of our history, and of our melancholy separation, assuring him that you had not been heard of since the battie of Shrewsbury; that no expense nor trouble had been spared to discover where you was secreted; and of the miserv I endured till chance should
favour me with the knowledge of your retreat. " Lord Raby at first expressed hi* entire approbation of our condnct, and seemed delighted at our happiness, and that of my son and daughter, for so I styled our Edric ; but the joy he experienced was soon checked, when he learnt your mysterious loss, and our inability to find you; and was much astonished that Edric was also missing. " He declared, that as soon as his health was restored, he would search the mystery out; and suggested the idea that it was some private enemy who had acted thus, to distress and * wound my feelings; or why was Edric also absent at this important period. He was sensible that nothing but a grievous misfortune would have pre¬ vailed oil Edric's being absent from H&
the army* He thought it was a com¬ mon cause, and ought minutely to be examined and attended to. " 1 told him my businessthat day at Waltham Abbey, when I was so for¬ tunate to meet with him, though in such a situation, was on suspicion that Edric was detained there; but was disappointed. However, I determined tp lay the young Edric Conway's case before the King, and I did not doubt of having him released ; whictv agree¬ ably to my promise, I sent by a mes¬ senger ; and Edric Conway paid me iis respects in person the following day. " Lord Raby soon recovered, and grew quite hearty, all but his anxiety to find you and Elgiva, whom I repre¬ sented about the same age as wh§n you left Raby Qjastle, 1 al§o mentioned < JjSlgiwty .rtta^nent to Edric, which
seemed to give him great satisfaction ; for he declared, he had always held, the amiable Edric in the highest esti¬ mation, though he never imagined under wliose care he had beenv reared.. " The day previous to that in which- he proposed to leave me, the welcome messenger arrived with information that you were found, and orders for me to repair to Shrewsbury, to hear further particulars. I shewed Lord Raby the happy command, and had only time to give an account of my absence for about ten days, and set out post, travelling night and day till I had the happiness of seeing you. Lord Raby said he should follow im¬ mediately, as he was anxious to see you. Being only just recovered, I begged he would take the usual rest by*the way, that he might not endan¬ ger his health. And now, my dearest u6
Ellen, you may soon expect to behold Wir father." Ellen wept several times during Lord Rosenberg's relation, and ex¬ pressed her happiness in the expecta¬ tion of seeing and being forgiven by her father, whose severity and am¬ bition bad Compelled her to forsake his protection, which at times had caused her great uneasiness. The day was passed happily—Sir Bernard and Lady Melbourne strove who should excel in kind attention to their guests. Late in the evening Lord Raby arrived, and was received with open arms and unfeigned affec¬ tion by his long-lost daughter. Tears of joy precluded words on all sides. Lord Raby assured Ellen of his entire forgiveness, and the happiness he en¬ joyed in once more beholding his ami¬ able and beloved child.
Lady Rosenberg then presented Elgiva to her father; he was surprised at the sight of her,.to think he had such a relation..so much like his daughter at the time of her leaving: him, and regretted not having known it before, that he might have had a share in forming her education to that situation in life ha hoped to see her enjoy. The happy party then partook of supper, and soon after retired to rest,, proposing to pay a visit to Lady Jane and Edric at St. Egbert's Castle early in the morning.
CHAPTER XXXIL
The cheerful sun rose supremely grand,, and. invited the happy Lord 5 " Raby to escort his long-lost daughter/ and her affectionate husband and child, to St. Egbert's Castta. Sir Bernard and Lady Melbourne were of the party, anxious to behold Lady Jane, who was declared the mother of Edric* They set out in different carriages,. attended by a party of friends, de¬ lighted that such a pleasing oppor¬ tunity offered as the congratulation of Edric to estates and title, when once all his estate was his sword. Brought up as a forester, he had no other title: - now fortune had blessed him witli
lK)th; and what was far more de¬ sirable, he knew to whom he owed his being, which was a happiness he nevei? dreamt of enjoying. They arrived safe at St. Egbert's Castle, where they were welcomed by its excellent inhabitants with every demonstration of joy,, after the several parties were introduced to each other. Edrie, whose joy at seeing his friend and Lord Raby so happily agreeable* as also wishing to explain the cause of his long absence, took a hand of each and led them to the drawing room> leaving Lady Jane to conduct the ladies and Sir Bernard* A most happy day ensued of mu¬ tual explanations; till. Edric intro¬ duced the subject of Fitzosric's vil¬ lany, and wished to take the advice of all his friends how to proceed in such an affair. " For myself," said he, " the
last attempt, I pardon him most hear¬ tily; for though he proposed to take my life, Divine Justice would not permit it; and my seizure and captivity was^ decreed by the unerring hand of Pro¬ vidence, to explain to irie the mystery of my birth—to restore me to my rights —and to succour Elgiva, Lady Rosen¬ berg, and my amiable mother, " Lady Rosenberg and her daugh¬ ter are safe ; but Jiow can I pardon the treacherous murder of my father?— the intended destruction of myself when a child—the misery and distract tion it caused Lady Jane for my sup¬ posed loss—his infamous treatment of her in various instances—and, last of nil* designing her death; which no¬ thing but a miracle could prevent-— nay, he believed her dead, and saw her b buried. If I pass over the murder of Birtha Siward, and treat it as an acci¬ dent, as it really was—4mt the instru-
ment which gave her death was aimed against his unoffending wife. The hapless young creature seeing his in¬ tention, and wishing to save her bene¬ factress, rushed to prevent the blow, and received the fatal point in her bosom. The cruel Fitzosric, still in¬ spired by revenge, could not rest till he had executed his horrid designs on the unhappy Lady Jane. Pity touched the heart of the man he fixed on to assist him, and he saved her. To him I am indebted for the blessing of the present moment! at leisure, I shall more minutely explain every thing; but at present, I wish to know how you think it will be best to act. Mercy is undoubtedly due in some instances, but the murderer ought not to escape; it is wronging justice to pass lightly over such enormities." Lord Raby. as being more advanced
in years,, first offered bis opinion. Ho* assured Edric, that unless the Baron. was brought to justice, and received the reward of his crimes, he would bo g;uijfj of violating the mo&t sacred Jaws,, for suffering a person guilty of such enormities, as he perceived the Baron was, ta go un punished. It would be; giving authority to the most atrocious acts, a,nd enable him to com¬ mit fresh crimes - y as Edric might be certain, he who could* kill the father,. who was bis friend—design to destroy the son through avarice-—murder his, wife because she was acquainted with his infamy, was a person never to bo nelied.on* For if there was a possibi¬ lity of. pardoning him, his private. malice, after being compelled to restore bis illrgptten possessions—ihe re-ap¬ pearance of Lady Jane—-the restora¬ tion of Edric—the exposure of his villanous character—he would &eek.
an opportunity of revenging himself on the innocent causes of his disgrace* and they could not rest in safety. Such also was the opinion of Lord Rosenberg, Sir Bernard Melbourne, and his friends ; observing, that, the in* jurer seldom forgives the injured, and never thanked him for his lenity; but on the contrary, embrace every op-» portunity of wounding the peaqe and happiness, of those whom they have wronged. " Let the officers of justice be sent for," said Sir Bernard Mel¬ bourne, "and deliver him over to be acquitted or condemned by the laws of his country." Immediately a party was despatched to Shrewsbury prison, to order some of the officers to attend, and take him into custody. Edric said he did not wish ta triumph over the feelings of a fallen eneaiy—though the Baron had, nao^
insultingly and unmanly treated him, when brought into his presence by the miscreants tbftt were hired to assas¬ sinate him; but he thought it would be necessary to let him know, that Ellen and Elgiva were restored to their friends. Ethelwald was now introduced to the company as the person who had formerly saved the life of Edric, when the Baron meditated to destroy him in his eiildhood; as also that he ex¬ plained to Lady Jane whp was the murderer of Lord Wallingford—and the more immediate preserver and pro¬ tector of herself for so many years, as she had been indebted to him for his care and secrecy. Ethelwald received the thanks of aM parties, and then repeated the par¬ ticulars of what has been before re¬ lated. He was desired to remain with
the party present, as they all esteemed him a friend. It was near seven o'clock when the carriage and officers arrived from Shrewsbury, They were conducted to the place where the Baron was con¬ fined ; where, having secured his per¬ son, they led him to the drawing room, where the first people who met his eyes, were Ellen and Elgiva. He started at the sight! for he could not imagine how it was possible for Ellen to make her escape from the place wherein he had confined her.' Next Lady Jane, the afflicted long-suffering aud much-wronged wife: he looked on her, while sentiments of a tender na¬ ture swelled his heart; for once ixll his hopes of ambition and love were sum¬ med up in the idea of obtaining her; and he mentally thought how he could have been capable of wronging such excellence. Lords Raby and: Rosen-*
berg he had some knowledge of, and Was astonished to, find, that Ellen vt v as the wife of the latter. But when he saw Ethelwald, he began to think he was betrayed by him*; mfcfe especially that to him he owcld his present mis¬ fortunes; and when he called to mind that Edrie, when an infant, was left to his care. He now found himself de¬ ceived, in supposing the heir of Wal- Kngford was dead; and the most bitter revenge swelled his breast, and had he the* power* he would have reeked his vengeance on Ethelwald, for daring to gfc against his drcters; To him also th£ ftfneral of Lady -Jane was com* mitted ; and although* he had beew an eye witness to Hhe f interment and helped to elesfe the gravse* he found he h&i been again deceived^* ^Bdl& forbore ^ tnettttetl any thing to *give birn offence, 6f make hihtttn- ertsys lie ccfuld only thank Heavcfo fc*
Restoring L^dy Jane and all he held dear. But the Baron, as he was g*oin^ to be led from the drawing Toom, re¬ quested to speak a few words with Ethelwald* He advanced to meet him, and Fitzosric, snatching a fcword from the side of Ldrd Raby, attempted to plunge it into the bosom of Ethel¬ wald, exclaiming, "Die! thou dis* sembling traitor—take the reward of thy villanous services from the hand of thy employer i" The sword pierced Ethelwalds arm; and the Baron was more strongly secured, before he could be guilty of further mischief. He was hurried to the carriage, while every one was busily employed in giving every assistance to Ethelwald his case required. The wmmd was trifling; l but they wleri afl greatly alarmed atUhe Vindictive spirit ! of the BaroA. *- '»■ , ^ > *,: , •? *, : Edric ntow 1 bcolfoct^d l d^w|, aiVd
had him also escorted to Shrewsbury, desiring he might be kept apart from the Ba,ron, as it was njecessary to have his evidence on the day of trial; and Edric believed him to be too danger¬ ous a character to suffer him to remain / in the C^tle, or put any confidence in a wretch who could be purchased by money to execute the most atrocious deeds. Lucius and his other accom¬ plices were no where to be found ; but it was generally supposed they were on the search after Ellen and Elgiva. They were conveyed to Shrewsbury, and safely lodged in the Castle. Tranquillity being again restored, (for they were all extremely confused at Ejhelwild's accident,) Edric en¬ treated Lord Raby, with I-ord and Lady Rosenberg and their dear daugh¬ ter, to make the Castle their home, till he was established in tlie full pos¬ session of his rights. He also begged
they would no longer delay his happi" ness; but grant him the hand of his Elgiva, whose heart he flattered him¬ self he had long enjoyed, as he could assure them she most fully possessed his. And as now he had a place to call his own, he should know no greater felicity than to make his dear Elgiva mistress of it. A nd as she had been the companion of his humble for* tune, so also he trusted she would share his prosperity ; as he was in¬ debted to her for the mysterious dis- covery of his amiable mother, and the good fortune that awaited him. Lord Raby said he thought he had a right to have some share in the dis¬ posal of his grand-daughter; and he should bestow on her a very ample fortune, to make her a suitable alliance to the man of her heart. Elgiva thanked him p:;ofus«iy; but voi,. in. i
as she seemed to hesitate, Edric said, " My beloved Elgiva, I hope you do *iot repent of your promise ?" " Never, my Edric," she replied ; " I thought you knew my heart too well to harbour such a doubt." " Well then," said Edric, « let us fix this day week, while we are hap¬ pily surrounded by our friends. Will that be time enough for preparation ? For I mean to make it a day of joy to all my tenants and domestics—to ce¬ lebrate not only our marriage, but my being restored to my paternal domain, and the comforts that surround me." All parties seemed happy at the proposal; and Elgiva said she had not a wish in opposition. Lady Jane pressed the amiable girl to her heart with the most lively transports,^alling her her dear danghfer. f
A few days passed over, making the necessary preparations for the ap¬ proaching festival; during which time Lady Jane and Edric, with their friends, went round to see their dif¬ ferent tenants, and to present the Earl of Wallingford as their present Lord. Great was the satisfaction of every one, to behold once more Lady Jane, who had been supposed dead so many years; and in Edric they imagined they be* held their late Lord—so much he re¬ sembled him. They testify their joy at this unlooked*for restoration^ and the removal of the tyrannous Fitzosric with most lively joy. Bon¬ fires illumined the adjacent villages, where his tenants resided ; and mirth and dancing exhilarated the spirits of all Old Siward was still alive. He was amazed to behold Lady Jane Fitzosric ; yet, anxious to learn the real i2
froth of Ms Birtha's unhappy fate, begged m few moments' private con* versatkm with itibat lady. Having been informed that Birtha had been buried within the last week at Shrewsbury, he thought she had imi just died, and, in his own heart, had execrated.her cruelly unkmd conduct, in keeping her¬ self so long secret {mm him, and living in an iafawnis connexion with a mar¬ ried man, for the isake of his riches. Lady Jane was sorry to *»nd Siward entertained such an ill opinion of his daughters filial duty; and, to clear lier from the imputation, was com¬ pelled to recite the whole of that sin¬ gular affair; though, in vindicating Birtha's conduct, .she was compelled to increase the unhappy Siward's grief, when she assured him that Birtha was unfortunately Wiled, endeavouring to MWP IMy £&» e {tom * threatened ij^tfe w *e w day if was given out that the latter 4ied.
weeping oH Sivvar^, clasping hit hands, "my child has suffered; but she was not,.. *.. .. her conduct was not abandoned—she lost no^ the native innocence and virtue of her mind, which was my pride, though a poor man. Spirit of my dea* girl, hover to hear me moufn thy untimely >:fkt& 9 and s forgive Ihe many unkind thoughts I have entertained of you during this lapse of tvme; when I considered you were living m a state of infamy, wrong- ing in the keenest sense tile feelings of an abused wife, and forgetful of every sacred tie^ and your poor father^—and with your gay seducer triumphing in wickedness^ when, aks! poor unfep- tunate! you were numbered with* tlte dead, and undeserving my reproaches. I thauk you* worthy Lady; you hctve eased my mind by relating the twtfr; 1 shall now die contented. The Baron, 1 hear, is likely to* suffer for strange ■t-3. '.''■
crimes ; one of the greatest is his con¬ duct to you—the heinous sin of ruining your happiness, by bringing another woman to live under your roof, and insult your feelings by the loss of a husband's love, the keenest affliction and insult that a virtuous wife can feel. But my Bktha never intentionally wronged you; she did not submit to the Baron from choice, but was com¬ pelled to resign herself to his power. However, your wrongs are redressed; the Almighty has avenged them. I return you roy sincere thanks, dear Lady, and to your excellent son, for your attention to the remains of my hapless girl; and if I live till to¬ morrow, I will go to Shrewsbury, and enjoy the heartfelt though mournful satisfaction of weeping over the tomb your humanity has raised to her memory." He then turned aside> unable to
suppress the effusion of grief that was ready to burst his aching heart. Lady Jane requested he would call on her at St. Egberts Castle, as it was her wish to make the remainder of his life as comfortable as was in her power; though neither herself nor Siward could be supposed to forget the mis¬ fortunes under which they had la¬ boured. Siward profusely thanked her, and she returned to her party, who soon after repaired to the Castle. In the evening, when they were all seated iu social conversation, Lady Jane said, " You have heard of the haunted chamber, and in fact know something of its mysteries, by its being the place that afforded me a safe retreat when every other was denied, I have now to explain it more fully, in order that so valuable and beautiful i 4
a part of St Egbert's Castle is no lon¬ ger under the dominion of that stupid superstition, that has so long prevented rne from having any communication with any one in the Castle except Ethelwald. " In the reign of Alfred the Great, the yea* 877, a Danish nobleman of great rank was taken prisoner, and brought to the Castle of St. Egbert, where he was confined for some time, though treated with great hospitality by my ancestor Lord Sefrid. He had such an esteem for the Dane, that under favour of the night he suffered the stranger to escape, but yet perse¬ vered in the assertion that he was still imprisoned in the north chambers, and would not suffer any one to attend him but himself. ** After a supposed confinement of several vears, and Edward the Elder
^oming^tothe^ throne, it was rumoured" that the Danes had concerted apian to invade England. Incensed at their proceedings, Edward* ordered all the Danish prisoners to be destroyed, and Lord Sefrid, finding it impossible any* longer to seem to protect his friend 1 (whom he had long before suffered* tor return home), took upon himself the king's order for the Dane to be killed. This was the cause that gave rise to* the murder of the Danish* Lord; the papers of which account have never yet fell into Fitzosric's hands, but have been studiously concealed, to preserve the mystery of the haunted chamber, u To deceive Edward the more effectually, who was much inclined to superstition, yet apprehensive of being deceived, Lord Sefrid declared, that since the death of the noble Dane, the chambers wherein he was confined, and the galery leading to them, were i 5
continually haunted by his restless spirit. " Edward was determined to know the truth of it, and sent a nobleman on whom he could depend to examine and more particularly inquire into the affair* On this occasion Lord Sefrid was obliged to dress up a trusty ser¬ vant, in a Danish habit, such as the prisoner used to wear, to walk about the Castle, personating the Dane as if he haunted it:—and this, according to my paper, seems to be the origin of the mystery of the haunted chamber. " After Lord Sefrid's death, his son Arnulph,for particular reasons, thought it necessary to keep up the delusion. 1 have often, in company with my dear departed Wallingford, read the cause of the mystery of the north chambers. But we have lost ourselves in conjec¬ turing why, after that time, St. Eg-
bert's Castle was reported to be haunted, and was amazed at the su¬ perstition of his ancestors, who could so foolishly resign the best part of the Castle with its valuable effects, in sup¬ port of such a credulous idea; but as the clergy had ordered it to be shut up, we submitted to it. " Years have passed away, and the mystery of this affair has not been elu¬ cidated, till I was made an inhabitant of that place by the care of Ethelwald, knowing that no one would think of seeking me there ; and for the sake of preserving my life, had ventured to examine these forbidden apartments, unmindful of the prohibition, in order to obtain a place of safety, for which I sincerely thank him, " When first he told me that I was in the north chambers, I could scaroe credit my senses; for I was astonished . i 6
to know, htw he eould have entered them, as I myself did not know where the l£f*ys were deposited. He inquired if I had rested in safety during my stay, as the room I slept in, and the bed whereon I lay, was that where the Danish Lord was supposed to be mur¬ dered. *' I assured him that I had never rested in more perfect quiet, and that I did not believe a word of the idea that credulous persons imbibed of those chambers being haunted, and was sorry that such a beautiful part of the Castle should have been so long ne¬ glected ; but was happy to find it so, as'my very life depended on the super¬ stitious belief. I remembered the paper, which since the death of Lord Wallingford I had always kept in my pocket-book, I knew not for why, any more than as the Baron Fitzosric had behaved so ill to me, and finding him
inclining to the belief, resolved ta let it remain so, that in possessing the estates of Lord Wallingford, his happi¬ ness, and, as I sometimes fancied, his ambitious designs, might not be com¬ plete. " Ethelwald informed me, that after having received orders from the* Baron to give me poison, and declare my death, his mind underwent suchs extreme uneasiness,, and he was an hundred times about to relinquish the cruel command;. but, fearing some. one less scrupulous might be engaged. by the Barcn, he thought it best to ua*^ dertake it, with the hopes of saving me; for Fitzosric's crimes had excited, his abhorrence. " For this reason he made the at¬ tempt to open the north chambers, and in so doing, a small door opened on the side % a spring, which admitted
his entrance into a noble suite of rooms: firsrminntely examining how the door opened, and being satisfied therein, he went to explore the chambers that had always occasioned such alarm to* the inhabitants of the Castle. Ethel¬ wald, in his private thoughts, had never yielded to the superstitious re¬ port of the Danish spectre. Yet, anxious to preserve my life, and kuow- ing no place so securely to conceal me, he had ventured to examine that place in the short interval, and endeavoured to prepare every thing ready for my reception, for which I am highly in¬ debted to him." Lady Jane had been an inhabitant of the north chambers about eight months, and in some measure resigned to her fate, when, for amusement, she one day looked over the contents of a handsome cabinet, and, to her surprise,, found the following paper, supposed ta be written by Ethelfrida:—
" MANUSCRIPT. " The mystery of the haunted chambers was only known to Lord Sefrid, the Noble Bane, Lord Arnulph, and myself, at the time when I took up my residence in that part of St. Egbert's Castle. " The writer's name is Ethelfrida, sister to King Edward, I entertained the most un¬ bounded affection for Lord Arnulph, and as he was a nobleman of great worth, I flattered myself that my brother would behold him with the favourable eyes I did, and consent to our union. I had a mortifying denial to my request, and a command never to think of or mention his name again. " I found it impossible to forget Lord Arnulph, though I fortunately made the King imagine that I had conquered what he fan¬ cied an ill-placed affection, and widiin the course of a few months he affianced me to a foreign prince. My heart revolted at the mere imagination of leaving my beloved Arnulph, the idol of my heart. But I was- compelled to be the wife of a stranger, and bitterly I lamented the separation. M Lord Arnulph suffered as much dis¬ tress as I had done, in being obliged to quit my native land, and he determined to prevent it if there was a possibility. Upon inquiry, he
found that the captain of the vessel in which* I was to embark with a fawurite attendant, was a particular friend of his. fhe captain had » desire to serve him, bat disdained the thought of any reward, and proposed for Arnulph to go to a place whei* he appointed,. and take a boat a* if by accident, where he would endeavour to run the s&ip aground, so that in the confusion I and my attendant might fee missing, and no one know but that we were lost. ft Lord Arnulph attended at the place he had appointed, with * large boat: but as I inew nothing of the plan I embarked with my attendant, Christiana,, and with a heavy hearfc and weeping eyes bade adieu to Eng¬ land, and, as I thought, all I held dear. The weather was Yery unfavourable, for the wind blew a heavy gale, and in a few hours in* creased to ft storm; I clung to Christiana with unusual terror*—the sea ran, what the sailors termed, mountains high; and indeed the aspect of the angry waves almost overcame me with terser, and we were in great distress; more especially as the Captain strove all in his power to make to a particular spot. At that moment, & wave threw us upon a- sand-hank, and there we lay beating fell the ship was m
danger of going to pieces. The captain was st-Wible of the danger, and, looking round, observed a boat making towards us. With the nope of being saved, he advised me to jump overboard, and trust to the mercy of the waves to save me. I hesitated, but he whispered, that Lord Arnulph was in the boat which he saw at a short distance, coming to save me, I gazed at the captain with wild astonishment, and scarce crediting my hear¬ ing—looked round, and plainly discovered Arnulph in a boat, making towards us, with four rowers. I communicated the captain's intelligence and my observation to Christiana, and entreated her to venture with me. She looked at the boat the captain pointed out, and with joy beheld Lord Arnulph. The storm increased...we no longer hesi¬ tated ; for the captain told us, to risque the waves, was the only way to save our lives; for if we remained with the vessel, it would soon go to pieces. I remembered to whom I was going...more hateful than death itself; and rather than be torn from Arnulph, to be another's, I would prefer to combat the tur¬ bulent waves; therefore, casting a smile of thanks on the captain, and taking Christiana's hand we resolutely leaped overboard...and*
with the mercy of Heaven, were picked up in safety by Lord Aruuiph, and happily con¬ veyed to the shore. " The vessel soon after cleared itself of the sand (as.I was informed by Arnulph &ome time after our preservation) with very trifling damage, and my loss and Christiana's were con¬ sidered to have been washed overboard, as wo could not bti prevailed on to leave the deck. " Wrapped up in the disguise of pilgrims, we proceeded the way Lord Arnulph directed lu St. Egbert's Castle, as he lei't us to pre¬ pare a reception, as well as to avoid suspicion. He fixed my residence in that suite of apart¬ ments where the Danish Lord was supposed tu be murdered by the command of my brother Edward ; at the same time assuring me I had nothing to apprehend. As soon as we reached St. Egbert's Castle, 1 was conveyed with my faithful Christiana, where a priest waited and United me to Lord Arnulph. " I iiad as many attendants as T could wish for, in that part of the Castle, which had. every convenience, as it were for a s( parate family, who had no communication with the other part, except Lord Arnulph, who was the only person who ever entered the north gallery.
^ The idea of the murder of the Danish Lord, so powerfully possessed the minds of all the domestics, that Arnulph found it a diffi¬ culty to appease their apprehensions. And to preserve my retreat a secret from his own jwople, as well a& my brother, he gave way to their idle fears, and allowed them to yield to llie superstitious idea, that the Castle was haunted. •« Here I was brought to bed of a daugh¬ ter, named Haroidina. She was nursed with the tenderest care till iifteen months old, when she was taken from the Castle, to be restored to it as a foundling, that her father might be able to bring her up in a manner suitable to her rank, as likewise that she should have air and exercise, which could not be so conveni¬ ently given her, in my retired situation. And now it was that Arnulph, hearing the servants continually complain of the north chambers and gallery being haunted, suffered himself to be prevailed on to have the supposed spirit of the Dane laid ; in the north chambers the ceremony passed; tlie door was accordingly secured, and the keys put out of the way. "In this manner I have lived eighteen years. Haroidina is married to Lord WaU ffaford. My brother Edward ib IuhuH ex*
pected to leave this world. I have several times seen Haroidina, but at present she is unacquainted that I am her mother, or that Lord Arnulph is her father, I have been extremely happy during my marriage, and shall soon have the pleasure of visiting Haroi¬ dina, and letting her know the reason of this mysterious concealment, " I have two motives for writing this nar¬ rative—the first to do away with every super¬ stitious idea, respecting the supposed spectre of the Dane, and to elucidate the history of the haunted chamber, if any one should ven¬ ture to develope it; for it is a pity so noble a part of the Ca»tle should be the victim of superstition—secondly, to let the reader know that Lady Haroidina Wallingford is nobly born, the daughter of Ethelfrida (sister to King Edward) and Lord Arnulph, sole heiress of this Castle and estate, so that no person need doubt the legality of her claim and birth. " And may the person who enters this place, either by a wish to discover the mystery of it, or through misfortune compelled to seek an asylum here...may they find that the ru¬ mour of the chambers 1 being haunted is all a faV.e to delude the credulous—and may the -
find that happiness while here, which I have experienced so many years I " Ethelfrida " Thus was the mystery of the haunted chamber unexpectedly revealed* to the great satisfaction of all present; and the north gal¬ lery was in a short time no longer the dreadful place which many had imagined it to be; and Edric Lord Wallingford found that he was descended from the sister of King Edward the Elder. In a few days the marriage between Edric and Elgiva took place, and was celebrated with that magnificence which was the custom of ancient times, Joy was in every face, and every one of his tenants strove to vie with each other in expressing their affection and grati¬ tude to the rightful Lord, in whose family the estate had been many years, till wrested from him by the treacherous conduct of Fitzosric. Fitzosric, while in prison, bribed one of the keepers to let him know how affairs were going on at the Castle of St Egbert; finding by the report that Edric was married to Elgiva, and Ellen restored to her husband, as also that
every body allowed the justness of EdricV claim. He also knew that every body was acquainted with his own base conduct, and dreaded the event of tlie trial in a court of justice; for Ethelwald was a powerful witness against him, as he knew almost all his secrets; and if there was a possibility of escaping from prison, he could never shew his face. To put an end to these tormenting thoughts, lie deter¬ mined to take the poison he formerly in¬ tended, happy to find he had it yet in hk power to avoid, what he judged would await him, an ignominious death. Tired with the weight of guilt which bur¬ dened his soul, he took the earliest opportu¬ nity of drinking an oblivion to all his cares. No sooner had he swallowed it, but it pleased God to touch his heart, and lie sin¬ cerely repented of all his crimes. He wrote a most affecting letter to Lady Jane, in which he implored her forgiveness of the many wrongs he had been guilty of to her, and be¬ queathed her all his estates, which were very Considerable. He confessed that all which had transpired was strictly true, and that Ethei'- wald's word might be relied on. After having concluded his letter, he felt death approaching, and passed the few re-
maiuing minutes of his existence in praj'ers to Heaven, imploring mercy for his sins, and died a true penitent:—and though his sins "were great and many, let us hope he was for¬ given.* His untimely end cast a gloom over St. Egbert's Castle for a sliort time; for whatever might have been his own feelings, there was no one in the Castle but from the first moment of knowing any thing of him, had found him an obdurate, unprincipled tyrant, truly despo¬ tic m every action of his life, of which the reader may be able to judge Tfom his conduct to all the parties concerned in this history. They united their prayers to Heaven, that as he had expiated his faults witli his life, he might obtain pardon in the world to come. Happiness was soon restored to the Castle. Lady Jaue chose to reside with her son and daughter, and iutrcated to be indulged uith the north chambers while she remained with them. The estates of the Baron Tit/osric were al&o used in common between them. Lord Rosenberg purchased a noble seat near St. Egbert's Castle, to which a few years after he retired, as soon as the King could fix on a person to his choice to supply his place; for Lord Itosenberg did not like the busy scenes
of life, having always been used to retirement and his beloved Ellen. His removal to Lon¬ don had caused him much unhappiness, in bebg separated from her. Lord Kaby also came to reside near them, and lived to a great age iu the loved company of those so dear to him. Lady Rosenberg soon after had a son, who was named Edgar, after his father, and lived to be a person highly honoured. Elgiva had a numerous family, the de¬ light of their parents, and joy of the country round. Lady Jane found in the society of her long absent friend Ellen, and that of her daughter, as much felicity as could fall to the share of a reasonable being, which helped in a measure to chase away a retrospection of the calamities of her earlier years; and their friendship and happiness continued till the end of their existence. Edric, Earl of Wallingford, amply re¬ warded Ethelwald for his past kindnesses, and they lived in the strictest friendship, for to him Edric considered himself indebted, not only for life, but fortune, and every com¬ fort he now enjoyed. FINM. JPrint&by P»,& SU&RY ( Mtrwick Street, Soho, L<mdon>
