EDGAR: 



A NATIONAL TALE. 



By miss APPLETON, 

AUTHOR OF PRIVATE EDUCATION, &C. 



God and my Right. 

Edwaid III. King of England. 

Man he mad?, and for 1 im built, 

Magnificent, thi» world, and Earth his seat. 
Him Lord pronounced ; 

Subjected to liis service, angel-wings, 

And flaming ministers, to watcli and tend 

Their earthly charge. 

Milton. Paradise Lost, b. ix- 

To you a Father sliould be as a God, 

One that compos'd your beauties j yea, and one 

To whom you are but as a form in wax 

By him imprinted ; and within his power 

To leave the figure, or disfigure it. 

hhakespeare. Midi. Night's Dream. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. II. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR HENRY COLBURN, 
PUBLIC LIBRARY^ CONDUIT STREET^ HANOVER SaUARE, 

1816. 



I'liiUed by Cux aiifl Bajlis, 
Great Queen Street, Liiuolii's-Inn-Ficlds. 



^^ 3 



EDGAR 



BOOK Vllf. 
THE ACTION. 



Horror! thou eldest sister of Fear, how 
frightful is thine approach 1 Oh, touch 
me not, lest crawling worms drop from 
thy finger, and bristle up every pore of 
my flesh. Oh, haste away, that thy odious 
song buzz not in mine ear, that my brain 
beat not to madness, that my heart bound 
not so dreadful within my breast. How 
hateful art thou w^ith all thine artifice to 
raise the ringlet, to dash backward the 
stream of life, to enchain the fine organ of 
speech, to force the orbs of vision from 
their beds. How doth it rejoice thy savage 
mind to hear the smothered scream, and 
the convulsive laugh, and to see the dis- 
torted limb, the severed jaws ! \yjiilst 
VOL. II. B thou, 



2 E I) G A 11. 

thou, to increase the agony, beginnest-to 
raise up the lantern to ligiit imagination to a 
deeper ^picture. To the young mother, 
thou holdest by an arm, a httle infant be- 
smeared in its own brains. To the tender 
wife, ^a husband dashing from rock to rock, 
and at last his remains thou gatherest up 
in thy hand, and spreadest out every bit 
by turns. To the affectionate son, thou 
shewest a father clasping the briny wave 
for refreshment, and then leaping in mad- 
ness to the shark's tooth. To the faithful 
friend, thou displayest a heart wallowing 
in black and treaclierous blood. For every 
one, canst thou fiiul an agonizing sight. 
Merciless being, and powerful as thou art, 
none can stem thy malice but Virtue with 
the torch of Piety ! 

'I he breast of Atheling still glowed with 
deiight in the release of his friend, when 
the Marshal commanded him into his pre- 
sence. His look was cold and changed ; 
the fervour of the moment had passed, and 
he now feared the displeasure of his court, 
that he had not imprisoned both young 
nMes4 He, notwithstanding, said with 

courtesy, 



BOOK VIII. 3 

courtesy, ♦* My lord, you will prepare in- 
stantly for your departure to the capital. 
The whole English army, with our unfor- 
tunate monarch, will pass near this town 
to-morrow. I dare not longer detain yon. 
Yet, judge of my esteem, when a Marshal 
of France gives a captive reasons. But," 
added he, and put his hand to his breast, 
bending low, *' this captive is his be- 
nefactor." " Name it not, my lord," 
proudly answered Atheling, " the benefit 
conferred upon me in the release of my 
friend, not only cancels every other obliga- 
tion, but leaves me your debtor. — Sir, I 
am ready." Then the governor led him by 
the hand, and respectfully aiding him to 
mount the steed allotted him, gave him in 
charge to fifty men at arms, and two 
knights, to whom he entrusted letters to 
the Dauphin, and enjoining respect to the 
noble prisoner, bade him farewell. 

The young chief hastened through Poic- 
tiers, and mounting a hill, looked back to 
a distance, and beheld the camp of the 
victorious English. ** Beloved people, 
heaven bless you !— and thou too, my noble 

B 2 "Warwick 



"* EDGAR. 

Warwiek— and my Prince.'* Quickly lie- 
turned away his head, for his great soul 
swelled high to nature and honour. But 
presently, at full speed, rode the band, for 
they too caught the distant sight, and were 
appalled in that which roused the pride 
and tenderness of Edgar. 

Theknights, humbleci bythelate disaster, 
scarce spoke on the journey ; and Athe- 
ling regarded wit;! indifference the fine 
country that smiled around him — so sHght- 
ly do outward matters affjct, when the 
mind is labouring with emotion. On the 
third evening, tlie little troop entered Paris, 
and one of the knights spurring before his 
charge, proceeded to the palace of the 
Bishop of Laon,^° president of the coun- 
cil, with whom he found tiie Dauphin 
Charles, now Lieutenant of France, in the 
absence of his father. The letters were 
perused, and the captive was demanded, 

Edgar, wlio stood without by his guard, 
now with modest firmness advanced, bow- 
ed, and waited in silence. Charles fixed 
his keen eye upon tlie chieftain, whose 
exploits had oft been sounded in his un- 
willing 



BOOK VIII. 5 



willing presence. He contemplated his 
youthful stature, and then looking upon 
himself, his elder by two years, hesitated 
what to say, and glanced upon his minister. 

" I," said the proud bishop, *' I will 
interrogate the prisoner. Sir, please you 
to state your reasons for desiring an inter- 
view with the Dauphin.'* 

The pure and lovely flakes of snow, pressed 
in the hand and dashed to earth, are vainly 
attempted to be dispersed ; they cling toge- 
ther, they accumulate, they harden, they 
swell, with every fresh effort, and at length, 
present a dangerous and bulky mass: thus 
do they resent force, but caressed by onege - 
iiial beam, they sparkle, smile, weep and 
dissolve away in tenderness. So the gentle 
countenance of Atheling, ever sensible to 
kindness, now proudly swelled with disdain 
at the voice and manner of the president. 
" Sir," said he, *' whatever be my reasons, 
consider them as addressed to the Dau- 
phin," then turning to Charles, he conti- 
nued thus : 

" I had, Sir, a brave and generous friend, 
who, on a late occasion, ventured too far 

B 3 in 



6 EDGAR. 

in a pursuit ; he was wounded in Poictiers, 
and lay dangerously ill ; and as I feared for 
his life and thought an exchange not dis- 
honourable to your interests, I proposed, 
entreated, and succeeded— judging, that 
as in such a case a peer of France might 
be allowed his ransom, that I also might 
obtain the like favour j for know. Sir, that 
I have parents of some honour in England ; 
wherefore, you have but to name the sum, 
and I dare aver that in one month it shall 
be transmitted." 

" By what title is your father known, 
Sir ?" enquired the Dauphin. *' He is," 
replied Edgar, *« the Earl of Mercia, a title 
long since extinct, but revived in his fami- 
ly ; and he is descended from the blood- 
royal of my country." As the young 
hero uttered these words, his anger subsid- 
ed. The image of a beloved father, a 
tender mother, a happy home, rose on his 
imagination, and he cast his brilliant eye 
once more on the ground. Charles, inex- 
perienced and undetermined, looked to his 
minister. Edgar saw not the motion ; but 
he recollected that he had failed in respect 

to 



BOOK VIII. 7 

to a man of the church, and an elder-— he 
stepped to him with modesty, and bend- 
ing, said, " Reverend father, I have been 
taught to respect age and the heads of re- 
ligion — I have spoken hastily — I have done 
wrong — I entreat you to pardon me ; I am 
young and full of error. Father, forgive 
me.'* The haughty prelate coldly touched 
the hand that was extended, and rising, 
led the Dauphin into another chamber, 
where, having stayed a moment, he re- 
turned alone, and calling to his people, 
said to Atheling, *' For the present, Sir, 
it is necessary that you retire to the castle ; 
your matter shall be deliberated in council, 
and the result you shall hear." Atheling 
grew pale, and would have replied, but the 
guards opened the way as tiie bishop waved 
his hand, and Edgar pressed on all sides, 
advanced a step — but suddenly paused. — 
** Sirs, do not hurry me — where do I go ? 
— where would you conduct me ?" " To 
the prison !" answered gloomily one. " To 
prison ?"— said Edgar, « ha ! I am a cap- 
tive ! 'tis well ; but may I not again see 
the Dauphin ?— I have a word— but surely 

B 4 my 



8 EDGAR. 

faith, my honour, might have satisfied. 
Why doth the bishop condemn me ?'* 

The assembled crowd gazed on Edgar at 
these imprudent words. " The bishop does 
well — he is our friend !" uttered a thousand 
voices. — " Who are you ? are you a friend 
to the Dauphin ? do you league with Na- 
varre against us? are you then a Briton, 
not satisfied with taking the King of France, 
but you come to insult us in our capital ?'* 
Huge stones were instantly levelled at the 
head of Atheling, and fiercely he laid his 
hand upon his sword. The crowd waited 
for the first attack, the arm suspended — 
Atheling would have been crushed to 
atoms J death seemed to hover near him j 
but suddenly, a figure enveloped in dark 
robes broke forward, and leaning near him, 
whispered in English — " Sir, be prudent, 
and think upon llestormal Castle,*' — and 
having said this much, it drew back, and 
was lost in the crowd. 

The young colt fresh from pasture spurns 
the ground, and indignant at the restraints 
of man, breaks loose from Jiim and rushes 
furiously towards an immense precipice — 

as 



BOOKVIII. 9 

as he flies, his ear suddenly catches the 
soft plaints of his mother — he stops, lis- 
tens — sweeps the earth with his dejected 
mane, and suffers his pursuers to overtake 
and seize him. Down dropped the hand of 
Edgar — trembling he looked on every side. 
" People, I submit — lead me ! '* he cried ; 
the sword returned to its sheath, — the 
crowd unbraced the arm — the guards has- 
tened onward, passed the massy gates of 
iron, mounted the staircase, opened the 
door, made way for tlie captive, saw him 
totter to the straw bed, closed and locked 
the door — drew its heavy bolts, and de- 
parted. 

Atheling sat mute ; his eye fixed on the 
bare wall of his prison, lost in amazement 
at the events of the day. Wiiat was to be 
the issue of this proceeding — how long to 
be confined — how to procure an interview 
with the Dauphin, and to gain some know- 
ledge of the strange figure that had ac- 
costed him, and saved his life. These, 
with thoughts of his prince, his country, 
liis friends, rushed confused to his mind, 
and fluttering to his bosom swelled it with 

B 5 silent 



10 EDGAR. 

silent passions whilst he himself remained 
motionless. So Nature when she would 
ride in a storm, first snatches from the coast 
a huge torpedo,"' and hastening round, 
touches the air, the tree, the wave, and 
beckoning to the frightened cloud, com- 
mands it to lean heavy on the bird's wing, 
that it may strive in vain to rise. A dread- 
ful stillness reigns; she herself stops the 
breath and shudders in her own work. 
But presently casting away the benumbing 
power, she strikes, first, the heavens — they 
open — -the electric fluid tears through the 
apertures, strikes its forky terrors, and 
drags after it a tremendous crash of roar- 
ing thunders, which bellow through the 
whole concave and echo to earth's founda- 
tion. Then the air is restored, and now 
rage the furious hurricanes, dragging up 
forests, overthrowing rocks, amassing pil- 
lars of sand within tiieir wliirl. Nature 
lastly reanimates the wave, and the gasp- 
ing animal, and looking terror, commands 
every creature to join the strife. The 
tree whose top grazed the clond, now 
dashes its head against the earth, drags off 

its 



BOOK VIII. 1 1 

its own arms, and plucks from its own 
side the leafy offspring, Tiie wave rolls 
its mad surge in mountains, and bursts into 
a dreadful roar, swallowing and sinking to 
its deepest valley, every object within the 
deadly grasp- The animal with eyeball 
glaring red, and starting from its socket, 
with hair crisping backward, curdled 
blood, and clammy jaw, now leaps upon 
the chasm which opens under his hoofi 
and now scours the howling plain to kick 
at the lightning, which dries up at a flash 
the aching sight, and transplants in the 
skull two hot cinders ! 

Atheling sat immoveable, till the bolts 
drew back, and a man with a taper ad- 
vanced and setting it on the ground, step- 
ped back and brought in bread, some 
fruit, and water. And now he would have 
retired, but Edgar roused to madness, 
darted upon him and furiously cried — 
" for what is all this preparation ? am I to 
be shut in here for life ? may I not see 
the Dauphin ? may I never be ransomed ? 
what is my crime, that I am treated as a 
criminal ? Speak — nay, kill me — I v/ill 

B 6 be 



12 EDGAR. 

be heard — is this the manner of England 
towards her noblest captives ? Strike — en- 
chain, buffet me speak I will — what cap- 
tives have you in this horrid place, and 
what time must I remain ?- why .vould not 
my word of honour suffice?— why, I say, 
am I treated as a criminal ? '* 

The man at first terrified, now levelled 
his strength at the prisoner — the helmet 
bounded from his head, and rolled off. 
Edgar again touched his sword, but his 
adversary was unarmed : he saw and hesi- 
tated — whilst the guard perceiving the 
generous struggle, aimed another blow 
which laid him senseless on the stone pave- 
ment. 

Fearing for his life, the man bent over 
him and saw that he breathed ; when clear- 
ing away the blood that streamed from the 
captive's fbreliead, he hastily girt the 
wound with a strip of leather which he 
drew from his belt, and then seizing the 
sword retired. 

It was midnight ere Atheling began to 
jevive from his stupor. During a few mo- 
ments he tried to recollect where and what 

was 



B O OK V I I I. IS 

was his situation ; but on touching his head 
that felt cold and stiff, he discovered the 
bandage ; and the throbbing ])ain that fol- 
lowed, brought back a recollection of the 
past scene. Weak, cold, exhausted, he 
with difficulty raised himself — the taper 
was extinguisiied ; but a friendly beam 
from the lovely evening star and the wan- 
ing crescent of the skies, gleamed upon his 
pallid cheek. Trembling he groped to 
the iron grating — the casement stood open, 
he leaned on the shelving edge, and mourn- 
ful watched the sweet aspect of nature. 
" Oh nature, nature !'* said he, " ever 
changing, yet ever consistent and true, 
how unlike to thee is man who in every 
variety strays a step further from the great 
designs of his Creator. Every day that is 
added to my number brings with it some 
new perplexity, some fresh cause to dis- 
gust myself How few are my actions that 
rejoice me to look, within this year that I 
have quitted my home — thou dear home, 
sweet scene of my infancy, when I used 
to pace thy haunts, I knew every shrub, 
every tree ! O my father, my beloved mo- 
ther, 



14 EDGAR. 

ther, I see thee at thy chapel as we part- 
ed — at my first separation I would say — 
our separation ? How did I quit her— I, 
who heard her scream at my voice, and 
saw her rush towards me, and I dared not 
embrace her ! — and mine the fault — mine 
the error — mine the uneasiness — alas ! 
Edgar, and hast thou not undone thyself 
by thy rash impetuosity, and steeled the 
heart of all, of all thine enemies against 
thee ? Art thou not, perhaps, shut in for 
thine existence ? — existence ? but what ? 
the life of man is not so long ; the planet 
runs his course around his sun, and then 
begins again. But man like a taper, ac- 
cepts his being, throws about him his 
little uncertain light, a whiff comes, and 
he is gone ! What matter then, his poor 
miseries, they must end j and, perhaps, 
Lord, as evil cannot spring from thee, thou 
permittest misfortunes to fall indiscri- 
minately on mankind, considering them as 
small objects, and beneath thy high inter- 
ference, for who is exempt from trouble ? 
But how often do our misfortunes originate 
in ourselves, our imprudence, or ill con- 
duct 



BOOK VIII. 15 

^]^ct — how often has my father taught me 
to think thus. My father 1 who trained 
me with such care — me, who so often 
offend — O heaven ; I am sick of myself." 
Thus saying, Edgar returned to the mat- 
trass, and bending over his knee hid his 
face, whilst his soul was drowned in grief. 

But Sleep which sheds no sweet in- 
fluence over the pillow of crimes, forsook 
not the self-accusing Atheling. In the 
attitude of despondence, immersed in the 
high tower of a state prison, surrounded 
by enemies, and resting on straw, none 
of these prevented the beauteous shades of 
youth from tending their beloved prince, 
and relaxing his lip into a smile, whilst 
his pure bosom heaved to the tranquil stroke 
of innocence and peace. 

At the dawn as was his habit, he awoke, 
refreshed and placid ; and having poured 
forth his soul to his Maker, received the 
guard, who cautiously unbolted the en- 
trance and stood armed, with a smile, and 
extending his hand made apology for the 
violence of the preceding day. The man 
replied with cold gravity. Whereupon, 

Edgar 



l6 EDGAR. 

Edgar answered, " I beseech you, Sir, 
mistrust me not ; I am mindful of my 
word, and will you but reveal to me the 
orders you have, provided you are not 
bound to secrecy, I never will betray you, 
and will hold myself for ever obliged. 
Surely I may hope to have my ransom ac- 
cepted ? " The man hesitated. " But, 
say then," cried Edgar, " whether others 
are confined in this place, and whether 
captives from its walls have any hope of 
appeal to the king ? This in truth is all I 
wished to ask of you yesterday." Edgar 
anxiously waited — but he waited in vain ; 
for the man replied not, and was leaving 
the chamber, when the Prince flung him- 
self on his knee, and holding him, cried, 
" O ! Sir, if you have a fluher, if you 
know what is the blessing of home ; if you 
love your country ; if you have ever earn- 
ed the glory of a soldier ; if you ever had 
the dread of breathing out a sad existence 
in a foreign prison, answer me." 

The man stopped. *' What do you de- 
sire to know ?*' said he, " whether there 
be prisoners in this castle ?" ** I answer, 

yes : '* 



B O O K VI I I. 17 

yes :" " Whether captives from its walls 
may appeal to the king ?" " We have no 
king ; did not yoar army seize his person, 
and may he not ere this, be on his passage 
for your hated soil. As for the rest, the 
Bishop governs here, and he is, be certain, 
your enemy." Thus saying, the guard shut 
the grating door and descended. 

Atheling caught the sentence as it fell 
like a thunderbolt on his ear. Amazed, he 
tried to collect himself from the mass of 
floating images that distracted his mind. 
One violent effort he made ; despair quick- 
ly sank, and hope, arrayed in smiles, by 
degrees rose, till she stood uppermost. 
Thus the branch is cast into the pool, and 
plunging downward, stirs up numerous par- 
ticles of soft clay, till the tumult spent 
ceases, and the drops refine as the branch 
sv/ims beautiful on the gentle wave, O 
generous and compassionate Providence ! 
when man knoweth not his calamitv, but 
only apprehends it, his heart sinks witli dis- 
may, and fear trembles in his eye : but when 
misery hugs him close, and misfortune 

shews 



18 EDGAR. 

shews him her worst, then heavenly Hope, 
thy best gift, swims in his breast, and raises 
iu his eager fancy a thousand endearments 
to smother his cares and give a transient 
oblivion of his ills. 

" ^yhat folly," in me, reasoned Edgar, 
" to depend upon the information of the 
lowest officer in the service of his court ! 
How should he tell the duration of my 
captivity ? Other prisoners he may tend, 
but how can he measure the indignation of 
the Bishop against me — a bishop v/hom I 
have never iniured, but to whom I failed 
only in respect, for which I entreated par- 
don. Surely such a fault cannot merit the 
punishment of a crime. And my being 
a prisoner by the chances of war, is no 
plea for unmerited suffering. Have we, 
have the English ever provoked them by 
insult, to retaliate on their captives ? Even 
.enemies admire the grandeur and gene- 
rosity of our king and his noble son. 
Surely, then, I may be heard — I shall be 
released — I shall be ransomed, and I will 
wait with patience. I will question the 

guard 



BOOK VIII. 19 

guard no more j I will have none of his 
gloomy tidings ; he is austere, and perhaps 
would curb my precipitance." 

Thus reassured, Atheling unbound his 
forehead, and bathed it with water, of which 
he had a fresh supply ; and after the ablu- 
tion, made a slight repast of the homely 
provision. But now, ever habituated to 
active exertion, he pined after employ- 
ment. The immense height of his case- 
ment from the ground, afforded but a 
prospect of a dark and distant forest. Du- 
ring some hours he leaned forward to num- 
ber the changes of the cloud, and to trace 
the shades of foliage on the spreading trees — 
and even thus amused, imagination had been 
plotting interviews with his family and his 
friend— that generous friend for whom — 
and he blushed as the idea stole over his 
mind, — for whom he endured captivity. 
Tired at length, he moved away from the 
scene. *' Oh that I had some employ,'* 
cried he — " I who was never permitted a 
moment of indolence, how shall I bear, per- 
haps days of complete inaction?" As he 
spoke, he unbraced the coat of mail from 

bis 



20 EDO A R. 

his body, and eagerly began to rub its 
bright surface, into a brighter polish. How 
great was his joy, to discover in the little 
case on one of its sides, his ivory tablets, 
and a strip of lead which he had used but 
the day before the battle of Poictiers, in no- 
ling down the commands of the Earl of 
Warwick — his eye sparkled in the sight, 
and clearing the surface he thus wrote : 

I. 

Creation marks the kindred space, 
And points to all the fitter place : 
Air, soil and wave, the law fulfil, 
But man alone rebels in will. 

IL 

The slip strikes down its tender root ; 
And upward tow'rs the spreading shoot., 
Torn from the only spot it knows, 
No more it thrives, no more it blows. 

III. 

The dog which leads the outcast blind, 
Strains for his charge his little mind ; 
Licks the old hand that pats his head, 
And proudly guards the loathsome bed. 

IV. 

Of all domestic feath'ry train, 

The monarch hails each morn again; 

Unseemly hills his day employ. 

The cobweb thatch his night's priz'd joy : 

V. Unlike 



li O O K VIU.- 21 

V. 

Unlike to man ! of varied pace, 
Who heeds nor time, nor good, nor place, 
His far-sought hopes in distance roam, 
His motion rest — the world his home. 

VI. ^ 

The sport of passion's captious will, 

He headstrong braves ; now frets at ill — 

At eve he swells in rounds of mirth, 

The dawn — he mourn'd his wretched birth ; 

vn. 

When most he longs to scour the plain. 
His duty backward draws the chain ; 
When duty whispers he should fly, 
Clogg'd is the foot, and shut the eye ; 

VIH. 
Brutes beyond earth have nought to prize, 
But restless man has other ties : 
Let him then certain good pursue. 
For death is fix'd — and heaven is true. 

Thus passed the first days of Edgar's 
captivity — he hoped — he lived. Every 
morning he saw the guard, and he endea- 
voured to soften him by his gentleness j but 
he was ever silent and thoughtful. The 
hero petitioned for his sword, which he 
missed — it was returned. He begged an 
old lute, in which, for a large diamond 

stud. 



22 EDGAR. 

stud, the man indulged him ; and now, he 
amused himself, in tuning and touching 
the string, and endeavoured to chase away 
mournful thoughts, that rush to the mind 
in the grave hour of solitude. Still he clung 
to hope, till the season of winter had flown 
over his head, and that spring had far ad- 
vanced in her lovely progress. But now 
that Edgar had seen nearly a year of im- 
prisonment, and had received no message, 
no encouragement, his spirit fell. The 
lovely bloom of nature flitted away from 
her proudest work. The beautiful eye of 
Athehng shone with faint lustre ; lassitude 
crept over his limb, and he sat for hours 
absorbed in distractions. He heeded not 
th€ entry or departure of the attendant, 
and often forgot during the whole day to 
touch his food. So the tender branch of 
the sweet brier throwing around it delight 
and fragrance, is plucked from its kindred, 
and pent up in the gloomy vase ; long it 
imbibes the fluid nourishment, and conti- 
nxies fresh, strong, and charming ; but st 
length bending under its own efforts, and 

unabie 



BOOK viir. 23 

unable to strive-with nature, it fades, pineSj 
and droops the head towards decay. 

Atheling was conscious of the change in 
himself, and expecting dissolution, resolved 
to meet it with dignity. He ran over the 
past moments of his life, and fervently im- 
plored forgiveness for every error which his 
humihty magnified into a sin. How fleet 
is time, said he ; I might have lived in my 
own country, during a few more short 
years; but should I not have to lam.ent fresh 
sins, and more heinous offences than I now 
have ? As it is, I am taken less gloriously 
than my kind Alfred; but, and I have 
reason to be thankful, with more time al- 
lowed me to prepare for the lot of morta- 
lity. It is a solemn event to meet 
by such slow degrees ; but the soul of man 
ever restless, shev\'s him perpetually, that 
it is not at ease in its earthly habitation ; 
that it longs to burst the stay that hinders 
it from fleeing away to everlasting rest. Oh, 
my soul, beat not thy wing against my 
breast, thou shalt be released, but only at 
the command of thy Creator ; be patient, 
and spare my weak frame of dust which is 

awed 



S4 EDGAR. 

awed In the prospect of going to that place 
from whence none return. But a short, a 
very short time, a few days, and thou, my 
spirit, shall ascend with humble hope to 
the God from whose breath thou art. Tiie 
sun draws the drop from the ocean, and 
suspends it for awhile j then he suffers it 
to fall with rapture, and to mingle again 
"witli ecstacy among its great original — 
so my soul came from God, and to my 
God it shall ascend. Peace then, immortal 
part of me, and let me rend, one by one, 
the ties that still hold me to earth. O, my 
country — my family — my friend — how dear 
are ye — how do the affections of departing 
man float around him ! How sweet must 
it be for a dear hand to close the eye ; or 
how soft to breathe out one's last, long 
farewell in the ear of affection ! 

Here, Edgar, fainting with weakness, 
tottered back, and fell upon his lowly 
bed. 

At the same instant the door opened, 
and the guard advanced, shewing in with 
respect a stranger, in age^of six and twenty, 
of courteous aspect, and noble manners ; 

then 



BOOK VIII. 25 

then upon a sign he retired, leaving him, 
and bolting the door, according to his cus- 
tom. 

The guest started at the sight of Edgar^ 
on whose features sat cold drops of dew, 
on whose cheek flashed a pink glow, in the 
appearance of a man whose eye looked 
pity. ** Pardon the intrusion, Sir," cried 
the stranger, " my means are small, but 
I would readily employ them in your ser- 
vice." — " Noble stranger," returned Athel- 
ing, " believe me, I am grateful ; but my 
wants are now few on earth — I have but 
one wish ; — pardon me, I would rise to ex- 
press my sense of this goodness." — " Hold, 
my lord," interrupted the other, *' I be- 
seech you talk not thus : you must live — 
you must live and hope. Permit not your- 
self to be thus cast down j know. Sir, 
that I, too, am your fellow prisoner. My 
apartment is directly under yours j often 
have I listened to your sweet minstrelsy — 
but lately I have heard it not, and enquir- 
ing the cause, learned that you were ill. 
By caresses, and the exertion of some little 
power over the guard, I have obtained the 

VOL. II. c favour 



26 EDGAR. 

favour of this visit, which I will daily renew 
till I regain my liberty, when I ensure you 
your's. Cheer, then, Sir ; expect happier 
times — the hour is not distant — rely upon 
me — be assured I deceive you not ; and 
since, as the soldier declares, you are a 
high noble of England, do not, for shame, 
give your life away to your enemies ; rather 
keep it to perplex them now and to punish 
them on a future occasion. As for me, I 
eat, rest, and smile, in despite of them. I 
have been twice your time a prisoner, yet, 
as you see, I am alive." 

Edgar, cheered and re-animated by the 
voice of kindness, smiled and bowed. When 
he raised his eye to his new friend he 
saw that he was dressed with negligence ; 
his air was in disorder, but the fire of 
his gaze, and his commanding air, shewed. 
him of proud and lofty birth ; and when 
Atheling replied with respectful confidence, 
and addressed him as a peer, the guest re- 
ceived the honour with pleasure and as his 
privilege. " Since you are resolved that I 
must be of noble descent," said the stranger, 
** address me as the Lord Robert j it is the 

name 



BOOK VIII. 

name of one I love." — " And I, too, my 
lord, had a fiiend whom I adored of that 
name ; judge if I revere it." — ** Whom 
might be that friend ?" asked the stranger. 
Edgar instantly, and delighted, began to 
expatiate on the virtues and family of de 
Clifford ; but the vivacity with which he 
spoke, violently shook him, and he suddenly 
stopped, turned pale, and leaned his head 
on his breast. The stranger looked with 
great concern, and pressed Edgar to take 
nourishment which was by, and he complied 
with reluctance. Presently after, the guard 
entered, and the captives separated with 
mutual professions of regard. 

The day following the Lord Robert was 
again admitted ; the door was fastened, and 
Atheling with difficulty rose to meet him. 
What was his surprize ! The noble captive 
led by the hand a young female, handsome- 
ly attired. " My sister, Isabella, who is 
permitted to visit me, has heard much of 
the British chief, and desires his friendship," 
said he. Edgar profoundly bowed to the 
lady— modest and diffident by nature, now 
languid by illness, he twice essaj»ed to thank 

c 2 her, 



28 EDGAR. 

her, but his voice failed, and his long and 
dark lash drooped over his eye as he bent 
it to the ground. The stranger made ex- 
cuses for him, and gently urging him to 
indulge on the pallet, took his station on 
the window-seat, and placed the lady by 
him. And now with sprightliness and ease 
the guest began a conversation, leaning 
towards subjects of interest to Edgar : his 
King, country, government, his family, 
connexions, and other matters, upon which 
Atheling spoke delighted, but with less 
wan^mth than before, as he was restrained 
by the presence of the lady. At length she 
uttered a few words, and Edgar dared to 
steal one look at her countenance. She 
was in first youth, and mild in appearance ; 
but besides these, possessed no beauty or 
attraciion. He looked upon her features — 
he heard her speak, yet with no sentiment 
but gratitude. Not so the Lady Isabella ; 
she beheld with emotion the highest per- 
fection of man, even in the disguise of sick- 
ness ; she saw his candid soul breathe round 
his lip, his pure flush of sensibility rise and 
vanish from his cheek, and his dark azure eye 

beam 



BOOK VIII. 29 

beam with a transient fire and tenderness, 
as England was named. What a heart, 
thought she, flutters in that bosom ! how 
dehcate, how graceful, how tender the love 
of such a man. Yet he looks as if he 
never were yet sensible to the smile of a 
woman ! Ah me ! how lovely must be the 
maid tliat sliould touch his heart ! Thus 
thought the lady as she softly sighed. 

The Lord Robert had brought for his new 
friend some fine wine which he urged him 
to taste, and declared he would apply for 
leave to walk the castle ramparts, and pe- 
tition for the same favour for Edgar. The 
guard then entered, and the pair with- 
drew, taking with them the warm gratitude 
of the young captive. 

Atheling's health seemed to revive by 
the gracious efforts of his friend. He 
amused himself in recollecting every par- 
ticular of the conversation, and could not 
refrain from admiring the insinuating elo- 
quence of the noble. IIow much does he 
know of me, and how little do I of him : 
tliought Edgar ; he has a manner of ques- 
tioning, which I cannot but consider grace- 

c 3 ful , 



30 EDGAR. 

fuJ, yet metliinks I should be confused and 
abashed in returning such inquiries : but 
I am young and of no experience ; doubt- 
less he hath seen much of life. Perhaps he 
thinks me too loquacious, and smiles in my 
ready speech concerning my country and 
my friends. I will be more reserved, for 
1 would secure his esteem. 

The following day, Edgar preserved 
longer silence. The stranger instantly ob- 
served and was disappointed, and with gen- 
tleness urged a cause for the reserve. Then 
Atheling re-assured again, fell to the open- 
ness of heart which innocence herself had 
taught him. Thus the little unsuspecting 
moth sti^etches forth to grasp the curling 
flame, and till it is actually scorched, will 
not listen to prudence, who would teach it 
to pause in grasping a new friend, lest he 
prove an enemy. 

The permission was granted; and the 
Lftdy Isabella, the companion of the two 
prisoners, regularly visited the ramparts. 
Edgar's vivacity and strength returned. 
Hopes of release were continually enliven- 
ed by the Lord Robert, who appeared to 



gam 



BOOK VIII. 31 

gaia intelligence of all that was passing. 
And now he dared to think he should soon 
touch his native shores. Still time rolled on ; 
and he dated his acquaintance with the il- 
lustrious strangers three months back. 

But on a sadden there seemed a vast 
change in the prison. The guard occasion- 
ally muttered to himself. The Lord Ro- 
bert appeared to hold private conference 
and signs with him, and some portentous 
event seemed to hover near. The lady's 
cheek turned often to a pallid hue : she 
sighed, and for several days forbore to 
enter the apartment of Atheling. 

One evening: as Edgar revolved in his 
wonderinc? mind these extraordinarv mat- 
ters, the Lord Robert, enveloped in a 
capacious mantle, entered with his sister. 
The lady was dressed with magnificence ; 
jewels sparkled on her bosom, and a tiara 
■ of diamon s blazed round her head, vet in 
her modest eye stood tears. Edgar with 
astonishment rose, and respectfully touch- 
ing her extended hiuid, led her to the seat. 
The noble stranger then hesitated ; his 
countenance changed, and with some con- 
fusion he thus addressed Edgar ; 



3S E D G A K. 

" My lord, I have seen you prepared 
for events : I, who can read every turn of 
your expressive countenance, have observ- 
ed your perplexity. Time is big with 
change and prodigy. They now burst over 
your head — it is no moment for dis- 
guise y Paris is in uproar ; the Dauphin has 
acted unadvisedly : the people are despe- 
rate : I am free. This lady loves you ; 
she can bestow liberty ; marry her : her 
|>ortioD is immense : but first swear iidehty 
to me," said he, lowering his voice. He 
paused — he approached near — he whisper- 
ed : — *' I have deep designs ; designs even 
sure of success upon the Dauphin : his 
very existence. ...He is your foe.... There is 

honour, my lord, I, ." He 

stopped. 

Edgar leaned against the wall ; his eye 
glared wide : with mouth extended, he 
gulped; strove for breath; his lip dried 
like the parched soil under a vertical sun. 
His limbs recoiled. So looks the man when 
he hears that the dog he has cherished, and 
that has just drawn his blood, is raging in 
madness. The stranger percei\'ed the shuck, 

and 



BOOK VIIT.' 33 

and stepping back, threw off the cloak and 
unbound liis head. *' Behold !" said he, 
proudly, "behold Charles King of Navarre!^" 
Yonder stands my sister-in-law, the Princess 
Isabella; of France.*^' I leave you to consider 
my offers. A princess and freedom : ho- 
nour, power, glory and riches; or, cap- 
tivity and the hatred of a king, and that 
king, a Charles." The monarch then ga- 
thered up his robes of ermine, which glit- 
tered with jewels, and tossed his diadem'd 
head. He was leading forth the weeping 
Princess, when Edgar springing forward, 
cried, " Enough, O king ! give me cap- 
tivity and virtue,'* and fell down at his 
feet. 

Charles started — he looked confounded. 
*' Is there then," said he,' slowly, " a 
God to inspire such sentiments, to teach 
such firm resolve ?" He turned away — 
" One night," said he aloud/ " one night 
I give you to reflect. Come," madam ;" — 
but the Princess knelt down, and grasp- 
ing the hand of Edgar, softly murmured, 
** Oh, Sir — spare my brother, the Dauphin^ 
for I dread the King of Navarre : forget a 

c 5 poor 



$4l EDGAR. 

poor maid who has given her esteem to the 
noblest of men. For alas ! I cannot deny 
this truth : yet, if aught be in the whisper 
of the King against my brother's safety, 
never, never shall Isabella know a ffleam 
of happiness.'* " Great Princess," answered 
Atheling, " though the generosity and 
pity you have had for me, are imprinted 
for ever on my heart, and though my soul 
adores your virtues, yet on such terms, 
would union draw down on my head a 
thunderbolt from heaven. No, madam, 
your brother's person is with me safe and 
sacred as the babe to the tenderest mather. 
Not to be monarch of the proudest empire 
under the sun would I join against him, 
excepting in the field, face to face, in 
the midst of day, and witnessed by thou- 
sands on either side." 

Charles of Navarre now hastily called 
the lady, and she wept her reply, as Edgar 
took her hand and led her on. Mournfully 
she suffered herself to be drawn av/ay ; but 
she turned back to give one look at Edgar 
as the door closed upon him. He knelt 
and Stretched his arms, as if to give her 

assurance 



BOOK VIII. ^5 

assurance of his virtue. The firm look 
tliat told her her brother was secure from 
any attempt of his, reminded Isabella of 
Navarre's anger, and her own separation 
from the man she loved. Giddiness whirl- 
ed her brain ; the door was fastened ; the 
Lord de Pecquigny^^ darted forward to 
save her, and she fell into his arras. 

How many emotions now swelled the 
tide in Edgar's vein ! He proudly rose 
from the ground and paced his chamber, 
glowing once more in the satisfaction of 
dutv. But how did wonder rise as he 
thought upon the discovery of the King : 
that perfidious King who had already broken 
so many treaties, leagued with so many 
princes, enchanted so many unwary hearts 
by his noble insinuatiag manners — and yet,, 
Avhose faith all but a capricious mob, had 
learned now to despise. And in what in- 
timacy too had he lived with this king as a 
fellow prisoner ! But Atheling banished 
the ungracious subject from his mind, to 
recollect the young and innocent princess 
who had w^pt on his hand : he remembered, 
aiad he blushed in the gentle caress and 

c G soft 



36 EDGAR. 

soft words of the maid wlio owned she 
loved him. He blushed, for he was diffi- 
dent, and knew not his own manly graces. 
Eut though Edgar was softened by grati- 
tude, he as yet, was a stranger to the ten- 
derness of love. " Be happy, gentle Prin- 
cess,*' said he, " be happy with a being 
who is more suited to adorn a court than I 
am. Misfortunes seem to cloud over my 
days, and my heart is not light enough to 
sraile on a bride. I love, if it were per- 
mitted me to choose, the sweet haunts of 
nature in my own country, surrounded by * 
my friends, if alas ! any are left me 1" 

Here Atheiing was startled by shouts that 
echoed round to the high turrets in which 
he w^as confined : he listened ; again were 
they repeated. Anxiously he expected the 
guard with the evening supply : at last the 
moment arrived. What pleasure 1 the gloo- 
my centinel no longer attended, and an aged 
veteran appeared in his stead. Edgar 
smiling, advanced ; and relieving him of 
the charge, said, " Friend, might one in- 
quire the meaning of the shouts which as- 
cended to these prison heights some mo- 
ments 



BOOK VIII. 37 

ments since ?" — " Ah, sir/' replied the 
man, " 'twas the populace saluting Charles 
of Navarre, who has been visiting the Dau- 
phin, and haranguing the people;* he has 
opened prisons, and crimes are now stalking 
in the streets. You are, sir, doubtless, no 
friend to Charles, or you would be free." 
Prudence was not the virtue of Edgar, yet 
he now refrained from reply, and merely 
bent his thanks for the information. The 
old guard was inclined to stay, but Athe- 
ling, absorbed in thought, heeded him not, 
and soon he was left alone. 

In a few days, a small billet was sent to 
Edgar : he read the olfers, the threats, the 
promises of King Charles, and he shudder- 
ed : he would have returned the paper, ^'^ 
but he recollected that kings, even bad 
kings, are to be treated with some indul- 
gence ; he waited. A messenger stood be- 
fore him for an answer, he looked up and 
bowed to sacerdotal robes j he looked high- 
er, and started back — the Bishop of Laon 
was the man ! " You ! reverend father ! 
you against the Dauphin ?" cried he. " In- 
solent I'* 

* Millot, Histoire de France. 



38 EDGAR. 

Solent !" retorted the Prelate, his eye flash- 
ing anger ; " I am come from the King, 
who makes you these great offers ; do you, 
or do you not reject them ?" — " Father," 
said Atheling, with respect, *' in the field 
I would oppose the enemies of my country; 
but my soul abhors the hand that could 
strike the defenceless. I detest a faction, 
and I despise a people who can dare to rise 
in arms against tlie man they consider a 
lawful prince. Father, if his monarch eiT, 
'tis not for man to lift his hand, and wet it 
in blood that should be more sacred to him 
than that of the being from whose loins he 
sprango Kings only, in the open field, may 
draw the sword against kings, and the 
Great God of Heaven looks down from His 
high place and giveth the victory ! But 
privately ! without notice, embra<:ing with 
<me hand, with the ather to arrange a plot ! 
- — as a thief — a murderer — ^iii cold blood ! 
-— ^ relation — a brotilier aiid prince — a . . . 
^k, my soul abhors the treason ; I would 
oot cliarge my conscience with such deeds 
ev«n in meditation. I beseech you, take 
my answer, and quickly." 

The 



BOOK viir. 89 

The President of the Council stamped 
with his foot ; his visage waxed red and 
pale y his lip quivered ; shame choked his 
utterance. Atheling gazed for an instant, 
and covered his eye to shield the dreadful 
sight. The guilty man, enraged beyond 
measure at the act, rushed towards Edgar, 
and lifted his arm to strike. Atheling res- 
pectfully arrested it, and kneeling before 
him, cried with earnestness, ** Oh, father ! 
remember, I charge thee, in whose presence 
thou standest. Art thou not a pillar of the 
church, a teacher of divine precepts ? Have 
not lessons of piety dropped from thy lip, 
and have not the young, the lovely, and the 
innocent, smiled upon thee for a blessing ? 
Hast thou expounded the beautiful doc- 
trines of a Redeemer in whom was no 
guile, and hast thou thyself never felt their 
sweet influence extend to thy bosom ? He 
was a man of sorrows and acquainted with 
grief — did His grief for the sins of men 
never subdue thy soul? Surely, oh, father! 
— thou dost weep — heaven will yet bless 
iiiee-^I see thou wilt be merciful to others, 

and 



40 . EDGAR. 

and heaven shall yet have mercy upon 
thee.'* 

The Bishop, humbled to the very earth, 
turned away his head, and smote his breast 
— *' Oh, Virtue !" he cried, and precipitate- 
ly quitted the chamber : Edgar, deeply 
agitated, leaned on the casement. Another 
step paced the apartment: he judged it to 
be the guard, and observed not ; but a 
deep tone uttered, ** Lord Edgar, how 
fares it with you?'* The voice was not 
altogether strange, and Atheling quickly 
turning, saw a figure wrapped in coarse" 
weeds with a scrip and staff; he replied-, 
*' Thanks, friend, whence come ye ?" — 
" Poor mistrustful world !" said the pil- 
grim, and shook his grey locks. " V/hat, 
sir, have you too much proud blood to 
acknowledge mine acquaintance ? Have 
ye then forgotten the shipwrecked pilgrim 
and Restormal Castle ? but I go ; I am not 
welcome." — " Not welcome! Restormal 
Castle ! — the good Palmer !" burst from the 
lip of Edgar ; he rushed to him, flung his 
arm round his neck, and cried, " Not wel- 
come! oh, by heaven and earth, by thy 

dearest 



BOOK VIII. 41 

dearest hopes, kind pilgrim, I conjure thee, 
stay but a little moment. Restormal Cas- 
tle, sayest thou ? — what of my home ? — oh, 
let me embrace thee — from England ? Ge- 
nerous, generous friend ! give me thy bur- 
then ; let me place thee on the seat, and 
unbind thy sandals — from Restormal Cas- 
tle ? — oh, speak, good pilgrim, and tell me 
all — oh, speak !" 

The soft dove guards the young, whilst 
the tender mate flies abroad to seek for 
food. The hour of his return passes by — 
the little ones chirp for nourishment — ano- 
ther hour flies ; strong beats the heart of 
the mother bird as she listens — a wing 
flaps the air — hope, joy, and life, or misery 
and dreadful horrors are to be her portion ; 
her beak is divided in the conflict — the eye 
starts — the quivering pinion balances — the 
neck is stretched — the foot curdles to ice. . 

So hung Edgar, dubious on the pilgrim's 
word. *' Moderate these transports, young 
man," said he, coldly. " Six months ago 
I saw your parents in the gardens of Res- 
tormal— both well — yet I spoke not to 
either." — " Enough," exclaimed Edgar^ 

*< enough, 



43 EDGAR. 

" eiiougli. May angels light around your 
soul in the hour of agony, and return you 
the bliss you now give me," and, over- 
come by emotion, tears of delight sprang 
from his eye. The Palmer crossed his 
arms, and waited a few moments ; then he 
said, " I too, sir, have had a day and a 
soul for transport — but those are fled — I 
am now a poor isolated wretch, neither 
loving nor beloved by aught on earth." 
— " Say not thus, good pilgrim," cried 
Atheling, " 'twould be too great misery to 
bear ; for what is life without affection ? 
What is joy, if we have no one with whom 
to share it?" — A faint smile relaxed the 
pilgrim's lip—" ah yes — I know all," said 
he, " I know all these arguments ; 'tis 
wondrous well to talk of joy to an old man 
— happiness ! 'tis a shade — a ghost— a will 
o'th' wisp— but I go." — " Nay, I conjure 
you, kind friend," said Edgar, *' do not 
so soon leave me — ^if you but knew how 
tedious pass the hours of captivity — how 
slow, how comfortless — without one cheer- 
ing voice — yet once I had company!— 
Friend, how didst thou venture within 

these 



BOOK VIII. 43 

these walls ? — knowest thou aught of 
Charles ?"— 

" Of the Dauphin Charles ?" replied the 

pilgrim, " he hath been forced to receive 

his brother-in-law the King of Navarre : all 

Paris is inveterate against him, and 'tis 

thought he must flee from the city. For 

me, thou would st know how I gained 

admission ? I had long an acquaintance 

with this soldier when he was my prisoner.** 

— *' Your prisoner ?" interrupted Edgar. — 

" Aye sir," answered the pilgrim : *' 'tis 

not worth explanation. Once in my life I 

bore arms in a battle, and this man fell to 

jne, and now he pretends to be grateful for 

some office I did him, and he allows me to 

see you. 'Twas in vain that I craved so 

much two years since, for your ill-favoured 

centinel denied me." — •*' How ! generous 

pilgrim," exclaimed Edgar, " were you in 

Paris when I was first immured Within 

these walls ? excuse my anxiety, but I 

cannot help the thought that I owe my 

life to a few words from you ; I feel assured 

that the voice was your's." — " It might be 

so," answered the other j « and what 

tlien r^ 



44" EDGAR. 

then?*'—*' What!" interrupted Atheling, 
" what, O stranger ! is it nothing to owe 
my life, my honour to you, Sir ?" and he. 
grasped his hand ; " you endeavwu- but 
vainly to throw on your actions an air of 
apathy and indifference — a generous heart 
inhabits that breast, of noble descent — 
who are you, Sir, that thus take so hu-. 
mane and delicate a concern in my fate ? 
Tell me your lofty name, that I may write 
it in imperishable characters within my 
memory." 

The pilgrim struggled to conceal the 
different changes of passion, as they work- 
ed his features — his hand trembled for a 
moment within that of Edgar, but soon he 
recovered — his dark brow took its deep 
contraction — Jiis eye resumed its keen side- 
glance, and his arm fell with measured hu- 
mility by his side ; he thus answered to 
the question : " my lord, or, if you will 
have it so, my friend, I will not dissemble, 
nor shall you be deceived. My birth ranks 
me only among gentlemen of the princi- 
pality of Wales ; my history is short, un- 
important, and wretched — ayc> 'tis. ...My 

name 



BOOK VIII. 45 

name is Leolf — and remember, when thou 
thinkest on it, that happiness and Leolf 
are enemies. Ties I have none — thus I 
tread the earth a wanderer — but enough. . . 
Perchance I felt some interest in you at 
Restormal Castle — some secret working — 
some invisible power drew — I know not 
what — I care not — but to me, an old foot- 
pad o'the world, thy character was amus- 
ing. On my way from Rome, two years 
since, I passed unnoticed in wretchedness 
and weeds through Paris. I saw and re- 
cognized you ; I owed you some remem- 
brance for your hospitality at Restormal, 
and I whispered prudence in your ear — 
thus in all the matter is no mystery, no 
wonder, no favour. Since I could not gain 
access to you, I lingered some months in 
the city, and then crossed the Channel, 
passed through England, finished my task, 
and again set forward to pace my solitary 
rounds." 

" Dear Sir," replied Atheling, respect- 
fully. " [ owe you my life : would to 
heaven I might give you comfort ; — but, 
perhaps, kind pilgrim, you may chase away 

many 



4G EDGAR. 

many a month of care under our roof, 
under the roof of friends that will tenderly 
love you for your misfortunes and your 
goodness to Edgar. Tell me, Sir, did you 
hear my father's voice, or a word from my 
mother ? How earnest thou so near Re- 
stormal, or was that another kind act of 
thine to t" 

" Have I not told thee," said the pil- 
grim with peevishness, " that I heard nei- 
ther speak ? but this is the way with man. 
You doubted your parents' life six months 
since — I tell you they are well — you were 
just now in transports — now are you dissa- 
tisfied that I heard them not speak. What 
an unconscionable being is man!'* 

Edgar blushed at the reproof; but he 
pitied the unhappy wanderer and v/as silent. 
Again the pilgrim frowned ; " speak," 
said he, *' of what art thou afraid ? Do I 
presume too much, that thou art silent ? " 
" Nay, Sir," answered Atheling surprized,, 
" I feared only to be troublesome in my 
questions." " Ask on, Sir," cried the 
pilgrim. " Since you permit me," replied 
Atheling^ " is Edward, Prince of Wales, 

iu 



BOOK VIII. 47 

in Bourdeaux, or is he in England? and 
what said my country on the news of a 
captive king ?" 

" England," resumed the pilgrim, " was 
mad with exultation in the success of her 
Prince. King Edward commanded* public 
thanksgivings for ten days after the news, 
and when some months afterwards the 
Duke of Aquitain landed with King John, 
his son Philip, and the nobles of Fraace, 
the rejoicings were doubly great. That 
Prince of England's idolatry is truly gene- 
rous — he entered London on a small black 
palfrey, whilst the royal captive was mount- 
ed on a fierce white charger as an emblem 
of royalty." 

At these words, Edgar started up with 
delight, and said, " how like to Edward* 
how consistent with his magnanimous soul. 
Oh, Sir, lived there ever a nobler prince, 
a better man ! but tell me only this^ — is 
John still in England?" " There are," 
said the pilgrim, *< now in London, four 
KingSjt of whom John de Valois is one ; 

but 

* CoHins's Life of the Black Priace. f Rspiu. Spoetl. 



48 EDGAR. 

but this John must shortly return to these 
realms, or the Duke of Aquitain must es- 
tablish himself here to preserve his acquire- 
ments ; for the truce of two years is now 
expiring. I know not what treaty is on 
foot, nor of public news can I tell you 
more. My heart is indifferent and cold to 
the passing events j you are warm and san- 
guine. My woes are tough girt round 
memory ; yours are still green and supple ; 
the branch has not yet blossomed. But 
hark ! the centinel knocks thrice — the time 
is expired, I go." 

" May I not see you once again ? I 
beseech you, good pilgrim, desert me not," 
said Atheling. "Dost thou," enquired he, 
*' really wish for my return ? " " Yes, 
most earnestly I do, goo d p ilgrim." 
" What! by heaven?** asked the wan- 
derer, fixing his earnest eye. ** Why this 
question, friend ? " said Edgar, "I scorn an 
untruth ; yes, by heaven.'* " 'Tis well," 
returned Leolf, and departed. 

Edgar long pondered in his mind the 
extraordinary ways of his new companion. 
Is it then, he thought, the nature of mis- 
fortune 



BOOK VIII. 49 

fortune and calamity to render man so 
morose, so gloomy ? Affliction humbles the 
sold — he is humble to appearance, but he 
assumes an air over me, which is not that 
of humility. But alas ! the suffering merit 
our pity ; how soon may it be our turn 
to mourn, and then all may be changed too 
with us ; for as I have heard it said at 
home, how little may we calculate for our- 
selves in the hours of deep adversity or 
high prosperity ! 

Three more days fled away ; and the 
pilgrim stood again in Edgar's chamber. 
•' I fear for thy life," said he ; " the Dau- 
phin * must flee the capital. Charles of 
Navarre will assuredly wreak his vengeance 
on those he imprisons. Wilt thou escape ? 
Speak." " Liberty and life," gravely re- 
turned Atheling, " are dear ; but honour 
is dearer. Consistent with honour, can I 
escape ? Thou knowest, Sir, that I am a 
prisoner of war. My word is not passed, 
but who may not forget this ; speak, Sir, 
say the means for liberty with honour." 

VOL. II. D The 

* Histoirc dc France. 



so EDGAR. 

The pilgrim burst into a fit of laughter 
upon these words, and then he drooped his 
head, and bitterly sighed. Atheling amaz- 
ed, looked at him and said, " what ail:s 
you, Sir ? '* '* Oh, *tis nothing, my lord," 
answered Leolf j *' a little worm crawled 
on my breast and tickled me, I laughed — 
it stung me, I weep. How can I tell thee, 
Edgar, what I feel ? I know it not myself 
— except that I loathe mine own existence, 
aye, and all mankind too — hearest thou 
that ? but why I smile, why I weep, dost 
thou ask ? Who of mortals thinkest thou, 
my son, that has lived sixty wretched 
years, shall well sift his feeling of the 
past and present, and explain why he 
shudders, — wherefore cold dew damps his 
brow — why his knee totters to one recol- 
lection and stands firm to another? — per- 
haps, the friends he bound within his heart- 
strings are shrunk away to air — or the pur- 
suits he loved, are beyond the grasp of 
age — or the embers of youth's fire and en- 
thusiasm, it may be, are plashed by a cold 
chilling deluge which drowns even virtue in 
its flood j and at best, that fine prospect 

of 



BOOK VIII. ■ 51 

of life, which was stretched by young 
hopes on smiHng pinions before him, is 
changed to dark reality, where not a gleam 
flits to light the way ; and yet say est thou, 
old man, what aileth thee?'* " Friend," 
answered Edgar, " I meant not to wound 
your soul. I pity such griefs and would 
rejoice to blunt their edge." *' Oh, pity 
me not, my lord," answered Leolf ; " I 
bate the pity of man — I pity not myself, 
I live mine ov/n abhorrence. I am sick of 
life and the world, I loathe it as the 
sweet-mouthed lamb loathes the fat slime of 
the long earth-worm, which his jaw has 
crushed between two young blades of 



grass." 



Leolf suddenly paused. " Hark 1" said 
he, " what speech I what voice! — hush!" — 
Edgar listened. Mutterings were heard 
on the staircase. " I am betrayed," said 
the pilgrim, and started, " but no matter." 
The door immediately opened. A man in 
a long cloak advanced to Atheling, he per- 
ceived Leoif, and whispered — " is it a 
friend, may I speak ? " *' You may. Sir j" 
replied Atheling. " Recognize in me, 

D 2 then, 

UBRARt 

UNIVERSmr OF JLUNOIS 



52 EDGAR. 

then, young warriour, the Daiiphiti of 
France. I flee my capital this night ; but 
ere I leave it, I will acknowledge my debt 
of generosity. Isabella, my sister, hath 
revealed to me sufficient to shew your no- 
bleness of mind — your virtue. Tiie Bishop 
of Laon has been most your enemy, for 
with me, your faith of a soldier should 
have sufficed ; but he would not so have 
it. Give me then your word, the word of a 
chief on the honour of his country, that 
you will not set foot in England for three 
years j that you will not draw the sword 
against any part of the realms of France 
during that time, and you are free." 

" Prince," said Atheling, " the condi- 
tions are severe. I could have thought — '' 
*' Hold, Sir;" interrupted the Dauphin ; 
*• I feel I am unjust — yet how should I act 
otherwise ? Can I release you, and give 
you back to England and her court with 
all your knowledge of our afiairs, after 
having lived in intimacy with tiie treache- 
rous King of Navarre ? Shall I thus betray 
my country ? No ; freedom is your's, but 
upon the conditions ramed. Take or 

leave 



BOOK VIII. 53 

leave it— my conscience is acquitted ; but, 
remember, I answer not for your life in the 
hands of Charles. " And, Sir," rejoined 
Edgar, " when my release is known abroad, 
and that I have no pledge to guard the 
jewel of my reputation, who may not slan- 
der my fame, and cast a suspicion of dis- 
honour on my enlargement? My father 
has taught me that life without reputation 
is as a rankling poison which no one looks 
on without shuddering. I have heard this 
father declare, that the being who has lost 
his honour, his virtue, has committed in- 
cest with nature, and having rifled her of 
her charms bears about her curse, starts 
back with misery in the deed, and looks 
in every face he meets for contempt." 
" Take then," replied the Dauphin, " this 
signet ; and with it my esteem, young 
1^'ince ; by this pledge I swear thou art 
free, except from the conditions laid on 
thee ; " — and he slid the ring on the finger 
of Edgar ; — " and now," added he, " in 
a low voice, I advise that you escape by 
the dark. The guard is faithful, I know 
him — conceal your person — leave Paris, 

D 3 and 



54 E D G A R. 

and if you would gain renown in further 
battles, Venice, the Archipehigo, Palestine, 
the Emperor of the East, may afford you 
a post of honour. Quick ! the word — the 
promise — and farewell !" 

Edgar took the proffered hand, respect- 
fully raised it, and with solemn gaze on hea- 
ven said, " not to set my foot on England's 
shores — not to arm against the monarchy 
of France as understood by the Prince, till 
three years are expired, am I now bound j 
and so heaven be witness to my truth." 

The Dauphin hastily embraced Edgar, 
and drawing the hood around him, gently 
struck the door — it was cautiously opened, 
and he moved away. 

" Once more then, ye sweet fields, I 
may pace ye ; once more I may climb the 
rock, and gaze on the dashing waters be- 
low! Disposer of my life!" exclaimed 
Edgar, " great Omnipotence, I bless thee." 
" Art thou then so very sure?" said the 
pilgrim, with a frown, " dost thou not sus- 
pect? knowest thou the person of the Dau- 
phin? there maybe fraud, artifice." " No, 
friend," answered Atheling, " I do not 

suspect 



BOOK VIII. 55 

suspect any artifice ; I have seen, I per- 
fectly recollect the Dauphin's feature. This 
is he I saw in the palace with the Bishop of 
Laon, besides which the signet bears the 
impression of royal arms." ** Easily ob- 
tained," replied Leolf, " however 'tis just 
possible — be not too confident — wait the • 
event — I go ; but what is your plan ? '* 
" I know not, friend," said Atheling, 
«* could you advise ? " " Canst thou trust 
the pilgrim?" said Leolf. *' Oh yes," 
" desert me not, I entreat thee," cried Ed- 
gar, ** if thou couldst procure me a garb 
like thine, it might escape notice." *' I 
will try," answered Leolf; *' but if I return 
not ere the sun's shade be lost behind yon 
trees, expect me not j but make thine own 
terms, and bear thine own perils." 

Now the pilgrim quitted the apartment, 
and again the bolts fell back into their 
grooves. Edgar for once was struck with 
suspicion which he in vain strove to repel. 
The manner, the mistrust, the broken sen- 
tences of this stranger passed on his mind ; 
he remembered the chill which Leolf's 
words ever threw on his own warm feelings, 

D 4 and 



^ 



•56 EDGAR. 

and from his wretchedness he felt dread that 
all was not right within. *' Virtue oppressed 
can smile, but this man is all gloom j surely 
'tis only a sting of conscience that is in- 
supportable. Yet how ungenerous am I in 
determining of this stranger ! how can I 
judge for the despondence of age, I, who 
am but in the flower of youth, inexpe- 
rienced, and unable to decide upon the 
effects of decrepitude and sorrows ? let me 
not be guilty of presumption, but rather seek 
to justify and to palliate, than to hastily 
accuse.'' Thus reflecting, Edgar paced 
the apartment starting at every sound, and 
gazing every moment on the trees for the 
signal. 



BOOK IX. 57 

BOOK IX. 

THE ACTION. 

Adversity ! thou portion of man, I sa- 
lute thee. Come, thou harbhiger of all 
that is cheerless and sad ; thou breaker of 
every tie that winds through the human 
heart ; thou preparer for scenes in which 
sorrow shall be no more 5 come, sad and 
downcast maid, put thy cold finger on the 
throbbirg pulse of prosperity and pride, 
and humble the lord of creation in the dust. 
Let him know thee, unhappy chauntress, 
that he may tune his mind to brighter 
prospect, and burst away from this chec- 
quered life of varied tumult and invariable 
disappointment into peerless joys, and hap- 
piness immutable as the God who prepared 
them, ere he called the world into exis- 
tence. Who is he, however bright his eye, 
however airy his step, however rosy the 
lip, however noble the faculty, that shall 
not bend to the touch of Adversity ? Come 
it must that day, when tears shall gush 

D 5 from 



dl^ EDGAR. 

from their watery beds, the bosom heave 
in deep drawn sighs, the head droop, and 
the voice falter, whilst the memory ach- 
ing shall whisper, " the loved tone which 
once struck on thine ear is stopped for 
ever — thy friend has betrayed thee — slan- 
derers have torn thy fame — the dear hopes 
of thine heart have been crushed and are 
fallen to nought. Means of supporting thy 
frame are denied thee. The beings which 
sprang from thee are perishing around j 
want grasps thee close — all thy schemes, are 
frustrated." Then, Adversity, wilt thou kiss 
the poor sufferer for thine own ; wrench 
irom his bosom the fond, the fluttering, 
the last lingering tenderness to earth, and 
by one kind and cruel stroke, break up the 
path that leads to heaven and to rest. 

The young Prince Edgar in the violence 
of agitation quickened his pace, when the 
cool breeze taught him that the sun was 
gathering up his strength for other regions., 
Suddenly, the tips of the forest assumed 
other shades — and then they were spangled 
in net-work of burnished gold, and nodded 
in grandeur and brightness as the plumes 

of 



B O O K IX. 59 

of the kingly pheasant of the woods, when 
spring dresses him in new majesty. Edgar 
marked every change with fresh emotion ; 
he put his ear close against the door j all 
was still — he tried the latch — it was im- 
movable. *' Now, pilgrim,'* said he softly, 
" art thou true or false ? The trees ? gloom 
is sitting around them — their brilliant tints 
are fled. Now, now, ye naked walls, which 
have enclosed me for two .long years ; 
couch, upon which my poor limbs have 
rested so many nights — thou, straw pillow, 
which hast hidden so many of my plaints 
and tears— and thou, little casement, which 
bast never refused me a portion of heaven's 
expanse, or a beam of protection from the 
eye of my Creator — all, all dear objects, 
grown dear by acquaintance — I quit ye all,, 
perhaps this hour — nay, this minute — hush,, 
buzzing fly, let me hear my deliverer's step 
and hail it." Atheling could speak no 
more — hardly dared he breathe — so strong 
rose the seat of life, that he pressed firm 
his hands on his bosom to check the suc- 
cession. 
A sound stirred 5 and a whole impetuous 

D 6 tide 



60 EDGAR. 

tide of blood bulged up to the ears and 
temples of Atheliug, and sang in its impa- 
tience J but it throbbed and died, for all 
was again still. With not more of move- 
ment than the bust of stone stood the pri- 
soner. But the sound returned — it stops 
— it increases — the bolts slide — the door 
turns on its hinge. Edgar gives one look, 
springs forward, and strains the pilgrim 
in his arms. " Silence 1" whispered the 
guard, ** there are other ears alive ; de- 
scend, and with caution ; take every one 
his own — yet methinks, we who run the 
risk should gather the spoil.'* Edgar 
blushed at the words of the centinel — he 
turned aside his head, lest he should betray 
his feelings and wound another's breast. 
Vain precaution ! self-interest is indelicate. 
The guard knew not tlie delicate strokes of 
sensibility. *' Friend," said Atheling, '* the 
few changes of raiment procured with 
my last jewel by thy predecessor I leave, 
excepting this one — they are too mean for 
thy notice and my gratitude. My sword 
1 — here are jewels, but the blade was be- 
stowed by a father,'* " Quick," exclaim- 
ed 



B O O K IX. 61 

ed Leolf ; " art thou mad to stand thus 
loitering ? here, take tliis pilgrim's garb ; 
tie over thy jaw the bushy crop. Cast off 
the armour, the massy studs and breast- 
plate may content the savage,'* whispered 
he. " Nay, friend," said Atheling, " I 
cannot part thus easily with it; 'twas a 
dear gift, O that my hand were gold that 
I might cast it before him," cried Ed- 
gar. *' Well — 1 go ; " answered Leolf, 
*' I wdll stay for thee no longer." ** One 
moment, I entreat," cried Atheling ; and 
passionately he snatched the loved sword, 
and grasping strong, wrenched from the 
hilt some stones where the diamonds stood 
thick set and threv/ them to the guard, who 
smiled in the prize, and then wrapping 
himself in the huge folding robes and man- 
tle, and drawing down the scolloped hat, 
fled with beating breast after the pilgrim, 
who cautiously led the way. " Keep 
close," muttered Leolf, " and be silent." 
They reached the portal ; the guards had 
all been relieved. Every one in his turn 
asked for the word. The pilgrim answer- 
ed ; he passed, and Edgar bending low 

for 



62 E D G A n. 

for concealment, passed with him. Thejr 
reached the drawbridge near the street. 
The guard saluted them. " Fathers, where 
go ye?" " Through the city, good friend," 
replied Leolf. " Methinks, thy brother 
is young for pilgrimage,** said the man, 
" whither are ye bound?" " To Venice 
and the Holy City," returned Leolf. 
" Hast thou travelled much, good reve- 
rence?" said the guard to Athehng. 
** Speak to him not, friend," interrupted 
Leolf, *' for his sins he has made vows not 
to utter any word, till Jerusalem loosen his 
tongue, and cheer his soul ; and now, I 
pray thee, let us pass ; and see, what lieth. 
before thee, as I live 'tis a gold piece ! — 
lucky thou to find what some poor wretch, 
hath doubtless lost." ** Ah prithee, now 
hold thy peace, fatiier," cried the centinel, 
" get ye both gone > wherefore do ye stand 
here prating ?" Whereupon he opened the 
gates, and the two pilgrims stepped out — 
the portal immediately closed. Leolf pre- 
cipitated forward, and Atheling trembling 
followed. 

The dreary stilhiess which precedes the 

howling 



B O K IX. 63 

liowling tempest sat througli the streets of 
Paris. Events swelling with civil discord,, 
hung drooping, and waited but one little 
touch to communicate in a stream and 
burst over ill-fated heads. The pilgrims, in 
silence hurried forward ; they approached 
the suburbs. A splendid mansion illumined 
by large wax tapers within and without, 
stood by the way side- Horses^ feet sud- 
denly trampled the stones. A vast retinue 
dashed near. " Crouch down," said Leolf 
in a hurried tone to Edgar, " be still for 
thy life, 'tis the King of Navarre, that this 
palace is prepared to entertain." " Oh 
heaven 1 '* exclaimed Athehng, " do thou, 
befriend me ! " Leolf threw himself on 
the ground in the nook of a wall, leaned 
half over Edgar, spread wide his ample 
folds, and closing the eye appeared in pro- 
found slumber. The cavalcade approach- 
ed, the guards bearing lighted torches^ 
One flashed on the visage of Leolf. " Who 
lies there, Sirs?" said Charles. The sol- 
diers drew near. " A poor pilgrim, I 
judge, by his garb, your highness." " 'Tis 
a sight ill-befitting our great city, that poof 

travellers 



64} EDGAR. 

travellers lie on its liigliways. I would that 
ye awaken him,'* replied the King of Na- 
varre. 

The beating heart of Atheling sank with 
shame at his inglorious station. " Charles 
will recognize me in one instant," thought 
he, " when his eagle eye flashes on my 
person, even thus disguised. O that I had 
died in the fields of Poictiers ! — my bones 
would h.ave been gathered up and have been 
wept over in the tomb of my ancestors ; 
but now, Oh tyrant ! yet, dearly will I sell 
my life." 

Now the guardian angel of virtuous man 
perceived the imminent peril of the young 
chief, and listened to the short petition of 
Edgar for help from heaven. Then with a 
pinion more rapid of succession than 
thought, he hurried up to the archangel 
whose turn was that day to hold the celes- 
tial list of those who were, before night, to 
break the union of spirit and body. " Hail, 
benign power ! " breathed the heavenly 
minister of Omnipotence, " I know thine 
embassy. The God of mercy hath but 
chastened thy charge to teach him wisdom; 

his 



B O O K IX. 65 

his win Is not that he should yet see death ; 
hasten back, then hast permission for any 
exertion in his behalt?* «• Seraphic ex- 
cellence," answered the guardian of man, 
bending gracefidly, •' I obey ; receive my 
blessings and lay mirxC humble praises, 
which I will breathe, at the foot of the 
throne of Eternal Majesty, from the lower 
world for this unexpected mercy." So say- 
ing, he with sweet complacence turned 
away, and calUng in the pinion, dropped 
as a stono by the side of Atheling. 

The guards approached to rouse the pil- 
grim, but Charles suddenly recalled them. 
'* Advance; it matters not," cried he; " a 
flash, a dreadful glare of liquid fire, tore 
through yon cloud and curled round mine 
armour. Hold, my beast— see how she 
trembles ; ne'er heed the pilgrim, if he 
can sleep whilst elements rage over his 
head, let him. Advance," cried he, impe- 
tuously, " my blood curdles at lightning — 
I feel — I feel, as though *t\vere a God that 
made this vast earth shudder under his 
will — tush — ye villains ; see how she rears 
and starts- -will ye lead the foaming jade? 

O how 



66 EDGAR. 

O how icy is this poor breast of mine I" 
murmured he, whilst he frowned and curled 
his body in tlie second flash. " Am I a 
king ! and must kings tremble — what folly! 
— there, again! — may not that mad fire 
strike a monarch's bosom ? wiiy not — is he 
of flesh ? — another ! how dreadful — my 
God — hush! — dare I — advance, yc wretches, 
or this sword/' exclaimed he alcud, " this 
sword." — 

Big drops of sweat crusted the visage of 
the King ; his glaring eye was half opened 
in expectation, and half averted to escape 
the awful sight j his teeth rattled in the 
hollow jaw, and his dried and quivering 
tongue could give but faint and imperfect 
sounds. The animal on which he was 
mounted, trembling and scared, plunged 
backward, rose on her hind feet, sank on 
her knees — reared again, and lifting up 
her hairs and mane in horror, goggled on 
the sky, and insensible to blow or caress, 
nor retreated nor advanced. 

« Hold her," cried Charles, " I will 
dismount — give me another steed — this 
shall pay the forfeit of her life." A dozen 

meu 



E O O K IX. 67 

men held down the animal — the King flung 
Iiimself upon the ground, and seizing the 
arm of a noble, hastily staggered forward, 
and entered the palace gates ; the guards 
quickly followed, and again were the street;^ 
in silence. 

The pilgrims gently rcse and looked 
around. Edgar flung himself on his knee. 
" God of my life, I bless thy name 1 '* 
said he, " whose arm is powerful as thine, 
and who is strong before thee?" Then 
he arose and hastened behind Leolf, wha 
quickly reached the great gate of the city — 
here they passed without notice. Time 
was ready, but not yet delivered. The 
dark night favoured them. " I am young," 
said Atheling, " support thyself on me, 
good Leolf." The pilgrim took his arm — 
** haste, haste," muttered he, " we are 
not secure till we reach the borders of the 
German dominion." " Generous friend," 
replied Edgar ; " suffer me to tell thee, 
how deeply my soul is penetrated by gra- 
titude." '' We have not time for speech," 
answered the pilgrim, " to-morrow we must 
"be far out of the stretch of pursuit." 

A horse* 



68 E D G A R. 

A horseman swiftly darted by them, fol- 
lowed by two men. Leolf started. Tiie voice 
of one reached the ear. "Ah,'' whispered 
Edgar, " that is the voice of the Dauphin 
Charles, he hatli chosen our moment for 
flight." ** Sayest thou so," replied Leolf, 
** I would we were as well mounted. I 
fear we should be overtaken first, and suffer. 
for all ; for in twelve hours every thing will 
be known, and Paris be in uproar. O by 
my life, how will the tyrant lock up the 
city, fortify the entrance, strenghten the 
palaces, and mistrust the whole world. 
What a subtle poison lurks under that 
smooth tongue. It would be a feast for his 
soul, to wreak his vengeance on thee and 
me, for the escape of his royal victim — but 
I forget — I enjoined thee silence — and 
speed." 

The tempest had passed — and a few 
twinkling stars now SThlly shewed the 
way. During the night, the fugitives 
briskly kept on the pace, and when the 
morning dawned, they guessed that seven 
leagues were cleared. *' Here we quit the 
high-road and choose only by-paths," said 

Leolf, 



B O O K IX. C9 

Leolf, " at present we may rest under yon 
clump ; and let us see what refreshment thy 
scrip aifords — what none ! Let mine then 
supply the want.'* Atheling partook of 
the homely repast with grateful thanks, 
and as the old man slept, he stood up to 
gaze on the beautiful expanse of country, 
and to smile in admiration on beholding 
once more the simple loveliness of nature — 
but presently he sighed, as he said, " and 
yet thou art not England — England, my 
loved soil, I am receding from thee, but 
my heart is thine — and thou, my de Clifford 
— thou, my home — my family — dear objectf ; 
if ye still remain to me, may I ever again 
be permitted to behold ye ! alas ! years, 
long and tedious years rise between us — 
O Time, take from my allotted space and 
hurry forward my being ! " 

The limbs of Edgar unused by long 
confinement to strong exercise, now craved 
some rest, and he leaned on the soft moss 
and snatched a sweet repose under the 
wide canopy of heaven. 

The sun was high in his course, when 
the pilgrims started up, and addressed them- 
selves 



70 EDGAR. 

selves again to their long and arduous jour- 
ney. Steady they continued it, and at the 
end of some days they reached tlie frontiers 
of the Emperor's estates, and they remain- 
ed two days in a village hard by. Edgar 
wrote from hence upon paper given him 
by Leoif, to his friends, and folding down 
what he had said, concealed the letters in 
his bosom, till an opportunity of dispatch 
should offer. 

Now the travellers moved forward to the 
entrance of Switzerland. " Happy coun- 
try," exclaimed Edgar, " to have cast off 
the yoke of tyranny ;** thou art free ; thy 
children are noble of mind, they may go- 
vern thee in tenderness and zeal. Happy 
ye, proud freemen! but happier the country 
which is sanctified by a king, who is a 
living pledge of freedom, whose crown is 
the cap of liberty herself. The republic 
maybe shattered by a hundred little tyrants, 
whilst the limited monarch, bound by his 
people's laws, sees his life and honour 
woven in with the prosperity of his sub- 
jects, and knows that in their ruin is his 
downfall j he has nought to gain, but 

every 



BOOK IX. 71 

every thing to lose. Thus he strives for his 
children as a father, and they, in return, 
bless him as the promoter of their happiness. 
They shed the last drop of blood for him, 
and he exerts the power with which he is 
invested, to maintain their right, and to 
secure their prosperity.'' 

Autumn now blew over the mystic grots 
of nature his cool and invigorating breeze; 
and as the fugitives plunged into the won- 
drous scenes, the heart of Edgar swelled with 
admiration and greatness. On either side 
rose the towering mountains frowning from 
the clouds at one another, as if in battle 
array; and further still, grew the enor- 
mous glaciers, believed by the credulous to 
be seven years mounting to their vast bulk, 
and seven in diminishing. Immense fo- 
rests of pines looked down from the Alpine 
summits with dark disdain on the world 
below ; and here and there a beauteous 
linden tree bent his graceful head even 
lower than his roots, among the niches and 
cliffs. The sweet silver bell ^' tinkled round 
the loved neck of some favourite kine — the 
bell that had lasted for generations, and 

which 



7^ EDGAR. 

which alone displayed all tlie luxury of its 
master. The animal, proud of the dis- 
tinction, shook her sleek head to call 
about her the faithful herd, the only opu- 
lence of her possessor. Now swelled the 
plaintive sounds of the native melody '^' 
with which the shepherds enticed down 
the large flocks of goats and cattle from 
the bold crags and bleak air, to shelter 
them in the vallies during the blast of 
winter. There dashed the roaring cascade 
from perpendicular heights ; and here 
warbled the clear rivulet of the mountain, 
of virgin purity, as it trickled its little way 
among the shrubs and fruit-bearing tree of 
the mountain, over the sweet blue gentian, 
tlie Alpine rose, the delicious wild straw- 
berry, and the green myrtle ; when, having 
left behind the misty crag of the height^ 
and the verdant plots of grass and tinted fo- 
liage of the middle regions, it crept in 
soft content, and reposed near the walnut 
hedges at the lowest base. 

Hospitality every where opened her 
hand and enticed the traveller. Beautitul 
a,ndinnocent maidens pressed forth the sweet 

beveraL'"c 



B O O K IX. 7^ 

beverage from the mountain-fed heifer, or 
sprang over the threshold to pluck the wild 
fruit from its haunt, or drew from the 
simple churn the sweet butter, and sang to 
the hollow trunk to entice the queen bee, 
whilst another hand scooped forth a deli- 
cious portion of her wild honey. Atheling 
possessed no coin ; but Leolf twice offered, 
and twice offended. " Generous people 1" 
said Edgar, " your country bespeaks a dif- 
ferent race to the natives of mine, but 
P^ngland has all your virtues ; your passion 
for liberty, your generous disinterestedness, 
your noble hospitality — but she has not 
such proud rocks, such icy bulwarks ; her 
sons are valiant, but their breasts are made 
to feel every throb of nature, and even 
to feel more pangs for others th; n for 
themselves. An Englishman climbs with 
amazement, with emotion, with passion, 
these stupendous heights ; he casts an eye 
upward as millions of tender, grateful, 
devout notions fill his soul, for he reflects 
upon the Being who created such scenes^ 
He bends a look down to the bottomless 
chasms, and shudders ; he starts, he sighs 
VOL. It. i: to 



74' EDGAR. 

to think how many lives have been gulped 
in the opening ; how many feet ever rested 
on its verge ; how many steps some have 
slidden and have yet balanced and been 
restored; or, he gives his thoughts and his 
sympathy wider circuit. How vast, he 
considers, are the armies that have gather- 
ed on the plains below, and that have fol- 
lowed a daring leader over these rocky 
fortresses of nature ! Thou, Swiss, encom- 
passed by thy bold and rugged promontory 
from whence thy prospects are infinite, art 
wild, hardy, simple, fearless for thyself 
and others. The Briton, surrounded bv 
the green wave, and accustomed to plunge 
in her foam, or to meditate on her shores, 
feels, from tenderest infancy, evevy vary- 
ing image of the changeful element re- 
flected in his own bosom. He listens with 
melting fondness to her sigh, and plaintive 
echoes it back ; he rises in pride, in dig- 
nity, when he gazes on her swelling surface, 
and catches the first glimpse of her superb 
navy, rolling to the uttermost points of the 
earth her riches and strength ; he strains 
the eye to catch the line where cloud and 

water 



B O K IX. 7^ 

water kiss each other, and feels his breast 
pant with ardour and curiosity to cut the 
pathless road to lands and climes unknown; 
and when the wish is accomplished, and 
that other climes feed his breath, then im- 
patient as art thou, O wave, to roll back- 
ward thy tide at thine hour, so is he, as he 
gazes and sighs from afar, to fling his arm 
again round his beloved shore — and thus 
he cries, after having paced the luxuriant 
soil, the fruitful valley, and climbed the 
cloud-crested summit of pompous mo- 
narchies, or overgrown empires ; — thus he 
exclaims, with a tearful eye, and clasped 
hands : — " Oh, England ! England ! what 
countiy is like unto thee, in beauty, in ho- 
nour, in love?'* 

Thus spoke Edgar, as he journeyed; 
softly he spoke, for the old pilgrim loved 
not that which touched the soul. Leolf 
disdained to smile ; a frov^n ever saddened 
his brow — suspicion lurked in his eye, and 
displeasure fell from his lip when the hero 
poured forth in ardent strains his hopes, 
his feelings, his affection, or even his very 
gratitude to himself. Athehng was deeply 

E 2 sensible 



7^ BB G A n. 

tiensibie to the restraint, bur, he quietly sub- 
raitted to beat the casualties of age and 
infirmity — yet he languished in secret for 
the society of a companion, of a youthful 
friend. " Oh ! de Clifford," murmured 
he, ** art thou gone for ever ? has thy loved 
spirit quitted these busy tumultuous scenes 
of life ? may I never more behold thee ? 
I knew not thy value till I was deprived of 
thee— I durst speak — I might give thee 
every thought, and thou hadst no reserve 
with me* Sweet intercourse of friend and 
friend ! Oh ! happy equality of age and 
feeling, how I miss thee !'* 

Thus inwardly lamented Atheling, whilst 
he and his fellow pilgrim descended from 
the last Alpine summit, and touched the 
beautiful plains of Italy. But as they 
drew near to Venice, Edgar solicited to 
throw off his disguise. " Let me, good 
Leolf, be what I am j a soldier. England's 
children are respected in Italy ; how many 
times have English nobles and their im- 
mense retinues sailed from these ports to 
fight under the banner of the Cross ! All 
Europe has joined, hand in hand, for this 

great 



BOO K IX. ' 77 

*»'reat cause, and however divided upon 
other matters, ail have been unanimous 
here. The swarthy Italian, the pale-eyed 
Austrian, the ponderous Fleming, and the 
rcberved Briton, have, for religion, for 
honour, for virtue, forsaken their home, 
their family, their pursuits, their pride ; to 
enlist under one sign ; to bear down one 
power ; to fight under one leader ; to ac- 
complish one design* Assembled nations I 
unanimous io the danger j unanimous, ye 
people, y« generous people, in the certainty 
of reaping no personal advantage. Tell 
rne not then, good friend, that Edgar en- 
dangers his safety in openly wearing the 
sword through Venice, in demanding of 
the proud and lofty republic a station in its 
armies. The Briton is every where res- 
pected ; what need has he for fear ? Frown 
not, my good Leolf j nay, thou art dis- 
pleased — Oh! speak, my benefactor! I 
could hate myself if I have offended thee." 
" Am I offended, my lord ? Oh, no," 
answered the pilgrim, *' little matters it 
whether Leolf be pleased or not. But 
what! thou hot brained youth, with thy noble 

E 3 schemes 



7§ EDGAR. 

schemes of benevolence and candour, v.hatl 

hast thou never been taught a little craft — 

a little prndence ? how hast thou been 

brought up in hfe ?"—«' Sir," interrupted 

Atheling, whilst anger darted from his eje, 

*' I have been educated, I have been 

taught by a father, v/hom I respect above 

all men ; and for love — had I a thousand 

lives I Vv'ould give them for liis, and smile 

in the exchange. Sir, good lessons I have 

had, but that I never sufficiently availed 

myself of them I now deeply feel — now 

that I am deprived of them, and, as it 

were, thrown upon mine own discretion. 

Prudence, indeed, I have been taught, but 

not " 

Edgar stopped, — ever fearful in the midst 
cf passion to wound the feelings of others. 
Onward, in silence, they continued, a few 
paces. " You will do well to entrust your 
letters to me, my lord," suddenly ob- 
served Leolf " To you, my friend ?" en- 
quired Atheling. " Aye, Sir, if I set oif 
for England to-morrow." — *' How, good 
Leoii"," exclaimed Edgar, " are we not 
going both to Palestine ?"— «' Aye, my 

lord. 



BOOK IX. 79 

lord, we were going, but your hot words 
tell me that you ure tired of the old pil- 
grim — he may, therefore, return to Eng- 
land." — " Oh ! my benefactor," said 
Atheling, " how you wrong me ! I tired 
of you 1 of mine only friend in adversity, 
in these foreigns realms. Oh ! Leolf, do 
not suspect me of such ingratitude ; if T 
have been hasty, forgive me — I meant not 
disrespect, but I fancied — a reflection on 
the beloved tutors of mine infancv, and I 
was mad in the idea. Talk not of desert- 
ing me, Leolf, but come, give me thine 
advice ; tel! me why I should not openly 
declare my birth, and solicit from the 
Doge an honourable employment in his 
wars ? Many of my valiant countrymen, 
thou knovvest, have sought glory and re- 
nown in the Venetian service/^ and why 
should not I?" 

" Nay, take your own course, my lord ;'* 
replied Leolf, " but if you ask me why, I 
answer — first, that where there is doubt we 
should prepare for the worst. Secondlv, 
that where you will pass unnoticed as a 
pilgrim, you would be gazed at as a chief- 

E 4 tain. 



so EDGAR. 

tain, pointed at, perhaps laughed at. Third- 
ly, who will believe that you are a Prince 
descended from the blood royal of England, 
even if you say it ; without attendants, 
without friends, without credit, without 
money ?'* *• Leolf," interrupted Atheling, 
proudly, " I have a lip that was never yet 
sullied by falsehood." " Folly !" retorted 
Leolf, " who knows in Venice whether 
you may not have existed by lying j whe- 
ther you may not have purloined the very 
coat of mail on your shoulders ?" " Sir ;" 
cried Edgar, "this is ungenerous; surely you 
are severe.'* " Psha ! canst thou not hear 
the truth ?" said Leolf, *' how little art 
thou fit for the world ; this world, my lord, 
which I have well studied, and learned in 
theory and practice.'* ** I am indeed de- 
ficient in that knowledge," said Atheling, 
•* I believe every man to be well meaning 
towards me till I discover his falseness ; and 
then, and not till then, have I ever been 
ready to condemn : why should others de- 
sire to injure us without provocation or 
object in view ?" 

Tlie 



BOOK IX. 81 

The pilgrim gazed for a moment on Ed- 
gar with astonishment : then lie smiled, 
but faintly ; and his visao;e aq:ain took its 
contracted form. " My lord," said he, 
" perhaps I fail in courtly demeanour— 
however 'tis my fashion y but now tell me, 
prithee, hast thou ever read any history?" 
"Truly, Leolf, thou hast a curious manner 
with thee," answered Atheling, " I have 
in the course of studies, perused some wri- 
ters qf other, and my own times." " And 
did you not see all the wickedness of man- 
kind therein registered ?" asked Leolf. 
** I saw a mixture of good and bad cha- 
racters,** said the Prince. *' Chiefly of 
the latter kind, I believe," replied Leolf., 
*' Tell me of a crime, a stratagem, a hor- 
ror, that may not be presented in the his- 
tory of empires ? and yet you, who have 
read these grave and attested memorials,, 
can think well of men, and can be ready 
to trust and to wait for injury, to be put 
on your guard : how can one who has- read 
history, be without suspicion ?" 

" I grant," hastily replied Atheling, 
^ that we gain all this melancholy inform^- 

E 5 tioiT 



82 E D G A R. 

tion in histories ; but there are three points 
to be considered in tliis matter : first, in 
answer to your declaration of the predomi- 
nance of vice in them, we are to remember 
that much is to be said of the man and his 
actions, who carries fire and sword amongst 
a people that never injured him ; who drags 
away the helpless virgin into dishonour 
and captivity ; who tramples hoary hairs in 
the dust 5 who oppresses his people with 
taxes, and forces them to desperation by 
his cruelty. The life of such a man affords 
ample materials to the historian and the 
moralist, and pages swell with virtuous 
indignation at the recital of his deeds. 
But the quiet pacific governor, who, satis- 
fied with beholding the fidelity and happi- 
ness of his people, lives endeared to them 
as the father of a nmnerous familv, and 
unambitious of fame or conquest, never 
passes the verge of his dominions, presents 
no strong feature to the historic painter. 
One single and touching encomium is 
wound with his life, and posterity merely 
sees a pleasing sketch among dark finished 
pictures. No wonder then, if vice branches 

out 



BOOK IX. 8S 

out into wide extent, and that virtue sits 
close. Secondly, history is not a guide for 
common lite, or as you term it, the world. 
Facts are only recorded of kings or their 
great representatives. The people, the 
great mass of an empire, are only referred 
to in tlie gross, as a whole body. Kings 
having powerful interests at stake, all the 
master-passions are let loose j crimes take 
a gigantic form when committed by them ; 
but the people, the subjects, excepting 
liere and there a few, having no such vast 
objects, can be roused to no such exertion. 
The history of a king, cannot then be full 
authority for the private manners of a peo- 
ple as individuals. Thirdly, until the last 
centuries, the world has been disfigured,, 
and the liuman mind abused by a false re- 
ligion, and obnoxious ideas upon the grand 
article of duty between man and man, and 
from man to his Maker. The Christian re- 
ligion, that mild and gentle worship, is now 
in my happy period, established over entire 
Europe. How can one enter with a fellow- 
creature into the same sanctuary, or both 
cast up an eye to the same God, and yet 

E 6 livQ 



84 EDGAR. 

livi in continual apprehension and mis- 
trust ?'* 

*' All your arguments are very fine, my 
lord," peevishly interrupted Leolf — *' you 
may depend on this, that kings, with all 
their powerful interests, as you say, are 
but men ; and by the moment that your 
friend has betrayed you, your mistress de- 
ceived, your monarcli deserted, and that 
disappointments have bljghted you, you will 
look round the world with the spleen that 
I do, mistrust all mankind, and fancy that 
treachery lurks in every smile." 

** I pray heaven that time be far dis- 
tant," cried Edgar. '* But, Leolf, if thou 
hast such mistrust, why may not I sufler 
in thine opinion ?" "^ Perchance thou dost 
on some occasions/' said the pilgrim. — 
However, I would as soon depend on thee, 
as on any one — but enough ; wilt thou 
play the strutting Prince in the streets of 
Venice, and be scouted for a braugart 
hero ? or wilt tliou keep on thy scollop and 
thy staff, and act the safe pilgrim ? — e'en 
do as thou wilt !" Atheling's cheek glowed 
round the artificial shag of his visage, and 

he 



BOOK IX. SS 

he paused. At length, he said, "^ only 
secure me a passage to the seat of war, to 
the seat of just and honourable war, to 
crush rebellious spirits, or to repel the am- 
bitious strides of the Turk ; secure me an 
honourable passage, and I will not discover 
myself designedly in Venice ; and for this 
promise, I expect thy company. Yet, un- 
derstand, good Leolf, if I be charged with 
assuming a disguise, I will not deny it, but 
will then declare my family, my name, and 
my country. I will not court discovery, 
neither will I avoid it." 

To this, Leolf sullenly yielded an as- 
sent, and the travellers shortly afterwards, 
entered the gondola of a compassionate 
rich merchant, and they were soon borne 
to the heart of Venice. 

Atheling looke.i round him in this famed 
city. The silence of the streets in which 
a, wheel is not j)C".mitLed to turn, the plash- " 
ing of the oars under every casement, the 
gravity of the step of those who p rssed to 
and fro on the multitude of bridges, the 
servile dependance of the crowd who passed 
a noble, and the dark and disguising robes 

of 



/ 



86 EDGAR. 

of the inhabitants, wrapped studiously and 
with mystery, round their form, inspired 
him with melancholy and gloom. 

" Proud city, thou mayest be rich and 
as extensive, but how unlike otlier ways, 
to thegreat metropolis of England 1" thought 
Edgar. '= Lovely women, women of all 
ranks, ever certain of protection, there 
glide through the streets for business or 
recreation \ innocent, modest, respected, 
unassuming, adorned with the simplicity of 
the times ; looking health, happiness, and 
maidenly freedom. The men, towering in 
all nature's majesty, arrayed in the simple 
masculine attire, which imparts the healing 
warmth, yet displays to view the nervous 
and strong built limb, the square shoulder, 
the superb and commanding feature, on 
which virtue, knowledge, generosity, and 
enthusiasm of liberty and love of country, 
are stamped in characters of energy and 
love. These step forward, whilst the steed 
of the noble and his attendants, prance 
slowly by, retarded by the side of the im- 
mense waggon, or vehicles filled with bales 
and passengers from all points of the king- 
dom. 



BOOK IX. 87 

dom. The animals, unconscious of the dig- 
nity of man in this favoured constitution, 
would trample over the merchandise, break 
the obstacle, or toss away the labourer 
from his path ; but the man, however poor, 
looks up with honest and fearless smiles on 
the steed's impatience, and with a throb of 
delicrht, hears its master with o-entleness 
and lumianity, bid him to beware of hurt 
from the fiery beast, whilst he himself drags 
in the rein to curb his speed. Then the 
honest clown blesses the laws of his great 
country, clieers with hearty accent and 
animated eye, a peer of his realms, and 
content, pursues his way. The street, the 
city, the port, the whole land is free of 
access to all. The laugh, the whisper, the 
nod, the dialogue, may there rise in the 
square, the market, the street. Crimes 
only are chained. Decorum alone imposes 
restraint. O happy country ! in whom a 
wise government grants unbounded liberty 
ibr all but vice. O, noble people, that 
conscious of their freedom, and feeling their 
responsibility, are plunged into sorrow and 
dismay, for even a breach of decorum !" 

Such 



88 EDGAR. 

Such were the thoughts of Edgar ; but 
Leolf paced his way, regardless of his com- 
panion, and only anxious lest he might at- 
tract notice* He watched with earnestness, 
the faces of person3_, who half muffled, 
passed by, and cast on the travellers, an 
enquiring and momentajy gaze. " Cease 
thy whisperings,'* muttered the old pilgrim, 
*' I heed them not. Let us enter yonder 
poor inn, we may find admission and secu- 
rity against the deep searching eyes of these 
Venetians." " AVhy, Leolf, no one is 
near us, at present," answered Edgar, 
*' but I follow ; thou knowest the town, 
sayest thou ? I do not." 

And now the travellers stood on the 
threshold of the house, and craved admit- 
tance. An old female appeared : — " Who 
are ye r" said she ; " and what would 
ye have ?" Leolf spoke, versed in the 
languages of Europe, and in the ways of 
men. " We are pilgrims, gracious mo- 
ther, to the Holy City, and would fain rest 
us for a short season, till the sailing of the 
fleet." " What is your country, pilgrim ?" 
returned tlie dame, with a frown j ♦< I love 

not 



BOOK IX. 8^ 

Trtot strangers. A large cloak may cover a 
weapon, and a hoary lock may fringe a 
trait'rous head." ** We are from England," 
said Leolf, with a stern air ; but recollect- 
ing himself, he added, *' 'tis no matter, if 
you have not compassion on the needy j — 
yet we could have recompensed — we are 
pilgrims, but not without a coin — yonder I 
perceive is another house for travellers, we 
will proceed j thanks, good mother, and 
fare thee well." The matron suddenly 
looked out, and fearfully turning to the 
riglit and the left, muttered, " all is safe ; 
enter — I can give ye better fare than my 
neighbour — but look ye j if ye are not 
what you say, I am ruined. Hush 1 a 
voice ! — from England did you say ? Me • 
thinks I have heard of some such country 
far from Venice, and of needs, a wretched 
place, I doubt. Hark ye, sir pilgrims ; 
there is but mine own self and my daughter 
— we are poor — if ye both have wherewithal 
to pay, do it cheerfully ; and so may your pil- 
grimage be prosperous. — Quick ! I hear a 
voice ! — a whisper in the street — are ye 
really from England, say ye ? — and no 

spies? 



90 EDGAR. 

spies ? — Quick, tliat way — yon closet. — 
Silence !" 

Atheling, in the midst of these cautions 
and mystery, felt a dread rise upon bis 
mind that he had never experienced be- 
fore. Leolf hung down his head, and stir- 
red not. At length, said the old man, 
" Did I not tell thee there was need of 
caution ? thou knowest not mankind, thou 
knowest not the governments of Italy. 
*Tis not ancient Home that gives the law, 
nor ancient Venetia that is governed by 
that law ; but 'tis a country divided in 
petty states, all struggling for pre-emi- 
nence, and each suspecting and plotting 
against the other. Be silent — weigh every 
word — walk not — sigh not — laugh not — 
sleep not — mistrust all mankind ; but chief- 
ly, the envious and narrow-souled republi- 
can. And be on thy guard too, against 
the snares and arts of women ; especially 
of the old. They are cunning, avaricious 
and crafty. Beware of this one : play her 
on her passion ; thou seest 'tis avarice. 
Unbind the sword from thy shoukiers, and 
let us break off a branch of jewels for our 

support. 



B O O K IX. 91 

support. I can repay thee by and by.'* 
** Take all the jewels ; but couldst thou 
procure me a trusty handle to the blade ?" 
said Atheling. " Good ;" replied Leolf, 
" I stand not yet in need of them ; touch 
not the sword : wait till we step on shores 
less observant. Peace ! the hag returns." 

The door unclosed ■ — the matron ad- 
vanced to Leoif who feigned deep sleep. 
♦* So soon slumbering, pilgrim ? thou must 
heeds be weary — hold! awake 1 — hark!" 
Leolf staggering, rose up, the eye half 
closed — ** What, mother ! — where ; — what 
wouldst thou ?" muttered he : •' let me 
sleep on, I am faint and weary.'* " Nay," 
answered she, *' that cannot be here ; — ■ 
mount up the ladder, there is room above, 
and there remain. I will send thee pro- 
vision, and thou shalt discharge the debt 
as soon as 'tis incurred, and so shall we be 
friends.'* 

Leolf cursed in his heart ; but he lowly 
bent and led on Edgar to the half moul- 
dered stop, which creaked to the weight as 
they ascended. A shattered building gaped 
to their entrance : a century had stripped 

from 



02 EDGAR. 

from its outward surface, the covering of 
the beams, and the moss and ivy that had 
sprung from some straggling embryo, now 
waved round into the apertures, and half, 
hid the light of heaven, that an hour since 
had shone full through it. There had been 
a lattice window, but the cavity was partly 
^lled by a strip of serge, and a plank nailed 
at either end. The crackling of the floor 
in every step, roused a multitude of little 
animals that expressed in small shrieks their 
dislike to an intruder. A truss of straw flut- 
tered in one corner, and the remnant of a 
coverlid that had been once of sable, but 
which looked now of a dusky brown hue, 
was spread loathsome on its top. " Here," 
said the dame, " is accommodation for a 
prince, if he be not proud.*' Leolf frowned. 
"Why, mother, hast thou everlodged a prince 
within thy dwelling ?"—<« What if I have?" 
replied she, '* may it be aught to thee ? 
Look, yonder is the bed ; if thou art weary, 
rest till I have prepared thy food." The 
pilgrim answered not : with uncertain step 
the matron withdrew ; she paused — and 
returned— she hesitated : " There is a poor 

sick 



B O O K IX. ^3 

sick relative, a poor old man, iu the parti- 
tion there divided ; he moans at times in 
his slumber ; if, good pilgrims, ye hear a 
sigh, be not startled, *tis a reverend old 
man, my sire's uncle ; he has fought for 
the state, yet he is poor, sirs," added she, 
and raised ber withered hand across her 
eye. " Thr^a shalt be obeyed, mother,'* 
answered Leolf ; *' for what is thy poor 
sick kinsman to us, that we should disturb 
his sorrows?" — " True, pilgrim, I see thou 
art compassionate, and I am relieved,'* said 
the matron, and withdrew. 

No sooner was the dame gone, than 
Atheling fixed an ardent gaze upon Leolf, 
to mark his opinions; but the dark coun- 
tenance told nothing more than usual — 
both were silent ; and now, by degrees, did 
mistrust rise up in the breast of the young 
Prince ; he sat on the wretched pallet, and 
rapidly turned over every circumstance 
that had happened since his departure 
from Paris. Mistrust, suspicion, mystery, 
hung round Ledf, and he started with hor- 
ror on finding his heart half inclined to 
detest a benefactor, «• What, if he should 

have 



/ 



94< EP0AR. 

bav^ some intelligence with this woman ! 
but oh, how monstrous in me to suspect — 
I to think ill — Edgar Atheling to open his 
bi*east to ingratitude — an Englishman, who 
never forgets a favour^ to turn ingrate to- 
wards one who has saved his honour and 
his life ! — yet — begone, thou yet — thou 
doubt. Alas ! alas ! how I lament that I 
did not, as a warriour and an honourable 
exile, enter Venice, and openly solicit em- 
ployment. Oh, liow my soul abhors all 
artifice !— How I detest my servile conceal- 
ment ! Surely, surely, sympathy would 
have touched the breasts of the Senate — 
and, oh, perhaps, I might have spoken so 
feelingly as to have convinced — and how 
often, as my father has told me, does truth 
the most simple, convince by her native 
force J but, alas ! 'tis now too late. How 
could I with any face, sally forth from this 
hovel, after such declarations as Leolf has 
made, and acknowledge m.yself a chief and 
a noble of England ? Should I not be ques- 
tioned why I commenced the disguise, and 
did not continue it ? and might not my con- 
fusion, lead others to suspect me of sinis- 
ter 



book: fx. 95 

ter motives? Why, ob, why, did I act con- 
trary to my better judgment ; when reason 
spoke so loud, why did I resist ?** 

Edgar deeply sighed ; Leolf looked 
round. *' I know whence thou art griev- 
ed," mattered he ; '* but *lis too late ; 
come, I know what suspicions are rising 
to curve thy brow, but thou art wrong. I 
never beheld the hag, and to tell thee a 
truth, I like her not. I have nought of in- 
telligence witli her ; so cease to accuse 
me.'' Atheling, confounded, amazed, 
blushed deeper than the sun when he sets 
in blood ; his noble tongue disdained a 
prevarication, and yet it would not crave 
pardon ; for the human mind loves not to 
have his household wrenched out by force. 
Edgar was hurt, he was humbled, but alike 
seemed every stroke to Leolf j in a low 
voice, and careless of reply, he went on : — 
** Well I marked the old dame as she 
spoke ; and this is her case — for money is 
she to be bought, heart and soul. The 
sick relative is either some lawless ruffian, 
who waits for night to dispatch us ia the 

hope 



9^5 EDGAR. 

hope of spoil ; or 'tis one who flies from 
justice, or that has on foot some plot not 
yet ripe ; so I judged at first in her hesita- 
tion—but upon further thought, I guess it 
may be a woman, and not a man. Nay, 
start not- first, because she mentioned his 
sex, several distinct times ; women ever 
speak by exact contraries ; had it been a 
man, she'd have fixed on woman ; aye, 
sir, for pilgrims are safe with old women ; 
secondly, she laid much energy on the 
word, old, whence I conclude the person 
is young ; thirdly, her eye sparkled, not- 
withstanding herself, when she uttered 
poor, whence I know of a surety the guest 
fs>ich ; fourthly, she, with womanly artificCj 
mentioned the words, state, the govern- 
ment, whence I pronounce that she would 
have our minds to play upon these, and 
lead us from other points ; besides all 
which, by magnifying certain ideas of ter- 
ror in our forlorn station, she may teach 
us through every dark allusion, to be cau- 
tious, to be liberal in payment, to be silent, 
to be expeditious,— for in every word, in 

evtfy 



BOOK rx. 97 

every look, I see she likes us not, and 
would we were gone, could she but com- 
promise with avarice." 

The soul of Edgar was plunged into 
deeper amazement on the words of the pil- 
grim. Involuntarily he shrank farther from 
a being who could so immediately blast a 
character, and tear up motives by the roots. 
Leolf, who read every movement of his 
companion's ingenuous and artless soul, 
observed, but feigned to have not observed 
the little action of repugnance ; he again 
closed his eye, and Edgar felt a momentary 
satisfaction that he might dive into his 
own breast, and hold a council on his 
doubts. And here, the first power that 
met him was conscience. " How darest 
thou," said he severely, " how d-arest thou 
injure in thought a man who was thy friend* 
when all forsook thee ? who has risked his 
life to save thine ; who has shared with 
thee toils and dangers, and who, even now 
is plotting to convey thee in safety from 
these mysterioiis scenes ? What, if he be 
cold-hearted, suspicious, mistrustful, can 
his faults break down thy weighty obliga- 
T^OL. II. F lions? 



98 EDGAR. 

tioiis? Shall we not pay a just debt be- 
cause the creditor is gloomy, ill-natured, a 
tyrant ? how can the faults of Leolf step 
between Edgarandgratitude?'* — *' Enough, 
enough! '* said Atheling, " my conscience, 
my guardian, my preserver — thou hast 
spoken well, I will follow thy dictate. In 
this wretchedness, what ray of hope shall 
lighten on my breast, if I offend thee, my 
monitor ?" — " Leolf,'* cried he with pre- 
cipitation, " Leolf, my good friend, forgive 
my impetuous and rash suspicions. Leolf, 
I have dared to think ungenerously of thee; 
pardon, pardon me my benefactor, or I 
shall sink with the reproaches of my con- 
science for my ingratitude." — " Oh, my 
son, my son," murmured Leolf, averting 
his head, " yes, I pardon thcc, if thou w'ilt 
plead for Leolf, at the tribunal of Heaven 
— Edgar," continued he hastily looking up, 
** I had once a son — he had dark blue eyes 
like thine, and I have sometimes thought 
that in the sweet smile of thy lip, he re- 
sembled thee — but he died — he died in 
infancy ; and his tomb was so small that it 
served me for a pillow when I lay on the 

cold 



BOOK IX. 91) 

cold ground, didst thou know that, Edgar?*' 
** No, good Leolf," answered Atheling, in 
wonder at the altered tone — " but I am 
grieved in thy loss, and would sympathise 
witli thee.'*- — " Oh, I hate sympathy a\?d 
pity, my lord," replied J^eolf, as the deep 
gloom shaded his l:)row, and he resumed 
the drowsy posture. 

Astonishment again seized Atheling, but 
the old woman entered the chamber, and 
set before the travellers some large grapes, 
a melon, som-e bvead, some wine, and then 
retired. Leolf rose, and snatching the fruit 
surveyed it with care. He held the melon 
and pressed in every part the rough coat. 
** What seek you. Sir?*' asked Edgar. 
" I would know,*' answered Leolf, ** whe- 
ther there be any fissure or gap for poison. 
Touch not the grapes till thou have dabbled 
them in the wine — with that we are safe. 
I bear a powder which is on purpose to 
plunge in the foaming goblet 5 if the dust 
sink, all is well ; if it mingle, the draught 
carries death in the taste.'* 

Atheling feared to displease his compa- 
nion, he answered not^ and the danje re- 

F 2 turriinr^ 



100 EDGAR. 

turning, demanded to be paid for the re- 
fresliment. Leolf threw down the coin, and 
in a careless voice, said ** mother, we in Eng- 
land do not find it good to rest after meals ^""^ 
e*en take pity on us poor pilgrims, and say 
what news be moving ; Venice is a noble 
state, its merchants travel over the three'' 
quarters of the globe, the ships of the re- 
public look as a thick forest, from the great 
square through which we passed." " True, 
pilgrim," said the matron, and fixed a 
keen eye on the wary Leolf. He seemed 
to heed it not, and continued. " I hope 
we may not disturb the poor aged gen- 
tleman ; I dare assert he would not 
bless your guests. Do now, mother, sit 
down ; we people of England best love 
talk after dinner. Dost thou know that 
the gondolier that rowed us hither, said, 
• that all Venice was in quest of a beau- 
teous lady, young and rich, that had been 
lost and carried perhaps across the Adri- 
atic ? ' We, poor travellers, made our best 
escape through the crowd — I would that 
we could find some ship on her passage 
down the gulf." 

The 



BOOK IX. 101 

The countenance of the matron fell pale 
as the lunar beam, and strong flashes of 
scarlet spread in every direction upward, 
and deepened every feature. Leolf just 
then rubbed his visage, and from the divi- 
sion of his fingers saw, and saw enough. 
The woman confounded, turned aside to 
cough — she recovered ; fancied herself un- 
observed, and in a tone less steady, said, 
*' the story is surely false, good pilgrim, I 
have heard not of it. Even Venice has 
its babblers. Did ye ask me what news ? 
A fleet sails after to-morrow for Candia, 
so says my son who is a sailor, please 
ye, and a brave youth.'* ** To Candia ! 
Oh mother," cried Leolf, and started up,' 
*■' so great is our haste to be at the toil's end, 
that we would thank and reward thee too, 
if thou couldst gain a passage for two poor 
pilgrims." — " Aye, truly sirs," replied 
she, " I can advise with my son, and ere 
to-morrow night, shall ye be safely lodged in 
our navy." " Thanks, good matron," said 
Leolf. " however we may perish for want on 
our way, thou shalt be rewarded." A 
gleam of satisfaction shot athwart the fur- 

F 3 rowed 



l^^S E D G A K, 

rowed cheek of the old woman, and slie 
departed. 

Now would Edgar have spoken, but 
Leolf with an expressive frov/n taught him 
caution. Long they paused. At last whis- 
pered the old man, *' prudence, watchful- 
ness, or we are lost. Remember a lady is 
near ; what v/iil not female curiosity ! By 
and by will I rest ; do thou watch awhile, 
then awaken me, I will be on the alert, and 
thou shalt repose." 

Evening now flung around her with haste 
a dark robe. No soft grey and beauteous 
colours of twilight did she wear as in more 
temperate climes, but she fixed on a deep 
plittuC," imitating in strength of choice the 
bold sun, which gives to those regions all 
his. power, and will not hear of gradation. 

Leolf, who boasted not of nice feeling, 
rolled himself on the straw, and drew up 
the uninviting coverlid, and presently either 
was, or feigned to be, asleep. Edgar sat 
near him, melancholy and thoughtful ; he 
fixed on the gaps above, a tearful eye, and 
long endeavoured to catch a glimmering 
star, but in vain ; a soft breeze kissed the 

ivy. 



BOOK IX. 103 

ivy, and at length descended to play with 
Edgar's wild ringlet from which he had 
tossed the scolloped brim ; he thought a 
sound passed over his ear, but it was faint 
— he listened — again it sv/elled and melted 
away ; a sigh from the inhabitant of the 
inner chamber, thought he j fearful of 
breathing, he again tried to catch 
something of articulation, when in a few 
moments there arose an "ah! me!" in 
the sweetest accents of Italy. It was so 
soft, so sweet, so gentle, so plaintive, that 
it trembled half way ere it reached Ed- 
gar's ear, and then would it have perished 
had he not been eager. Quickly he un- 
cased memory and lodged in safety, in 
honour, tiie iiuiterer: ii revived, it 
throbbed, it lived. 

The little spring strives through its mean- 
dering source upward, rushes through th$ 
porous gravel, and bounds on with new 
start of extacy in the first gaze of heaven 
and light. The young rose tree that never 
counted of existence but two revolutions 
of the seasons, suddenly beholds on her 
tender branch a mossy bud, that blushes in 

F 4 its 



104 EDGAR. 

its birth ; she looks downward in graceful 
pride, under the new burthen : 

The chaste bosom of Atheling, more 
noble, more lovely, more pure, than eil]ier 
the unsullied fountain, or tiie virgin tree, 
on a sudden sprang to new emotions. The 
shock was strong ; he forgot the darkness, 
and sensible to the rising glow on his 
cheek, yet unconscious of the cause, droop- 
ed his head low over his knee, in the new 
confusion and surprise. 

Vainly did he listen ; not even a breeze 
rose to sing round the ivy bushes, and aid 
his fancy — all was still. Now imagination 
buoyed up the spirit of Edgar. Drowsi- 
ness flitted away. The chamber seemed 
commodious and pleasant. " It may be," 
thought he, *' a lovely m.aid yonder, who 
has fled from some unhappy roof, or some 
audacious pursuer. And if she should 
want a defender, why may not I bend at 
her feet, tear open my unvv-arlike garb, aiid 
oppose nations in her defence ? I would 
hold the precious trust as my life, and guard 
her innocence more spotless than the snowy 
flake, which hangs suspended betwixt eartU 

and 



BOOK IX. 105 

and heaven, and is just departing i'rom 
aether.'* 

Such were Edgar's thoughts as time ra- 
pidly dashed on. Leolf slumbered till 
beyond midnight, when he cast off the 
wrapper, and leaning forward whispered to 
Atheling to take his rest. The Prince de- 
clared he felt not weary, but he submitted ; 
and careless of the lowly bed on which lie 
reclined, gave himself to pleasing visions, 
till at last he fell into slumbers tranquil, 
gay, and refreshing. 

The day following, when the bright eye 
of Edgar met the partition, he blushed at 
past recollections ; for the image of a cap- 
tive or lovely fugitive again rose to his 
mind. '* If;" said he to Leolf, *' if thou, 
my friend, weit so happy as to be honoured 
with the discovery of that noble lady, of 
whom thou was speaking yesterday to our 
host, and that thou shouldst see that she 
required a shield in her defence, from pre- 
sumptuous suitors, or a iiaughty guardian, 
would not thine arm grow strong in such a 
cause ? '* 

" No, in truth," replied Leolf; *' we 

F 6 pi!grini:i 



106 EDGAR. 

pilgrims have nought to do with woiiieu ; 
they are vexatious beings. Woman is the 
source of all mischief, she has a head ever 
busy for plot, a cunning that sharpens at 
difficulties under which she sighs and feigns 
to bend ; she has a gaze more piercing than 
the sun*s ray through a chrystal vase, and 
a sudden perception of the feeling, the 
emotions of man, long ere he even guesses 
to have given her one chance for notice ; 
a vanity unbounded upon this knowledge, 
which she thinks to owe to uncommon 
sagacity, instead of acknowledging that it 
is an intuition common to her very sex ; 
she is patient only, when she dares not 
rebel, and is proud and scornful in the 
moment that man relaxes his dominion over 
her. Arrogant she is in youth, in the force 
of her charms ; ambitious in middle age^ 
to soar above her lord and her family; 
angry and malevolent in advanced years 
that the day is flown, and that but a few 
instants are left to indulge in the last tale 
of evil. The heart of woman is cased in 
adamant, and no one ever gained admis- 
sion to its recess but through the portol, 

which 



BOOK IX. 107 

wliich is self-love; and by soothing the 
attendant, which is flattery." 

Edgar presumed to smile as Leolf finish" 
ed the harangue. " Surely, my friend," 
said he, " now art thou severe. One wo- 
man I know, and know her well — may 
heaven guard her in peace and loveliness ! — 
and oh my friend, how unlike is she to 
thy picture ! The turtle-dove that spreads 
her downy wing to shield her mate, a mate 
dearer than her life, from the little zephyr, 
is not so tender, nor so gentle as she. As 
thou sayest, she is keen in guessing the 
mind of man, but how graceful ?s the know- 
ledge which is sought only for benevo- 
lence ! She looks with anxious eye on her 
lord, only to read the wish which has never 
yet been expressed, and to anticipate the 
will which has not yet given itself form. 
Woman, as my beloved preceptor hath oft 
declared, for his generous lip loved to sound 
her praise, woman has real sincerity, and 
is all truth when once her noble heart is 
touched. Of all friendship, that in which 
she has a share is most ardent and power- 
tlil. Her vivid imagination, inexhaustible 

F iw 



108 EDGAR. 

in its fecundity, is perpetually suggesting 
to her a ervice, a delicate attention, a 
tender care, even a complacent word for 
the beloved object or objects ; for the soul 
of woman is capacious enough to admit a 
pluralit}' of friends. 

« Woman is to be reproached with art 
say you^ — 'tis surprising ; when the very 
failing of loquacity with which some charge 
her, sufficiently proves that she is gene- 
rously candid and averse from concealment . 
but she can be silent as the shrouded 
corpse when honour has put his seal on 
her lip, and yet her brow shall not contract 
as in thought ; her tongue shall not stammer 
as if charged with unwieldy prohibitions, 
nor shall her ear be less than usually atten- 
tive to the courtesy of acquaintance. Deli- 
cacy of feeling is the characteristic of the 
men of England. If they are nice in ho- 
nour, in decorum, in the practice of every 
duty of humanity, what must be the lovely 
v/omen who. are a refinement of man 1 
Even in that generous soil, the prouder 
virtues have an air of austerity and reserve 
on the front of man, but everv virtue of its 

women 



BOOK IX. 109 

women is graceful and commanding ; whe- 
ther in the exercise of patience, of courage, 
of piety, of temperance ; of patriotism, of 
filial and conjugal love, of gratitude — in 
all she is touching, modest, enchanting. 
Such at least is my — such, but more lovely, 
is the woman I can oppose to thy rude 
sketch." 

Leolf, In his turn, gazed in wonder upon 
Atheling ; never had he remarked in the 
young prince so much hurry of discourse, 
such eagerness of repl}', such animation of 
feature. " Methinks, Sir," answered he, 
" thou hast been wafted througli tlie air to 
' the famed poet of Italy, this night, and 
hast caught a flourish. Pritliee, hast thou 
been to Avignon to see Laura, or hast thou 
fled to the delicious wilderness of the ro- 
mantic Petrarch ?" '^ 

Edgar, well accustomed to the old pil- 
grim's manner, v/as now hurt at the bhmt 
question, and vexed that he sliould appear 
so ; — ^he turned hastily away, and I.eolf, 
ever suspicious, now commenced a dis- 
course on pilgrimage, that he might after- 
wards have liberty to consider the most 

probable 



110 EDGAR. 

probable cause for the alteration. But 
both were interrupted by the matron, who 
came to desire the pilgrims to be in readi- 
ness by the rush of evening. She laid be- 
fore them a pannier of provision for the 
voyage, and receiving the return, and pro- 
mised reward from the cautious Leolf, she 
again retired. 

" My friend," said the prince, '* I 
should blush to see thy hand ever ready, 
and ever in thy purse, but that I look to 
opportunities of return ten fold, for all but 
thy benefits, and for them I must ever be 

thy " " Hush !" replied Leolf, 

♦• hark ! the noise !" — Edgar stopped and 
listened. The artifice of the old pilgrim 
succeeded ; he had begun to suspect the 
young chief of dark designs in his altered 
manner, and he said, in a murmur, " How 
detestable are acknowledgments and pro- 
fessions from him who has disgusted us ! — 
No wonder that man finds it hard to allow 
good qualities to an enemy 1" — " Sir," en- 
quired Atheling, " did you speak ?'* ob- 
serving the motion of his sullen lip. " I ? 

oh! yes, my L-^ , my brother pilgrim,** 

answered 



BOOK IX. Hi 

answered Leolf, " I was exclaiming against 
yonder black cloud, fearful it presaged 
storms.*' Edgar looked up, and then at 
the pilgrim, whose eye was closed, and 
tliis was ever the sign he used wlien he 
chose not to converse. 

But the hour of departure drew nigh. 
With a small taper the woman appeared, 
and hastened her unwelcome guests in their 
descent. Edgar, surprised at the secret 
tardiiiess he felt in his inclination to depart, 
continued slowly to move on, and was the 
last to creep down the shattered step. 
Leolf marked the reluctance ; a thought 
flashed across his mind — he felt half re- 
lieved of his uneasiness. " Haste a little, 
young pilgrim," said the matron, " surely 
thou wast more active yesterday ; never- 
vertheless, tlie stair is but one day oMer, 
*tis now strong enough to endure a cen- 
tury." Edgar quickened the movement, 
and on alighting in safety, v.'as grasped 
by Leolf, who hurried him after the guide 
that waited, and adva.nced so rapidly, as 
that in the deep shades of night, both must 
have been lost, had they not vigorously 
paced forward. At the end of two streets, 

a small 



112 EDGAR. 

a small gondola waited, the travellers en- 
tered, the guide took an oar, and a second 
person another, and, in profound silence, 
they rapidly cut the wave. 

When the boat had gained some distance, 
the men took from a covered recess a small 
lantern. The faint light cheered the pil- 
grims ; and, as they raised a glance, they 
perceived that both sailors were masked. 
Then they gazed around them, and pre- 
sently caught the cheering view of lamps 
suspended high over the fleet. " Good 
friends,'* said Atheling, " how far distant 
is the ship in whicli we may be stationed ?" 
— " More than a league," one replied. 
*' When sails the fleet?" asked Edgar. 
«* This night,'* answered the same man, 
and was then silent. 

Now the waves began to swell, and the 
waters to rush with tremendous precipita- 
tion over the huge beds of sand, which 
the sea deposits in its course as she ap- 
proaches to land, however inconsiderable it 
may be, in its dimensions. The seas rushed 
among the nestling isles, bearing up, with 
more violent motion th, ' their return upon 
every sixth hour* nsunlly produced, the 

*Proft5^orBlltdli^g'.iGeogra^by.-^■jcle Italy, p. "7.E(lit. 1762. 



B 6 O K IX, ll3 

dark floods that crossed the city's Tjase in all 
and every direction. The men dashed the 
oar with increased energy, and in two hours 
tliey reached the first vessel ; and, upon 
giving the signal, were received with the 
travellers. Leolf put the reward into the 
extended hand, and, in a moment, both 
rowers disappeared ; the boat was secured 
to the ship, whilst they, in change of dress, 
mingled with the company on board, and 
remained for ever unknown. 

The storm now broke in fury, but was 
soon spent. The heavens cleared ; the 
stars glistened in beautiful order, and 
countless numbers ; and the commander no 
longer hesitated to raise the anchor, and to 
fulfil the instructions of his Senate. 

During the hurry of departure, Edgar 
and his companion stood unobserved near 
a shroud, whither they had retired from 
the effects of the pelting storm ; but as 
the navy caught the fresh current of air 
which urged it forward, and that present 
anxiety was suspended, the commander 
desired that every stranger should be sum- 
moned before him. 

Atheling's 



114 EDGAR. 

Atheling's heart bounded with delight in 
the opportunity of now throwing off all 
disguise. He was together with Leolf, 
classed with several other pilgrims, and 
conducted to the state room j but the 
greater number of the strangers consisted 
of young men who were eager for glory in 
the field of battle. 

When all were assembled in respectful 
order and silence, the great chieftain, 
Victor Pisani,'^ who stood by the naval 
commander, thus addressed them : — 

*' You are not to be told, my friends, that 
Candia, the long attached child of Venice, 
has, with horrible infatuation, revolted 
from her allegiance. The instigator to 
this unnatural perfidy is the Turk ; he shall 
feel the indignation of Venice presently ; 
but first, will we chastise the rebel to his go- 
vernment, the guilty Candian. You, my 
friends, with noble ardour, you have avail- 
ed yourselves of the license of the Senate, 
and have thus, unsolicited by man, yet 
fired by the hope of glory and renown — 
and shall not renown be yours ? — you have 
in numbers exceech'ng my hopes, yet eq^ual 

to 



BOOK IX. 115 

to my desires, flocked to the standard of 
patriotism and duty. Every one amongst 
you shall be supplied with armour, with 
weapons, with the honourable ensigns of 
soldiery ; and I am assured, that in the little 
history every one gives of himself, and of 
his motives, we shall discover no fugitive 
from justice, no son who has broken down 
one duty to fulfil another; no man who, 
having disgraced himself on shore, seeks 
to mend de&perate fortunes by means which 
can alone give lustre to the honourable." 

So spoke the great General Pisani. He 
was answered by a murmur of applause, 
and then all were remanded from his pre- 
sence, and only two at once afterwards 
admitted, to declare their names, coim. 
try, family, and reasons for embracing 
a life of warfare ; after which examination'', 
they who could write signed to their testis 
monies, and others made a cross ; then the 
military oath was administcretl, and eveiy 
man was conducted to his quarter. 

•' Oh LeoJf, thou hast undone me P* 
exclaimed Edgar, as he flung himself o» 
the deck waiting for his turn ; «< see, see« 

my 



Il6 EDGAR. 

my friend, in -^vhat ends our artifice — but 
reflect — had we bat worn the modesty of 
strangers, had we only been cautious not 
to give offence by impertinence or curio- 
sity, we might have been safe in Venice ; 
none would have insulted us, and we 
might have obtained, even by day, free 
pass to the fleet j I, not in this mean dis- 
guise, but as a warriour, and an English- 
man!" To the reproach the old pilgrim 
made no answer, for other thoughts rushed 
to his mind. 

The young men quickly returned from 
the communication, some with looks of 
conscious rectitude, some confounded ; all 
the pilgrims entered, to give in their inten- 
tion and names— and at length but two 
remained, and these two were Atheling 
and his companion. 

Edgar made a desperate struggle to con- 
quer his extreme agitation, and his natural 
reserve of speech in the presence of stran- 
gers. The general had stepped back, and 
the naval commander had directed the in- 
terrogations to the pilgrims. But Atheling 
lushed up to him, and in a voice nearly 

inarticulate 



B O O K iX. 117 

inarticulate by strong emotion, said, '* oh 
General ! to you, to you I speak.'* Victor 
Pisani leaned eager forward. " Sir," said 
Atheling, and with a trembhng harid tore 
from his cheek the artificial locks, and 
from his shoulders the degrading folds, 
•' Sir, I am not a pilgrim — I was disguised 
— judge me not till I have breath to speak ; 
Sir, I too am a soldier, a chief, an exiled 
prince." — " A Prince!" exclaimed the 
General — " Hola there! who waits? — 
command the doors to be made ; look 
to the watch ; see that all go on right. ^ 
A prince !" continued he with a smile of 
credulity — ** a pilgrim also ? — a general 
also ? — but go on. Sir." 

The soul of Edgar sprang up to the 
taunt. With native grandeur he unbraced 
the beloved sword, and drawing it from 
the sheath, presented the hilt to the Gene- 
ral ; .-" take that sword, Sir," cried he; 
*' I give you free permission to keep the 
only treasure I now possess, a sword which 
has drunk blood in the fields of Crescy and 
Poictiers, which belonged to the Earl of 
Mercia,. prince of the blood royal of Eng- 
land. 



118 EDGAR. 

land, and by him given to me, his only 
son ; take it, and never let it be sullied by 
my touch, if I have disgraced my lip by a 
falsehood. Disguise I have used — it was at 
first permitted, nay, recommended to me : 
would, that I had sooner cast it aside ! I 
will be brief, Sir : made a prisoner of war, 
after the battle of Poictiers, for which 
great Edward's name of England shall be 
ever bound in laurel, I remained two years 
in Paris, and then procured an honourable 
release from Charles of France, who also was 
hastening to safety from the power of Na- 
varre's king. Next to the prince, am I in- 
debted for my life to this generous pilgrim 
here before you, whose history he himself 
must deliver. The Dauphin, solicited by me 
for a pledge of my truth and honour, slid on 
my finger the signet, which you ii;iay per- 
ceive bears the arms of France, at the 
same time that he bound me in a promise 
not to serve against his nation, or to set 
foot in my country for three years. I have 
youth, strength, and a sword, and I yes- 
terday arrived in Venice, waiting for the 
moment to exert them in the cause of ho- 
nour 



BOOK IX. 119 

nour and justice. Candia rebels, say you. 
General ? May you deign to lead a young 
warriour to the plain which disgraces itself 
in the breach of duty, and you shall see 
tliat an Englishman laughs at death, but 
sinks under the blast of dishonour.'* 

Pisani returned the sword to Atheling t 
he bowed, but coldly, and with studied 
respect gave an answer. *' Far be it from 
nie. Prince, to doubt your assertion— 
but. . ." he paused ; the colour deepened his 
scarred cheek ; then witli rapid utterance 
he continued : " I would not offend — far 
be it from me to throw an insinuation on 
a native of England — yet, had you, Sir, 
entered our city as became yourself, and 
but applied to the two ambassadors of your 
court, whom you might perhaps have 
known, one being a great poet, and the 
favourite of your Duke of Lancaster, 
Geoffrey Chaucer,'^ and the other the Lord 
de Cliflbrd, you would doubtless have ob- 
tained honourable commissions through 
them, immediately from the Republic. As 
the case is, I dare not invest an unsupport- 
ed stranger with command. I grieve, Sir, 

but 



120 EDGAR, 

but only from the rank of private soldier 
can I by degrees raise you ; for sucli is the 
tenour of orders which I dare not disobey." 
The doating mother of twin babes, seeing 
them languid and drooping, searches for 
the innocent balsam to re-animate their 
little frame. In rash confidence she mixes 
the drop with a ray of Iioney, and kissing 
the infant lip, introduces gradually the re- 
medy. She gazes witii eager smile, to 
witness the marvellous effect ; when lo ! 
dark rings suddenly enclose the eyelid, the 
lashes curl and tremble, the eyeball swells, 
the cheek turns livid, and dragged, down- 
ward from the red lid j the mouth stretches 
outward, now wide, now pursed, now 
rounded ; the lips swell out from the 
tongue ; the head enlarges and rolls from 
side to side ; the black vessels in the throat 
jut forward, the hands clench, the knees 
bend, the babes gasp, shriek, expire, and 
burst. The mother, the poor wretch — sees 
that she has poured down their tender gul"- 
lets the draught of death — she gazes first 
on one, then on the other — her first move- 
ment is to look for a dreg for her own 

lip, 






B K IX. 1^1 

lip ; but a secret power piiicks back her 
iinpious hand. She leans again— -puts 
down her ear to their disfigured corses. Her 
husband enters and starts. She rushes to 
him and laughing wildly, cries, *' 'twas I, 
love- — 'tis my deed— I killed them — lead 
me to the block — ^I should suffer, thou 
knowest — I am a murderer — yes, I will 
suffer. Lead on — to justice — people see 
ye not that v*^hich I have done?" 

Such were the gaze — the anguish— the 
desperation — the sullen agony— tiie laugh 
but more deep — the resolution of the Prince 
on these cutting words of the general of 
the Venetian army. He struggled— be 
gasped. Then gaining breatha, and bend- 
ing one knee, he laid the sv/ord at Pisaoi's 
feet J and tearing from his body the silver- 
studded armour, he also respectfully placed 
it with the sword at the top, and seizirs.o- a 
plain iron breast-plate for the common sol- 
diery and the corresponding garb, threw 
them about him, saying, «* *tis just, Sir. 
That armour and that sword I entrust to 
you ; when I deserve rank may I redeem 
those precious gifts of which I am now un- 

voL. II. G worthy. 



122 EDGAR. 

worthy. I beseech you, Sir, notice me 
not to your court ; and be pleased to recol- 
lect that I am now simply, Edgar Athel- 
ing." 

So saying, the prince bowed and hurried 
away ; leaving the general in astonishment, 
and the pilgrim contemptuously smiling at 
'his*self-degradation. 

Shame, disappointment, and remorse 
made deep havock in the sensible heart of 
Edgar during the whole voyage; yet silence 
and respect ever dwelled on his lip ; but 
inwardly he grieved ; and had not virtue 
reminded him of his sacrifice, he would 
have sunk under his own reproach. So it 
must be, alas ! thought he with anguish, so 
must we suffer if we act in defiance of our 
better reason, of our guardian spirit. But 
a few months ; oh that they would escape 
as a moment, and I may be able once more 
to endure myself Oh heaven, what hap- 
piness is there for man, when he has lost 
all reason tor self-esteem 1" 

Edgar with pale and disordered looks, 
leaped from his hiding-place when the fleet 
entered the port of Candia, and not daring 

to 



BOOK IX. VIo 

to raise an eye, sprang to the shore, mingled 
with the voluntary combatants, and like 
them advanced in order to the citadel, 
where also, was the regular army station- 
ed. And now, how ardent v;as the soul of 
Edgar in its self-imposed duties! The 
General who understood his noble conduct^ 
forbore in public particular conversation|^ 
but he honoured Atheling, and when not in 
presence of others, gave him his confidence 
and his esteem. Early and late was Athel- 
ing upon the guard ; vigilant, silent, at- 
tentive to the command of his chieftains ; 
his eye ever ready to catch their will, and 
his limb to execute any task however dan- 
gerous. , 

The rebels possessed the chief city. 
During six months they endured a siege. 
It so happened one day, that Edgar de- 
manded to appear before the chief captains 
in council, and thus he spoke :— 

" Sirs, being this day on guard, I nar- 
rowly watched a person who looked as 
though he would avoid me — I challenged 
him roundly with sinister designs — he re- 
plied with confusion — his imprudent speech 

G 2 convinced 



124 EDGAR. 

convinced me, and I refused him a pass. On 
this, he aimed a dart at my side. I wrench- 
ed the weapon fi'om him — and levelled him 
with the earth — seeing no hope of escape he 
drew a dagger and pierced his own breast 
ere I could arrest his arm. I searched the 
dead ; and have discovered this slip of 
parchment.'* 

The chiefs eagerly pressed to read the 
characters, but of connected, nothing could 
be understood. " Can you give us any 
light here, most faithful soldier ?" said the 
General, with a marked smile to Edgar. 
The young man respectfully advanced, 
proud of commendation which he felt he had 
earned. The other chieftains ignorant of 
the greater virtues, as of the noble descent 
of the young centinel, gave him but small 
attention. Thus replied Atheling : — 

** Great general! when I was yet a boy, 
my father, who ever intended me for a sol- 
dier, taught me many matters, which he 
said might be useful on occasions, to my 
profession. Among them, was a power of 
couching a whole phrase in two or three 
strokes j he called the art short-hand, and 

as 



BOOK IX. 1Q5 

as far as my little knowledge extends, this 
slip as ye perceive, contains twelve charac- 
ters, but three whole sentences. I under- 
stand them thus to form in Greek words : 
'* if our emissary fail, we are undone. The 
town is exasperated by want, and is half 
disposed to return to its allegiance. Haste 
then ; make tlie circuit of the mountains, 
and join us with provision and arms, and 
our messenger shall bring us back again the 
note and thy verbal reply." 

*♦ Now, Sir," continued Edgar with 
brightened eye ; but he recollected his sta- 
tion, and suddenly paused. " Go on, 
young warriour," cried Victor Pisani, in 
triumph looking around — Edgar continued. 
" Now, Sir, if a band of fifty men might 
be chosen t<j go secretly at the dusk, and 
make the attempt to check this reinforce- 
ment -if I might be of the number " 

" Thou shall command that liLtie valourous 
band, soldier," replied the general, *' ad- 
vance, Sir, the service thou hast rendered 
us, is invaluable — how many lives of 
the Candians may be spared through 
this important discovery. In the name of 

G 3 the 



1^5 E D-G A R. 

the Venetian Republic, I raise thee to the 
junior military rank — thou hast need of a 
sword ; there is mine — gird it on — away ; 
to victory, young hero, and proud shall be 
the day for thee when the standard of the 
Republic floats on the city ramparts — awayj 
choose thy men j the service and the glory 
be thine." Atheling sank on his knee, to 
grasp the generous hand— his great soul 
sv/elled in his breast, and forced a warm 
current of blood to his cheek ; — he was 
speechless : but ardour, hope, joy, and ex- 
alted courage, swam in his gaze, and spoke 
volumes of truth. 

Atheling once more trod the earth as a 
man. He gazed upon the heavens — his 
foot no longer felt cloggeil, but it sprang 
up elastic, under him. A sweet play of 
lofty emotions stretched his faculties, and 
the smile of innate grandeur and dignity 
once more stole round his vermilion lip. 
Oh virtue, powerful lovely virtue, how 
canst thou transform a man ! Without 
thee he gropes a brute ; through thee he 
treads an immortal ; when he forgets thee, 
he scowls and carries disgust on a brow of 

ivory j 



BOOK IX. 127 

ivory ; but in thy influence he moves, he 
expands in the beauty of angels, and carries 
in his look the eloquence of majesty and 
awe. 

Now he selected the hardy band, all proud 
of the service ; and as time shut out day, 
they secretly quitted the army, and began 
the march. Three leagues had they to 
pass ere the mountain could be gained — 
but Atheling led forward swiftly and un- 
daunted. Eagerly was he followed ; yet he 
occasionally stopped to wait for his men. 
A large flood checked ihe progress — it was 
swollen by heavy rains, and its current 
roared strong and turbulent. The little 
band halted in close order for the word of 
the brave commander. Edgar thought for 
an instant ; then tearing up by the roots a 
young pine, " here are trees, my friends,** 
cried he, " wrench them up and cast a few 
into the stream ; three or four of us may 
hold the riding prop, and stem the cur^ 
rent's force — behold 1 as I do^'' and as he 
swung forward the pine, he plunged into 
the wave, and seizing with one grasp strok- 
ed away the rushing fluid with the other. 

G 4 The 



128 E D G A R4 

The men inspired and emboldened by theii' 
leader, quickly followed ; and all landed 
on the opposite bank; — from which, but 
little further onward arose the mount, 
which overlooked the rebellious city. 
Atheling led on to the centre. *' Here 
we rest,'* said he, " 'tis advisable that 
one or two go up to the utmost height— 
the moon rises, and discovery may follow. 
I, therefore, will be the man." Every one 
was eager to share the danger, but Edgar 
went and alone ; he ascended to the sum- 
mit — all was quiet, and he returned. 

The hour of midnight arrived. Athe- 
ling permitted not a sound to move. Every 
ear was on the listen. A trumpet blew 
from the distance. *' Hush," whispered 
Edgar, " now is the moment." A light 
appeared. A clamour of tongues was heard. 
The band stood close, firm, steady ; Athe- 
ling all ardour and expectation. The ene- 
my ascended the mount. 

Now the Prince and his men rushed for- 
ward. " Stop or you die !" bellowed he. 
The rebel chief started with rage and asto- 
nishment — but presently he stamped on 

the 



BOOK IX. 129 

the earth with his foot ; " no," cried he, 
" to the charge ! —advance, my brave fel- 
lows — advance, we are betrayed." *' Hold! 
yet a moment !" exclaimed Atheling ; 
" civil war is most horrible — before one 
countryman crushes his fellow, learn oh 
rebelhous chief, that the Venetian Gover- 
nor knows of thy plot — we came to inter- 
cept thee, and to succeed or die." " Die 
then, thou audacious," roared the traitor j 
" on fellows ! to the charge ! " — " Off, I 
say ; nor stain your impious hands, citi- 
zens," thundered Edgar. " You men, 
what would ye? Venice can pardon— re- 
pent, and all shall be forgotten. My 
friends, secure their arms : no escape, no 
bloodshed, if it be possible. Thou, chief, 
mayst turn thy vengeance on me, if thou 
art sick of life." " Oh," returned the fu- 
rious rebel, " oh, that I could drink thy 
heart's blood, whilst it be yet boiling in 
thy prowess," and rushing on Edgar, essay- 
ed to grind him in his arms. Atheling 
smiled fearless, and quickly evaded the 
grasp ; when the monster falling, the Briton 
took his sword, thrusting on him his 

G 5 foot 



130 EDGAR. 

foot whilst his heart relented to the offer of 
mercy. The rebel was silent, and Edgar 
stretched a hand to aid his rising. Then 
he stood up foaming with rage, and put- 
ting his l,iand under his armour, drew forth 
a dagger and struck so hard upon the iron 
breast-plate of his generous foe, that sparks 
fired in every direction. ♦' Men of Candia 1 
behold the perfidy of this traitor,'* exclaimed 
Atheling; and exasperated, he lifted his arm, 
and sheathed his bria-ht sword in his bosom. 
No sooner did the Candian fall, than Edgar 
cried out, *' Now, good people, behold the 
fate of a rebel to his country — advance 
imder our banner — the banner of loyalty, 
and I swear to you, you shall be restoied 
to favour.*' Upon this, the men gave a 
shout, and the two little armies instantly 
embraced, whilst all swore fidelity. Athe- 
ling commanded the corpse to be raised, 
and the troop again set forward by the 
opening light of day ; descended the hill 
on the other side, arrived at the city gate, 
and demanding entrance, were all without 
suspicion, admitted. Atheling drew up his 
men around him, and as the inhabitants 

flocked 



BOOK IX. 131 

flocked for expected provisions, he thus 
addressed them : 

" TliB army before you, O people, is for 
the lawful government. One of the rebel 
chiefs is punished for his crimes, and, as you 
may perceive, is no more. We stand here in 
the name of Venice, either to pardon or to 
punish — for pardon shall be your's if you 
only return to duty, and the Republic 
shall mercifully receive you as penitent 
children — ail these your fathers, brothers, 
husbands, relatives, are sworn to their alle- 
giance, and will ye longer hold out against 
the force by which ye are surrounded ? 
The great body of the Venetian army is 
without, in the opposite quarter of the city, 
and our efforts shall be, to rush forward 
and give it admittance. Choose then — we 
have provision in plenty to offer you, we 
have protection, we have forgiveness j 
quickly choose — rebellion and death, or 
life, pardon, and protection." 

One vast shout rent the air. " Life — 
protection— life ! food ! We repent, if 
Venice will pardon." — " She will," ex- 
claimed Atheling, " she will. Ye men, 

G 6 joiu 



132 EDGAR. 

join my forces ; women, keep close. Let 
us advance ; open the gates to the Vene- 
tians, you, my friends ; I, with a few, will 
ascend the ramparts to plant the banner.** 

Onward rushed Atheling, at the head 
of a body of natives, who cried, " Peace, 
peace ! we are forgiven." Suddenly, Ed- 
gar perceived a warriour eagerly clasping 
in his arm a struggling burthen — a shriek 
escaped — he started and fled towards the 
sound. A female dropped lifeless on the 
soil, and the enraged stranger lifted a 
ponderous club at the hero. " Dastard ! to 
injure a woman," exclaimed Edgar, and 
plunged his sword into his thigh. *' Look 
to the wounded and the lady,** said Athel- 
ing to two of his people, and hurried on. 
Li a few moments, the standard of Venice 
floated on the walls — the sun cast his glo- 
rious beams upon it — the whole town shout- 
ed for joy — the army entered with the blast 
of the trumpet. " Peace, pardon !** echoed 
above every sound, and swelled the happy 
tumult eVen to the concave of the skies. 

The good general held forth his hand to 
the transported mothers, who met friends, 

relations, 



BOOK IX. i J3 

relations, and countrymen in his train. 
" Where, but where is the noble hero of 
the day?'* exclaimed Victor Pisani, '* where 
is the warriour who conquers, but delights 
not in blood ; who brings back people to 
duty but through persuasion ; who is va- 
liant, but not cruel ; wary, but not trea- 
cherous ; whose glory only equals his mo- 
desty ? AVomen, where is he ? Wives, he 
has saved your husbands ; mothers, he has 
spared your sons ; virgins, ye are indebted 
to him for your lovers. Where is he, who 
in the midst of youth, health, vigour, 
strength, passion, can yet have command 
to unsheath the sword and to offer mercy • 
to brave the battle, and yet sigh to crush 
a life ?" 

Atheling, in the mean time, sprang rapid- 
ly to the edge of the lofty walls. At their 
base was a deep stream, and he precipitated 
himself downward in it. The wave foam- 
ed wide — the hero disappeared — but, in a 
moment, he rose to the surface, leaped 
over the edge, and darting on, laid the 
rebellious colours at the feet of his o-eneral, 
amidst the reiterated shouts of, " My de- 
liverer. 



134 EDGAR. 

liverer, my guardian, my brother I*' — 
Victor Pisani drew hiin close, and pressed 
him with strenuous grasp to his breast. 
" Welcome, most heroic chief," cried he, 
*^* most welcome 1'* then he cried, *' Si- 
lence ! my friends — stop, oh assembled 
people, but a moment — and you, oh chiefs 1 
advance and listen.'* 

" People, the hero before ye — attend, 
my brave soldiers, to the lofty deed. — This 
hero is of the royal ancestry of England ; 
that country so famed for its attachment 
to liberty, and for honour ; he fought in 
the great battle of, Poictiers, and soon 
after, being made a captive, was released, 
under a nromise not to return for a few 

JL 

years to his country. He put on disguise, 
and came disguised to me for employment. 
I received him coldly, and taxed him with 
artifice. In the grandeur of his soul, he felt 
my reproof, and to atone for his fault, he 
consented to become a private soldier ; laid 
his bright armour and splendid sword at my 
feet, and has invariably refused to be in- 
vested with them, till they had been fairly 
won by an honourable action. Closely 

have 



B O O K IX. 135 

have I observed this young hero ; — as a 
soldier, no duty was too fatiguing, no 
office too menial. Early and late, with eye 
fixed on his superiors in rank; with manner 
ever respectful ; will, ever ready ; tongue, 
ever prudent ; he was the admiration of his 
comrades and the pride of his general. 
But now, my friends, ye know the action 
he has performed, the services he has ren- 
dered, the lives he has spared, the con- 
quest he has won. Now^ my brave army, 
ye generous Candians, now pronounce 
whether he deserves not his birthright and 
his arms? Speak, my brave friends.'* 

The cries of triumph, of joy, of admira- 
tion, mingled with the clasliing of arms, and 
swelled with greater fury than ever. Edgar 
knelt to the general, who commanded the 
shield-bearer to advance. " Rise, Prince," 
said he, *' receive, in the presence of five 
thousand people, the reward of virtue,'* 
and he assisted Edgar to brace on his 
arms ; then he threw over his neck a chain 
of diamonds of immense cost. " This 
chain," cried he, aloud, *' was entrusted 
to me by the republic : ** Give," commanded 

the 



136 EDGAR. 

the Doge, in full Senate, " give this pledge 
of the gratitude of Venice to the greatest 
hero of the Candian war.'* Thus I apply 
it — people, ratify my choice !'^ Again the 
shouts redoubled. *' Go, Prince," conti- 
nued the general, again embracing him ; 
" I know not what has been thy education, 
but I envy the father of such a son." 

Atheling grasped the hand of Victor 
Pisani, and in vain attempted to speak. 
" My general, my father, my noble friend," 
he exclaimed ; but he could add no more, 
and he drew down the bright vizor over 
his face to conceal his deep emotion ; but 
the people desired to gaze on his manly 
countenance, and pressed eagerly around 
him. To check the importunity, he slid away 
into a neighbouring hamlet, where a fe- 
male running to him, said, " Enter, thou 
great chief; my son v.as saved by thee," 

Atheling hurried into the shelter; but 
f.s the door closed, a person rushed in, and 
dropped at his feet. The hero, amazed, 
lifted the fallen, and gazing as the drapery 
slid away, discovered a face exquisite in 
the perfection of beauty. 

Lovely 



u 



-BOOK IX. 337 

" Lovely being,'* murmured the Prince, 
as his eye wandered over features that had 
been tinged by the incense of the enrap- 
tured sun ; over tresses which floated in 
glossy jet, and on lashes which swept low 
as the roses of the cheek to touch their 
bloom : " lovely being, who art thou ? or 
of what art thou afraid, whilst Atheling 
supports thee in his strong arm ?" The 
lady moved — she slowly raised her form, 
and straining the lid, sighed out, ** alas ! 
where am I ?'* 

Edgar replied not. A strong trembling 
shook his frame — his eye bent to the 
ground — his cheek flashed to deepest red, 
and fell again to hue of snow — his lip, 
parted for reply, remained severed. . . 

The lady rose, and looking wildly round, 
" are you not my preserver?" said she, 
fixing upon him her dark bright orbs j 
*' when the ruffian would have fled with 
me, did you not strike his arm, and give 
me liberty ? Oh yes ; I will kneel to thee, 
great hero ; I owe all to thee, valiant chief 
— thus, and thus I thank thee." 

Atheling's cheek grew to a deeper glow 

of 



138 EDGAR. 

of shame and confusion— he drew back, as 
he uttered, " oh madam, humble me not, 
I conjure you, by. . — rise, lady, I implore, 
or I shall. . ** — again he stopped confound- 
ed — " the voice — 'tis the same as in Ve- 
nice," he involuntarily murmured, as he 
caught another glance. " How, noble 
stranger," said the lady, catching the 
words, " hast thou seen me in Venice ? — 
Alas 1 I have been in that city, and in my 
passage to Alexandria was made captive 
by the rebel ships, and presented to the 
chief, from whom I was rescued by you." 

..Edgar, with strong emotion, which he 
endeavoured to suppress, replied, " no, 
lyiadam, the voice— but not to see you — 
the honour was reserved for this day," and 
he blushed deeply, that he had presumed 

so far. 

The lady sighed, and leaning forward, 
drooped her msjestic head over a round- 
ed arm, soft as the mantle of the velvet 
peach, and looking on the abashed Edgar, 
said, *' I thought, young Prince, I had 
never met thee in Venice — where couldst 
thou ever have heard my voice ?~be not 

suiprised 



BOOK IX. 139 

surppised that I give thee thy honours ; I 
too have heard the words of Victor Pisani ; 
I looked on thee, as he spoke, and recog- 
nized my benefactor and my deliverer, and 
hasted to thank thee.** 

" Oh lady,*' cried Athehng, averting 
his eye, •' repeat not, I conjure you, the 
trifling service rendered you ; what man 
could behold a lady in distress, and refuse 
one exertion — but so voung and so love- 
ly...'* — he paused, for strong agitation im- 
peded his utterance. '^ 

*♦ Yet I will, nevertheless,** cried the 
lady, " call you, Sir, my benefactor. 
Prince,** continued she, with lofty grace- 
fulness, '* Prince, understand that the 
Sultan of Egypt is indebted to you for a 
sister's life ; he is grateful, his sister is 
powerful ; Alexandria even now, boasts 
hundreds of your nation \'^ the war in Can- 
dia is at an end ; migiit not the Prince 
Edgar pass a few months of his exile in a 
court that would be proud to shew him hO' 
nour? Say, generous Prince, wilt thou 
accompany the grateful Nourrayah to her 
native shores, and remain during some time 

of 



140 EDGAR. 

of thy banishment amongst a people^ a 
governor, that will adore thy virtues, and 
make every exertion to give thee a courteous 
welcome ?'* As she ended, she looked 
timidly on Atheling, and blushed. 

Edgar, trembling with anxiety, surprise, 
joy, and doubt, hesitated in his reply ; for 
he could not slightly endure to quit his 
beloved general — yet a fluttering inclina- 
tion to behold again the beautiful stranger, 
held him in suspence — but now the door 
opened, and Leolf, who had never quitted 
the army, though inactive, the frowning 
Leolf stood before him. *' Hasten," cried 
he ; " the general is perplexed — the fickle 
Candictns, fired by his extravagant praise 
of you, are rushing through the streets, 
calling on your name — they wish to make 
you king over them ! Haste, flee with me 
to Jerusalem ; a bark is in readiness for 
Tvre. Victor Pisani is struck Vv'ith horror, 
for Venice will surely suspect and condemn 
him as a traitor." — " A traitor !" exclaim- 
ed Atheling ; *' oh generous exalted man I 
Edgar shall be pierced by ten thousand 
swords, ere one graze thy magnanimous 

breast— 



BOOK rx. 141 

breast — lead on, Leolf, I will see him — I 
will speak to him — I will rush to the 
depths of the sea, sooner than that one 
hair of that virtuous head should be dis- 
honoured." — ** Madman !'* cried Leolf, 
*' wouldst thou rush through tlie town 
now, and tinish all ? dost thou then pant 
so strong after the diadem ? Rather stay. 
Sir ; the general shall hear from me of thy 
retreat — stay a moment ; I will return, and 
we will depart this island.'* 

•* Daring presumptuous man," cried 
the lady *' who is he ?" — '* O madam," re- 
plied Edgar, *• he is my friend, and the 
preserver of my life ; his speech is home- 
ly, but the voice of reason should be ever 
grateful ; above all, to the headstrong, the 
rash, the impetuous." — " Ah, I see," re- 
plied the female, " that this friend is high 
in his influence ; I see that Egypt will not 
be permitted to pay her homage ; but I am 
able — yes, I am revived ; and I will depart 
for my country ; and, generous chief, 
deign sometimes to think upon the hapless 
Nourrayah." 

** Oh, madam," cried Atheling, hastily 

stepping 



142 EDGAR. 

Stepping forward, *' stay, I beseech you, a 
few moments, till I have seen this noble- 
minded general — and — lady, I intreat you, 
stay." 

Victor Pisani entered at the instant, fol- 
lowed by the old pilgrim : the Prince flung 
himself in his arms. " One embrace, my 
second father, my noble benelactor, and I 
am gone — take back the chain, most gene- 
rous of men, it may be prudent ; I have a 
soul that blazes in }our bounties."—*' No, 
never," cried Pisani, '^ never shall the chain 
be restored ; 'tis fairly yours, my brave 
hero. 1 grieve that we must part ; but I 
know thou wilt never forget thy general." 
— *' Forget thee !'* exclaimed Edgar, '^ oh, 
sir," and the tears gushed to his eye, 
*/ sooner- shall the bride forget her lord, or 
the mother her new-born babe, than Edgar 
Atheling the grandeur of Victor Pisani*s 
soul, and his parental tenderness." He 
stopped, for his breast o'erflowed ; the 
general was touched. " All will be blown 
away, all shall be well," said he ; " when 
the people know thou art indeed gone. A 
soldier is ever prepared to see extremes in 

hope 



BOOK IX. 143 

hope and fear ; if I praised thee much, 
Atheling, 'twas because I loved thee greatly, 
for thy character has in it an innocence, an 
unpractised art, with a bold native valour, 
that I have never before seen so firmly 
united ; and it hath been my wonder how 
thou couldst have been brought up, to 
possess, at twenty years, such modest vir- 
tue. Had I a son to wish for, he should 
resemble thee. But farewell, Edgar ; may 
heaven bless thee ; Leolf will lead to the 
citadel ; take my cloak. Two small vessels 
wait in the port for orders ; the one is for 
my government, the other shall conduct 
thee, and wliomsoever thou wilt, to Pales- 
tine, to Malta, to Egypt, as thou mayst 
choose. When thou art in safety, send me 
advices by the bark ;. and once more, fare 
thee well 1" As the general finished, he 
strained the hero to his breast, who in 
grateful silence, returned the grasp ; and 
then instantly sallied forth to harangue the 
people. 

Leolf seized the arm of Atheling, who 
would have rushed after the general. He 
sharply reproved, and throwing the mantle 

round, 



144 EDGAR. 

round, pointed to the secluded paths be- 
hind the house. " Come, quick," said he, 
" we will bend this way to avoid the 
crowds.'* The lady started ; Edgar has- 
tily turned. " No, Leolf, that lady must 
be protected to her native soil.'* — " Folly 1** 
murmured Leolf. " Nay, it must be ;" re- 
plied Atheling, with precipitation — " shall 
the weak plead to the strong, and plead in 
vain? Be generous, Leolf; this lady is a 
captive, and is detained from her native 
land. Since the noble general hath per- 
mitted, let us touch at Alexandria, and see 
her in safety ; then, oh, my friend, then I 
will with iov attend thee in thv lonff de- 
ferred visit to Jerusalem." Leolf frowned, 
but Atheling respectfully presented his 
hand to the trembling lady, and led her 
slowly forward, till he overtook a peasant 
with a mule, which he borrowed, and 
mounting the captive, himself led the ani- 
mal whilst Leolf strode sullen behind. Soon 
they reached the port ; embarked in the 
vessel, and the island of Candia with its 
liuge mount so famed in pagan legendary, 
disappeared by gentle gradation from tSie 
sight. 



BOOK X. 14<5 

BOOK X. 
THE ACTION. 

Sweet, unobtrusive Benevolence! thou soft 
orphan of Charity, hither, beauteous pity- 
breathing cherub, and fling thy tender arms 
around. How delightful is it, lovely blos- 
som, to behold the smiles thou canst draw 
from a saddened heart, to watch the re- 
treating tear steal away on thy cheering 
word ; to see thee stroking down rough sor- 
row, and lisping soft harmony and conso- 
lation to all mankind ! The negro, gasping 
under a burning soil, kisses thy little hand, 
wipes from his brow the rising drop, and 
with renewed patience and ardour bends to 
the daily toil. The old veteran, nipped 
by the cankering tooth of war, counts his 
deep scars, gazes on his maimed limbs, and 
listening to thy artless soothings, swings 
high the foaming goblet, strikes his breast, 
and offers the dregs of life in thy cause, 
^ven animals of timid nature, look up to 
thy smiling placid eye, and in mute ex- 

VOL. ir. H pression 



146 EDGAR. 

pression breathe their love : the innocent 
lamb stretches forth his little head to rest 
it on thy caressing arm. The faithful 
dog, with animated vision, bounds before 
thee, plays a thousand generous submis- 
sions to thy will, erects his fine-taught ear, 
lights up the countenance with sense half 
human, and distending the mouth, makes 
thee start in pleasing wonder to observe a 
laugh struggling on the face of a brute. 
Thus, oh, gentle child ! to the sad or the 
gay, the maimed or the strong, the man or 
the brute, art thou ever engaging and 
equally dear ! 

In a few days, the Venetian bark drew 
near to the low and sandy coast of Egypt," 
and Atheling, who had never presumed to 
visit the beautiful stranger in her apartment, 
now saw her step on the deck. Pleased, 
yet dejected, he ventured to look, as she 
moved, with more of grandeur than love- 
liness — of grace, than of sweetness. She 
extended her fine hand, and drawing round 
the floating robe, sighing, whispered, " Yes, 
Prince, there is my country. Alas ! why 
do I not feel my bosom swell with plea- 
sure? 



BOOK X. 1^7 

sure ? Methinks I am fearful of some dire 
event. Surely, my preserver, thou wilt not 
desert us ? Thy friend may go to Pales- 
tine without thee ; Alexandria sends ves^ 
sels to every port in the Mediterranean ; 
stay then but a few days, nay a few hours, 
with us, and easily shalt thou find a pas- 
sage to Tyre." The empassioned Edgar 
smiled and blushed on the earnestness of 
the lady, and respectfully touching the 
proffered hand, attempted a reply j his 
voice faltered, the hand slid from his trem- 
bling finger, and he directed his wandering 
gaze to the approaching harbour. 

But the Sultana delighted, marked the 
growing passion in Edgar's breast; she 
turned suddenly, and smiling graceful, again 
curved her polished arm, and hesitating, 
said, *' Look where the pillar of the great 
Pompey adorns our shores. Love and va- 
lour spring in our soil j the young, the beau- 
tiful, the gay, the warlike, have graced 
Egyptian history ; and my city, especially, 
has been not more famed for its works of 
art, and tbe grandeur of its founder, than 

H S for 



i48 E D G A R. 

for the beauty and talents of its last great 
Queen." 

Atheling looked full in the countenance 
of Nourrayah as she finished, to judge whe- 
ther he might reply. The lady with deep 
penetration hung eager on the expected 
remark, yet she gently said, ♦' Speak, my 
lord ; do you not allow that our lovely 
Queen equalled any that ever wielded the 
British sceptre ?" Atheling hastily rejoined, 
** Oh, madam, the jewels of her diadem 
were costly, but the most brilliant on the 
forehead of a British Queen — of woman, 
she wanted ; and the lustre of the whole 
tiara was diminished." Nourrayah deeply 
blushed, and Edgar remained silent ; nei- 
ther did the lady speak again, but returned 
to her apartment below. 

In the mean time, the vessel laboured 
against the strong current which drove im- 
petuous to the low and flat shore. Edgar 
sought out Leolf, who, sullen and dissatis- 
fied, desired him not to set foot on land. 
" Nay, good Leolf," said the Prince, "just 
to gaze on the interesting scenes, and then 
. *.."-*" Just to gaze on the lady," re- 
torted 



BOOK X. H'9 

torted Leolf ; " seest thou not she loves 
thee ? aye, madly too ; and I fear thou 
dost in return by her j 'tis folly." *' Howl'* 
interrupted Atheling, *' loves me, good 
Leolf? For once, indeed, thou wouldst 
flatter me. No, good Leolf, the lady is 
grateful, but not . . .'* and he paused and 
smiled, confused. " I flatter thee !'* an- 
swered Leolf, " no, in truth ; I tell thee 
thou art caught in a net.'* Edgar smiled. 
•' Surely," said he, *' when a lovely wo- 
man is near, we may give her the homage, 
the respect, her beauty and youth demand; 
surely, Leolf, thou wouldst not have man 
to forget his humanity ? I am honoured 
by the sweet converse of this lady, and I 
hear her soft acknowledgments confused, 
because I could wish the service she alludes 
to, were better worth." — '* Confused !" re- 
torted Leolf, " no doubt thou art con- 
fused. I tell thee thou lovest, aye, pas- 
sionately." 

Atheling stepped back indignant j anger 
flashed round his bright eye ; the colours 
gathered to his cheek. " Leolf!" exclaim- 
ed he ; but suddenly he checked himself ^ 

H 3 he 



150 EDGAR. 

he caught a sight of the old man's grey 
lock that quivered in the wind, as his half- 
dismantled head was bent towards the 
grpLUid J he sat witli folded arms on a 
tattered sail, and then turned on his shri- 
velled fiager the old scrip, from which he 
took figs and a morsel of hard bread. 
Edgar recovered his better self, and sitting 
instantly by Leolf, said, " now, hearken a 
moment, my good friend, for thy words 
hurt me, Leolf. That I who am young, 
should be pleased in the society of an 
engaging lady, is not more than natural, 
and thou wouldst expect that I should 
endeavour, by animated discourse, to 
shew my value for her condescension ; 
but as a . . . what formal courtesy demands, 
that merely do I offer. Thou wouldst ex- 
pect that I should handsomely reply, that 
I should with easy respectfulness thank her 
for the generous interest she is pleased to 
take in my well-being ; that I should be, 
in short, as I was, frank and unembar- 
rassed with the amiable young Princess 
Isabella: but thou art mistaken, Leolf; 
so far from giving the Sultana any fiivour- 

able 



BOOK X. 151 

able impression of my character, I have 
acted in her presence in a way to destroy 
the faint idea of merit which she might 
entertain from the words of the noble 
Pisani. When she is absent, I can con- 
verse freely with thee, with our captain ; 
but from the moment she stands before 
me, I am so overawed by the majesty of 
her person, and the grandeur of her air, 
that I am silent and abashed ; or, if I 
speak, 'tis only in clipped sentences, and 
Vv'ith hesitation. Thus do I ever appear 
to disadvantage before her ; and thus far 
am I from seeking her regard. I tell thee, 
Leolf, then, thou art unjust in misjudging 
my motives ; I am interested in that won- 
drous shore, and long to survey some of 
its marvellous remains of antiquity." 

The old pilgrim groaned aloud. Edgar 
looked at him for a reply, but lie waited in 
vain. And now the vessel having cleared 
the dangerous entrance,'* cast her anchor 
in a deep basin. The Sultana, gazing de- 
lighted around her, gave a hand to Athe- 
ling, and then descended with him into 
the small boat. " Leolf," cried the Prince, 

H 4 " come. 



152 EDGAR. 

'* come, my friend.'* — " Heed me not," 
replied he, " I will follow at my own 
hour." — " How morose is that old pil- 
grim,'* said Nourrayah : " I wonder. . . ." 
but the countenance of Edgar changed, as 
she began, and she continued, '* I wonder 
what may be his age ?" Atheling revived, 
and made an answer. But now the oars 
struck the shallower waves, and in a mo- 
ment Edgar stepped ashore, amidst a vast 
multitude of all nations. The lady drew 
down her veil, and commanding Atheling 
to follow, led him to a spacious building 
not far distant, and entering the gate, ad- 
dressed in Arabic'^ the attendant j who, 
upon hearing the well-known voice, darted 
forward, and dropped senseless at her feet. 
She hastily beckoned to another for his 
assistance, and passed on, making herself 
known, and conducted the Prince through 
the spacious and costly apartments. Amaze- 
ment and joy filled every breast, at the 
long-wished-for arrival of their lady, and 
the news rapidly spread through Alexan- 
dria. 

" Conductihe noble guest to the bath, 

and 



B O O K X. 153 

and supply him with robes," cried the 
Sultana, " and let a banquet be prepared.'* 
The train obeyed, and the astonished 
Atheling submitted to the charming re- 
freshment ; but the unwarlike dress of the 
east he declined, and as a British warriour 
he met the lady ; who, adorned with mag- 
niticence, and breathing the fragrant per- 
fumes of Arabia, seated herself on a swel- 
ling couch, and pressed under her slender' 
' foot the rich carpet of Persia, whilst she 
helped him to the delicacies of her coun- 
try ; when, dismissing to the adjoining 
chamber the soft music, she reclined pen- 
sive forward to meet the eye of Edgar, and* 
thus addressed him : 

" I doubt not, engaging Prince, but 
thou hast an anxiety to know how I should^ 
be induced to reside in Venice j I will, in. 
few words, satisfy thy curiosity.'* 

" The old Sultana, my mother, w^as 
permitted, after the decease of her lord, 
to retire from Cairo to this mansion; Until- 
the last inundation but two, of the Nile 
we lived here together ; but she then quit- 

H- 5. ted. 



154< E D G A E« 

ted this life, to join the -Sultan, my father, 
in Paradise. 

" In early childhood, I imbibed from an 
European attendant an extreme partiality 
for the Franks f^ and my mother, either 
from inclination for their polished manners, 
or to gratify her favoiu'ite child, invited to 
our banquets all the great among them 
who visited this city. Among these, was a 
noble of Venice — he pleased my fancy — he 
gained ray heart ; and, unknov.n to my 
kindred, I took the marriage vow. Scarce- 
ly was I a bride, ere I found myself a 
widow, for Venice recalled my lord, and 
on his arrival, being struck with illness, he 
sent to apprize me. I instantly embarked, 
but was Loo late, for he was gone. And 
now my distress was so violent, that but 
for a friend, a dear friend (although a fo- 
reigner) of my lord, I know not whether 
Nourrayah might have been secure from 
her own despair.'* Here Atheling started 
—the lady paused, and then went on. 

" When I had remained in Venice three 
reyolutions of the moon, I had reason to 

suspect 



BOOK x.^ 155 

suspect the friend in whom I had trusted ; 
and I secreted myself in the house of a 
wretched creature, who, for jewels of ex- 
traordinary value consented to keep me 
unknown, till a passage could be secured 
me. In the mean time, I expected to suf- 
fer from her indiscretion, in receiving tra- 
vellers, who I feared might betray me — 
but alas ! . . . 

*' It happened one day that two poor pil- 
grims earnestly supplicated permission to 
enter, and my host, either from hospitality, 
or hope of gain, admitted them. In the 
next apartment to mine they were lodged. 
Supposing, as the woman had declared to 
them, that a sick person was near, they 
only spoke in whispers. But the younger, 
from time to time, forgot his caution, and 
in a sweet harmony, minified with tender- 
ness and melancholy, broke out. I started 
and listened, alas ! with too much delight. 
I essayed to gain one glimpse of tlie charm- 
ing unknown, for disguised, I was sure he 
must bo, when I perceived, through a small 
aperture, an eye more brilliant than the 
evening star; a lip, ruby as the rose of 

H 6 Damascus ; 



156 EDGAR. 

Damascus ; and teeth, -whiter than the dew 
wliich hangs upon the virgin lily of the 
Nile, M^hen the suilbeam of morning 
wakens it. His figure was enveloped in 
long robes, and the lower part of his 
countenance was shaded by a vast bush of 
hair; yet, when he moved, a grandeur 
stirred in his port, and a noble sweetness 
fluttered on his brow. Till evening drew 
him to herself, I gazed, as tears filled my 
ardent eye ; and then, when I might see 
no longer, I eagerly listened, while soft 
sighs rose on my pensive bosom. The- 
next day, the cruel host sent away my en- 
gaging unknown — methouglit he had heard' 
jToy sigh, and gave me pity, even as the 
wretched relative of that poor being ; for, 
as I strained mine ear for his words, they 
seemed to grow more gentle, more tender, 
more lovely. " Stay, gentle stranger," 
murmured I, in the accent of my country, 
" stay, sympathising unknown, but a mo- 
ment, and Nourrayah will accompany 
thee." But I was not heard, and the 
strangers departed ; Jerusalem, I learned 
by gold, v/as their destiny. Unable to- 

- - forget, 



B O K X. 157 

forget, I resolved to follow ; the vessel 
touched at Candia — she was seized, and I 
was transported to the odious chief of the 
rebels, who, during two seasons, imprison- 
ed and treated me with cruelty. He would 
at last have sacrificed my life when he paid 
the forfeit of his own, but that I was saved 
by the most generous of heroes, and the 
most charming of princes.'* 

During this recital, Atheling, with burn- 
ing bhaslies and throbbing bosom, fixed his 
gaze on the ground. That respectful awe 
with which woman liad ever filled his soul, 
now trembled to its foundation. Tumult 
rushed in upon his mind ; every delicate 
chain of youthful association and infantine 
simplicity endured a shock. Dizziness 
seized his brain ; the colours, like the ebb_ 
ing tide, rose and fell on his cheek. The 
lady paused — she extended' her hand, he 
saw it not, absorbed in emotions. Haugh- 
tily she resumed it, and striking with her 
foot, her slaves appeared. " Shew the 
guest to his chamber," said she, **time 
wears away — I will also withdraw." Edgar 
rose, and with a trembling lip, attempted 

to 



158 EDGAR. 

to speak, but his voice faltered, and the 
lady bowed and retired with her female at- 
tendants. 

Edgar flung himself upon the splendid 
sopha dressed. He gazed upon the lamps 
tliat threw their mild rays over his head, 
and he imbibed the fraij-rance of the most 
exquisite odours. *' Heavens !" cried he^ 
*' in wh:;t enchantment am I ? Vvliat con- 
fusion distracts my sense ? What tumult 
lifts up my heart and throws it back again ? 
My temples beat with fury, my whole 
frame trembles v.'ith dread, with uneasiness, 
witli doubt, with confusion, with remorse. 
Where am I, alas ? Wliere hast thou led 
me, beautiful Sultana ? What is thy de- 
sign ? AVhy those strong words, so sweet,, 
so alluring, so dangerous ; for these agi- 
tations thr.t fill my soul with dread, with 
tumult, cannot be the feelings of virtue ! 
— Virtue, oh 1 heavens ! Nourrayah, canst 
thou be virtuous ? Should virtuous woman 
thus address man ? And tliou, Edgar, and 
thou ? "What are these tumults ? Lovest 
thou the beautiful, the charming Nour- 
rayah ?— Lovely thou art j yes, thy name is 

soft. 



BOOK X. 159 

soft, 'tis sweet, and tender like thee — how 
gently did thy voice swell on mine ear 1 
What praises to tliy enraptured Edgar — 
thine Edgar ? Shall Edgar Atheling marry 
an Egyptian ? marry ! oh ! powers forbid 
it ! Marriage ! — to forget his home, his 
country, his family ? Oh ! never — perish 
the thought. Is then that love which 
is not to be honoured by marriage, 
worthv the breast of Mercia's son? Oh, 
myfc\ther! where are your lessons? Oh, 
Leolf, my friend, my veal friend, homely, 
but faithful, where art thou ? Yes, I will 
accompany thee from this fatal and se- 
ducing beauty. Yet heaven knows I sus- 
pected not my own heart, I revered the 
lady — yes, I respected thee, beautiful and 
too captivating as thou art. I thought vir- 
gin cliastity dwelt in thy bosom, else would 
not thy foot have enticed me, nor thy 
voice have encompassed me vath awe. I 
durst not raise mine eye to thy robe, fear- 
ful to offend thy purity ; and now, en- 
chanting beauty, I have dared to think of 
calling myself thine. — Fly from thee ? I 
will kueel at thy feet and kiss the hem of 

thy 



1 60 EDGAR. 

thy floating garment, and conjure tliee icf 
banish every one that would tear me from 
the roof that revives thy sigh. Nourrayah, 
thy name sliall be graven on the gem of 
Golconda, and it shall be suspended from' 
my breast — 'twill rejoice my soul." 

Tiius raved the son of Mercia in all the' 
phrenzy of passion ; vvhilst the calm inno- 
cence of sleep quitted his pillow, and wept 
crystal dew in a corner of the apnrtment. 
No sweet slumber closed his lids ; no pleas- 
ing images fioated round his imagination ; 
no peaceful serenity gently lifted up his 
breast ; the first rays of light stole round 
his wild locks, and glanced o'er his flushed 
cheek. For the first time since his ervistence, 
he bent to avoid the beauties of opening 
day. " Oh light !" cried he, "thou art un- 
welcome; — how meet her? — how speak to 
her? — how tell her I must hasten far away 
— and for ever — ever ? — When my soul is 
enslaved; when she tells me with those- 
beauteous coral lips, she loves me! Oh 
Leolf, wondrous man, didst thou not guess 
all ? How can I raise my eye to thy severe 
frown ? hitherto, 1 have not dreaded thee, 

because: 



BOOK X. iGl 

because I thought — oh vanity and wretch- 
edness 1 — I thought I did not merit thy aus- 
terity — but now — why do I not escape ? — 
'Tis day — yes ; she still sleeps. — Then is 
she virtuous, for the innocent alone shall 
know sweet rest — innocent " 

Atheling struck his forehead with vio- 
lence — he started up — •' how dare I ? — oh 
passion ! how hast thou hurried me into 
presumption ?— how dare I suspect the 
beautiful Sultana ? — how has my tongue 
<lishonoured her ! Did she say that in me 
she recognized the young pilgrim, she 
loved ? Oh never! Could she have spoken 
thus, had she known that the prince and 
the young pilgrim were one and the same 
person ? Oh never, unjust that I am ; did she 
not say that the pilgrims went to Jerusalem, 
and did she not stay in Candia contrary to 
her will ? Enough — I will stifle my feel- 
ings — she shall not know my weakness — I 
will see her and depart. Now, at this very 
moment will I send for Leolf— I will not 
trust myself." 

Edgar rushed from the cham.ber, and 
crossed a long gallery — he entered the 

court- 



162 EDGAR. 

court-yard. Several attendants appeared* 
He spoke, but they understood him not. 
At length one advanced who, in Itahan, in- 
quired his wish. " I desire," said Edgar, 
" to see my friend who arrived in the port 
yesterday, in a Venetian bark. His name 
is Leojf", and he is habited as a pilgrim — 
would you, kind Sir, convey this message?'* 
The attendant profoundly bowed, and 
spoke in his own language to the slaves 
who surrounded him — they gazed on one 
another, and immediately saluting their 
chief, dispersed. 

Atheling now more calm, prepared to 
meet the Sultana, whom he saw above on 
the terrace ^' of the mansion, pacing among* 
the rich shrubs, and scattering grain to the 
tame fig-peckers. 

When they met, the lady blushed and pre- 
sented her hand to Atheling, who, trem- 
bling, respectfully touclied, and su^ired it 
to giidc away. " How have you reposed, 
Prince?" said the Sultana. Edgar colour- 
ed, but gave no reply. " I fear," she 
continued, " thy couch was not soft — or 
perhaps — how was it my benefactor? " — 

The 



B O K X. J 63 

The heart of Edgar recoiled at the idea of 
a falsehood — he answered, " my soul, 
noble lady, was ruffled ; otherwise, I could 
have slept on the hard stones of your en- 
trance. And nov/, oh Sultana, I have 
sent for my fiiend, that v;e may concert 
measures for our departure ; but deign, 
madam, to accept of my gratitude, of my 
respect, for this generous hospitality. This 
day we will pass in Egypt ; to-morrow, a 
bark, of which many are doubtless for 
Tyre, shall convey us to Palestine." 

As Edgar finished, Nourrayali shrieked 
and fell motionless by his side. The Prince 
agitated and astonished, raised her on his 
arm. " Oh Sultana 1 charming Nourra- 
yali ! alas ! what ails thee — whence this 
fear, this alarm, that distract me with 
doubts and perplexity ? What have I said 
to disturb thy happiness ? — open those ra^ 
diant eyes — let me once more hear that 
voice!'* The lady awoke ; she looked upon 
Edgar and then, blushing, smiled — 

Now the guardian angel that had attend- 
ed the side of Edgar from his birth and had 
assisted his father in screening hira from alj 

but 



164. EDGAR. 

but the errors of mortality, trembled in 
his celestial frame, for the safety of his 
beloved cliarge. Upward again, in the 
dreadfid emergency lie sped to the minis- 
tering archangel, who, by a sweet provi- 
dence, was the same as that he once before 
addressed, and thus he spoke : — 

** Gracious power, to thee again I bend. 
The dread majesty of the universe hath 
said, that in the awful hour of tempta- 
tation he will assist man. My loved charge 
now struggles with passion. If he should 
fall, my influence is for ever destroyed. 
I must, for so is it decreed, spread the 
■wing and quit his side for ever. If he 
afterwards return to virtue, an inferior 
spirit ittay minister consolation and protec- 
tion, but the sweet serenity, the calm hope, 
the just and virtuous confidence that I com- 
mand, can never, never be regained. 
V/hen I supplicated before, 'twas for his 
life 5 but now, 'tis his virtue, his everlast- 
ing happiness. Yet, benign celestial, the 
great etfort of man who stops his rolling 
body half way down the precipice, this has 
he made ; he has made one effort of virtue ^ 

oh I 



BOOK X. 165 

oh ! if it be Omnipotent will, let him be 
saved i " 

The beauteous archangel dropped a tear 
on the weakness of fallen man, and ga* 
thering it on the robe of the visitor, said, 
*' yes, exalted spirit, the \vord of Omni- 
science shall stand when that frail earth 
shall have vanished in smoke. The Lord 
hath said, he will listen to the cry of mortal 
man in the hour of distress ; and none ever 
applied in vain to his throne. Fly to thy 
charge ; the fold of thy robe is moistened 
by a celestial dew ; touch the lip of the 
youth ; chastisement shall light on him, but 
it shall be the chastisement of mercy. The 
Almighty will not touch his life : he loves 
virtuous youth, and the sight of a young 
eye looking on heaven, a young knee pros- 
trate, a young lip sounding his praise, are 
well pleasing before Him. Hasten then, ' 
kind angel — lead thy charge through the 
turbulent walks of human existence, and 
after he has cast off mortality, thou shalt 
enjoy the exquisite bliss of shewing him up, 
thyself, to the glorious assembly of the just 
made perfect." " I salute thee, and retire ; 

blessed 



l66 EDGAR. 

blessed unfclder of divine wiil," answered 
the visitant ; " and thou, Omnipotence, 
who wiliest not that man should die in sin, 
but that he live and repent, glory to thee, 
oh Father of Mercy 1 " 

Thus breathed the protecting angel — 
whilst the vast concave of heaven's golden 
porch rang in swelling echoes of praise to 
Divine Majesty and forbearance. Instantly 
the spirit lighted on earth, and approach- 
ing his charge, raised the vest, and turning 
his pure gazre from the glowing eye of 
Edgar, who still supported the recovering 
Nourrayaii, he touched his lip, and severe 
retreated from the chamber. 

No sooner had the sacred moisture met 
the gasp of Edgar, than a livid hue over- 
spread his features, trembling seized his 
whole body, and he fell backward on the 
couch. Nourrayah started up, and clasp- 
ing her hands, exclaimed, " he is dead! 
the hand of death is upon him." Shudder- 
ing, she hastily fled, and called in her 
attendants. With dread they approached ; 
but none dared to touch the disfigured 
body of a Christian. " Support him to the 

open 



BOOK X. 167 

open air ! he may yet recover ; " cried the 
lady. Again she spoke, but the slaves, for 
the first time, disobeyed her voice. " Oh, 
noblest of the faithful," said the chief of 
the attendants, casting himself at her feet, 
and presenting his scymetar, " take the 
life, but respect the ^^ faith of thy slave." 
Nourrayah seized the weapon, and aiming 
a furious stroke, cleft the cheek of the 
suppliant. He viewed the crimson flow, 
and raising his vest to staunch it, profound- 
ly bowed, and quitted the presence of his 
mistress. The slaves prostrated themselves 
as the Mameluke had done, each resolved 
to die sooner than violate his customs. 
But suddenly the Prince awoke, and with 
a ghastly stare, muttered a few incoherent 
words. " Alas ! where am I/' at last h& 
cried, " a sword — blood ! " — " 'Tis no- 
thing, gentle Prince," returned the Sul- 
tana ; '* my slave refused obedience, and I 
touched him with his own weapon." *' Oh 
horrible 1 " exclaimed Edgar — he rose up, 
but again the dreadful malady whirled his 
brain in a vortex, curdled the blood round 
his struggling heart j his lip changed to 

deep 



IGS EDGAR. 

deep purple, and again he was sinking to 
the earth — with a violent effort he cried, 
" air— breath— -I die ! '* 

Nourrayah in vain commanded. At 
length, she thought of the pilgrim, and 
in haste dispatched a messenger for him. 
Leolf was sitting at the gate, ruminating 
the means of enticing away his companion. 
To every one that had entered, he had, 
from day-break said, *' tell the guest a pil- 
grim waits without, to see him ; " but 
none had dared deliver the message, ex- 
cepting to the Sultana, who now recol- 
lected, and ordered him to be admitted. 
The cautious Leolf would not pass the 
walls till the lady herself appeared at the 
gate, and swore by the Prophet he should 
depart whenever he might please. Then 
he entered ; and in his strong grasp bore 
the convulsed Edgar, and laid him under 
the thick shade of a knot of cypress and 
date trees, in the gardens behind the pa- 
lace. There Nourrayah would not fol- 
low ; but she dispatched a slave every in- 
stant to enquire after him. 

Now Atheling a little revived, and cast 

his 



BOOK X. 169 

his eye upon the frowning Leolf, who gazed 
earnest upon him. " Oh Leolf, art thou 
here ? " exclaimed he ; and he leaned over 
to clasp him to his breast ; but his heart 
again sickened, and he fell against the 
tree. ** I come to see thee die by poi- 
son,'* exclaimed Leolf, in his native lan- 
guage. " I tell thee, that malignant 
woman has poisoned thee." " Oh, hea- 
vens," murmured Edgar — " surely, surely 
not— but — may heaven forgive her — if — 
and me — ." Again the convulsion seized 
l^m. 

Leolf paused to contemplate the noble 
countenance that was distorted by the ra- 
vage of distemper — he looked, and the 
breast of Leolf sent forth a sigh. *' Oh, 
man, supreme in wretchedness thou art," 
cried he, " what is high birth ? since 
Princes must die. What is glory ? for a 
hero rolls in the dust. What is youth ? 
since distemper can level it with Nature's 
decay. What is beaiity ? since Edgar 
Atheling is changed in a moment to a 
spectacle of horror. And what is virtue ? 
since Leolf can sigh over its fall '. '* Ti?e 

VOL. 11. I old 



lyO EDGAR. 

old pilgrim smote iiis breast, looked again 
on his friend, and with gloomy port moved 
towards the palace. 

Nourrayah advanced to the threshold to 
meet him. " Lady,'* said he, " I doubt 
whether the young Prince be able to sur- 
viv-e the day — his malady is dreadful. If 
there be a chance, it must lie in quitting 
these shores." *' Old man," answered the 
lady, with a disdainful smile, " I know 
what thou woiddst — I see thy design — 
the Prince shall not pass these walls either 
till life ceases, or that he is recovered — 
thou mayst retire." Leolf bowed. " La- 
dy," said he, " with affected gentleness, 1 
obey. Permit me one look at the suffer- 
ing hero, and I depart." Nourrayah fear- 
ed to oppose him, and he hastened to Athe- 
ling. " Sir," whispered he, " I have 
often told you my feai's of woman^ I must 
quit you — if you have resolution, and are 
struck with but transient illness, follow. I 
shall leave these hateful shores to-night. 
A vessel has engaged to receive me on 
board for Cyprus — all I can, is done for 
you — I dare stay no longer— the bark rides 

at 



BOOK X. 171 

at anchor near the old Pharos of Ptolemy, 
at the very entrance of the harbour — fare- 
well ! — rouse, or be for ever lost ! " 

Atheling a little recovered, on these words 
attempted to rise, and follow the pilgrim, 
but in vain. Strong torture shot across 
his temples, he reeled and fell in the dust. 
Leolf passed on, and reached the gate ; 
it opened and closed upon him. Edgar 
heard the noise, and with a deep groan 
and terrible anguish, threw himself upon 
his knee. '"^ Help me, good people," he 
cried, ** lend but your hand — suffer me 
but to touch your robe for support — I must 
see the Sultana." 

Bat the slaves frightened at his despe- 
rate gestures and swollen visage, quickly 
withdrew — only ©ne remained— the chief-^ 
the wounded Mameluke. He rolled his 
eye around — he advanced to Atheling — he 
bent. *' Christi*an," said he, in a low 
voice, " silence ; the Sultana forbids your 
departure, you must remain here." ** By 
what right can the lady detain me ? " said 
Edgar. " I will leave Alexandria ill or 
well this night, I tell thee." 

I 2 " Peace, 



17^ EDGAR. 

♦ " Peace, stranger ;'* returned the man, 
still discoursing in Italian. " I have heard 
Europeans talk of rigiit, but we hold other 
language. My lady is powerful in Alex- 
andria. A band of honourable Mame- 
lukes wait but her command, to enforce 
obedience to her will. The reigning Ca- 
liph loves his sister, and is ready to send 
' from Cairo any further support she may 
require. Right will not avail. Yet I see a 
way. First, canst thou be secret ? " " As 
the grave ;" replied Atheling, in a hoUov/ 
murmur. " Secondly, the reward?"— The 
Prince, with strong exertion, broke off the 
remainder of the jewels in his father's 
sword—" half of these ; " stammered he, 
almost inarticulate, " if thou will convert 
them into money and '* — he stopped. A 
dreadful palpitation swung his heart to 
and fro, and lie gasped for existence. 
'* Enough," replied the attendant, " come 
on— lean on the staff— meet the Sultana, 
teliheryou desire not to leave Egypt yet." 
*' Gh, never, never, friend ; not to save my 
vpretched existence v.'ill I utter a false- 
hood," said Edgar. The Mameluke replied 

not; 



BOOK X. 173 

not J and Atheling crawled with tottering 
step after him. 

Nourrayah who had from the terrace 
watched every movement, now hastily de- 
scended. Eager smiles lighted her fea- 
tures as Edgar sank on the soph a, although 
speechless with lassitude and pain. *' Wel- 
come, my Prince," said she, tenderly lean- 
ing over him, *' thou wilt soon be well — 
thou art already mending, and Nourrayah 
shall attend thee." " Oh lady," returned 
Edgar, with tremulous voice, '' oh, that I 
were in mine own country ; 'tis sweet to 
look on surrounding relatives from the bed 
of death." *' Talk not of thy country, 
nor of death, engaging hero ; " said she, 
" what relative can be so tender as Nour- 
rayah, and what air is so sweet as that of 
Egypt ? No, gentle Prince, Nourrayah 
will not so lose the lord of her affections — 
alas ! what has she said — yet — she cannot 
retract — oh, Atheling, live for the Sultana 
of Egypt." 

The heart of Edgar again throbbed 
high ; but the lady moving forward, he 
beheld on her robe some stains of the Ma- 
meluke's blood, which she had not thought 

I 3 to 



7 



17^ E D G A R. 

to remove ; Iiis heart recoiled — dreadful 
pangs smote his breast — sense flitted away, 
and he remained to appearance dead. 

Now the Sultana, in despair, tore oft her 
veilj and rushing out, commanded a man 
of physic to be sent. One presently ar- 
rived : he examined Atheling, and baring 
his arm, opened a vein, and drew from 
thence a copious stream of the dark and 
fioiling flood of life. The sufferer breathed 
more free. " Let him now rest,'* said the 
operator ; *' I will give this drug, whieh 
shall lull him to repose. Let every one 
quit the chamber ; the Sultana herself shall 
hold the key. To-morrow, at this hour, 
I will return. So powerful is the drug, 
tiiat renewed life or death shall be the re- 
sult by to-morrow's dawn ; yet mark ; if 
'but a foot stir in the palace, that may 
awaken him before the hour, all is over, 
and he dies." 

Nourrayah trembled, as she heard the 
sentence ; and the wise man having forced 
between tiie lips of Edgar the powder, 
every one left the chamber; and Nourrayah 
having fastened the lock, put the key in 

her 



BOOK X. 17^ 

her belt, and hastenetl to her own apart 
ment, in which she commanded to be left 
unmolested the whole day. 

The powerful sudorific drew round the 
frame of Atheling a deep lethargy, and in 
profound sleep he remained. Day flitted 
aside, and black darkness seemed to favour 
the desisrn of the chief of the attendants. 
No sooner did Nature veil his attempt, 
than lyv a small door he cautiously entered 
the chamber. The hour for the operation 
to end, arrived ; he drew near the sleeping 
Prince, and leaned low over him. " Awake !" 
said he in a hollow voice : " silence !" — 
Edgar, confounded, stupified, rose up. 
*' Where— who speaks ?"— «' Hush ! fol- 
low !'* whispered the Mameluke ; " re- 
member nioi to whom you gave your jew- 
els." Atheling, still confused, with be- 
numbed limbs, and whirling brain, had yet 
some inward perception of the converse of 
the morning. He rose, feeble, unsteady, 
perplexed, and grasping the attendant's 
robe, followed. Softly closed the door, 
and in darkness they crept through a nar- 

•'X o 

row passage, and then passed a few steps ; 

I 4 the 



17^ EDGAR. 

the air blew fresh. «' Hush,'* whispered 
the conductor, " we are under the Sultana: 
creep behind me." A small iron grate 
was lifted, under which both crawled with 
difficulty ; and now they found themselves 
in the gardens of the palace. The Mame- 
luke drew Edgar round among the shrubs, 
and silent they passed to the end. From 
beneath his ample vestment the attendant 
produced a hempen ladder, and hooking it 
on the wall, as a few twinkhng stars rose to 
guide his hand, " now mount,'* said he 
to Edgar. Atheling, freshened by the air, 
exerted himself, passed the wall, and 
alighted on the other side. The man fol- 
lowed, and pulling the friendly steps after 
him, rushed on. 

Soon they were near the port, when 
Edgar, almost exhausted by sickness and 
agitation, begged a few moments respite. 
" "VVe have good time," said the attendant, 
*' sit down under yon projecting mound, 
and breathe." 

" Generous stranger !'* said Atheling, 
" how can I ever sufficiently thank thee 
for my preservation ; but I fear for thee, it 

thy 



BOOK X. 177 

thy lady should suspect that I had thine 
assistance." 

" Stranger," answered the Mameluke, 
** attend, and praise and fear may cease. 
By the glare of yon moon which rises, oh- 
serve this disfigured visage, bandaged in 
linen. 'Twas the stroke of Nourrayah with 
my own blade, given in the fury of passion, 
because I supplicated for my faith. Long 
have I served, and faithfully, the proud 
descendants of the last Caliph, but my zeal, 
my love, my submission to their imperious 
mandates avail nought. Struck ? — ah ! did 
not my blood spout from me, and fly blush- 
ing for Nourrayah, even to the fold of her 
robe ? — A Mameluke ! the body guard of 
monarchs ?"" but mark, stranger : the in- 
jured may perhaps sleep awhile, and then 
waken to count their own numbers— hah ! 
has a servant never been master ? Has not 
water supported life, and then destroyed ? 
But enough — let us walk forward." 

" Stranger," continued the attendant, 
" know that I instantly understood the 
feelings of the Sultana towards you when 
she entered the palace. With profound 

I 5 hatred 



178 EDGAR. 

hatred to the Franks, and in anxiety for 
the honour of the CaHph's race, I had de- 
termined on your destruction." *' On 
mine ? " repeated Edgar. ** A moment 1 " 
interrupted the Mamchike. *• I had deter- 
mined to shghtly touch you with an en- 
venomed scymitar whilst you slept, and 
then to have hurried to Cairo for refuge 
with the Sultan. This scymitar incautiously 
I drew, and Nourrayah sheathed it in my 
flesh. My death is now certain, but slow.** 
** Oh eternal justice!" cried Edgar, with 
uplifted hands. " Hush!" murmured the 
attendant. " I hastened from the presence 
of the lady, all fired with the delicious hope 
of revenge. You were the first victim 
upon v.'hich I thought — your life was easy 
to take in unguarded moments j but in 
cutting you off from mankind, I could not 
liide your corpse from the passionate eye 
of Nourrayah, who would have felt a 
mournful greediness for embalming and 
caressing you even in eternal sleep. No 
revenge could be so sweet and full as this. 
To assist you in your escape; to drive you 
from the coast ; and then to witness her 

distraction, 



BOOK X. 179 

distraction, fury, madness, and torture. 
All these, even in contemplation, cheer my 
soul ; for I shall break out these truths one 
by one, and laugh over the locks plucked 
from her head, the bruises on her bosom 
from her own hand, the glare horribly 
flashing from her eye, as she will join her 
fine hands round my throat to strangula- 
tion, for well I know the passions of Nour- 
rayah. The plot was mine — the man of 
physic I secured — ^the jewels I return — 
what is monev to me, a wretch under the 
claw of death ? Yonder boat I have secured 
for thee — go; the vessel should be now 
raising the anchor. The men have direc- 
tions — away; be swift! and everlasting 
misery, horrours, and death be thy lot for 
the fatal deed of Nourrayah.'* 

" Oh dreadful — most dreadful ! " ex- 
claimed the Prince, as the Mameluke thrust 
the jewels in his hand, and fled. " Nour- 
rayah — Oh what passions ! let me touch 
no longer this dreadful soil. Oh heaven ! 
^rom what a precipice — my senses ! '* With 
hasty step he gained the boat. " The 
name? quick?" said a voice, in the loved 

J 6 accents 



180 EDGAR. 

accer.ts of England. " Atheling," an- 
swered the Prince. " Welcome, my lord," 
echoed fi'om three voices. " Hasten, Sir," 
cried a fourth, sternly. " My friends — 
Englishmen — my beloved countrymen — 
my faithful friend — my Leolf — and to an 
English vessel— from Nourr... — mercy!" 

Every big and swelling passion of the 
human breast was stirring within the Prince, 
and nature bent under the conflict. Edgar 
clasped his hands, sluit the eye, and sit- 
ting down, was silent. Meantime the bark 
pushed off, and rapidly cut the waves. A 
small beam of the silver moon trembled on 
tlie white surge. Two or three flocks of 
those innocent birds,** which taught by the 
little whisper of instinct when other shores 
are decked in beauty, or fanned by con- 
genial winds, now hurried by ; and pant- 
ing with joy at the glimpse of land, drop- 
ped in multitudes on the shores ; whilst, 
in the high reeds skirting the canals of the 
Delta, the nightingale *' already arrived 
from European groves, perched, not to sing 
her sweet melodies, but to mourn over the 



less generous haunts of man. 



The 



BOOK X. 181 

The boat reached the ship, and ropes 
were speedily let down to assist the little 
company. Every one arose but Atheling. 
" Come, Sir," cried Leolf, sternly, for he 
dreaded the heart of the hero meditated 
on Nourrayah. Atheling replied not ; his 
head drooped over his chest, yet he did 
not speak. I.eolf exasperated, raised him 
in his strong arm, and hurried him upward 
to the vessel. The commander approach- 
ed with the honest and generous openness 
of his country, and in animated words 
gave him welcome. " My friends," said 
he to his men, " a hero of Poictiers is in 
our heart of oakj" No sooner had the 
words passed, than three strong salutes 
from their glowing bosoms burst forth, 
and swelled in air. The Prince made 
no reply, but stood fixed. *' Give a 
lamp," exclaimed Leolf ; " now I know all 
is not right ; for never would he have been 
silent." The taper was raised to his cheek 
— every one started backward. Horror 
and fright stood in his altered and Harins 
.eye— his cheek was deathly as the pale 
violet hood that winks over the enraged 

turkey's 



1S2 EDGAR. 

turkey's bill ; and then the colour flashed 
red as the same hood, when it changes to 
blood. The captain took his icy hand 
with respect, and led him to the steps to 
descend. Atheling stupified, suffered him- 
self to be dragged on; but no sooner had 
he reached the head of the flight, than a 
mist spread before him, his brain whirled 
round, his limbs bent under him, and he 
was instantly precipitated to the chamber 
below. 

In a moment, a dozen of humane arms 
were stretched to raise him ; but he was 
to all appearance lifeless. With haste, the 
honest sailors, assisted by their comFaand- 
er, took off his armour and stretched him 
on a bed ; whilst every one shewed his na- 
tural sensibility and his anxiety in the life 
of a fellow creature. One chafed his cold 
hand, another applied to the temples the 
strong acid of wine ; another supported hi& 
head, and the commander himself held a 
small cup of diluted spirit, and endeavour- 
ed to introduce it, drop by drop, between 
the clenched teeth of the unhappy prince. 
At length he sighed deeply, and wildly 

gazed 



BOOK X. 183 

gazed around. ** Nourrayali," said he, 
*' oh ! turn away thy robe ; there ! I see it 
sprinkled with blood — thine own faitliful 
servant too ! — Hark, 'tis the din, tlie clash 
of arms — quick to battle, Nourrayah, to 
battle. Didst thou then use the sword in 
battle ? — When was it ? — Hush, let her 
speak — she sighs ; Nourrayah, when was 
it? No, answer not ; speak not. I thought 
thou hadst been a woman — lovely, gentle, 
tender. Mameluke spare her — hark! — her 
groans — her shrieks — oh ! how wide and 
terrible are those dark eyes. ^ I thought 
'twas the Sultana — let me quit the shores, 
let me go, Mameluke ; oh, horrible ! — 
Wilt tliou then die in the midst of such 
dreadful sins ? Revenge — oh ! repent, re- 
pent ! — Fare thee well ! — yes, even though 
thy horrible curse still rings in mine ear — 
break quickly, my head — split to pieces!—- 
oh, how heavy the hammer strikes — hark, 

how it rings on the brain ! — hark ! '* 

Such was thephrenzy of Atheling, whilst 
the superior arteries of his frame, with 
amazing quickness, swelled to higher and 
stronger beats j the glaring eye, fi'ery 

chQek, 



181' EDGAR. 

cheek, parclied lip, burning hand, and 
agitated body, gave strong evidence of 
violent disorder, and the captain judged it 
prudent to dismiss every attendant but one, 
to whom he recommended nice caution ; 
and then returned to his duty. 

A fine breeze curved the white sails, and 
the vessel parted the current with rapid 
and graceful motion. The faithful mariner 
at the helm, gently assisted the effort of 
the keel, as he gazed every moment upon 
the emblem of constancy, the trusty 
magnet, which looked and looked for ever 
in trembling joy, towards the knob of earth, 
which, perad venture first felt the impress 
of Almighty creation ; he gazed upon the 
conscious needle, and then turned his eye 
on the starry heavens ; and, though he re- 
joiced in their brilliancy, yet shook his 
head, and confessed that the little guide 
before him spoke plainer signs than they ; 
for the seaman was old, and he remember- 
ed the hour when he led on the ship 
trembling and fearful, as the starry lamps 
put out their lights, that he had no monitor 
to direct his course and iiispire him with 

confidence. 



B O O K X. 185 

confidence. " People of China,^' we sa- 
lute ye ! a grateful nation salutes ye for the 
inestimable gift. A nation surrounded by 
billows, that cannot see other empires 
without casting herself in the vessel. A 
nation that ploughs the waters that gird 
the whole world, bends to ye, in gra- 
titude for the precious gift. Accept our 
thanks, industrious people, and indefati- 
gable ; and smile in the sweet idea of 
having, by the imparted secret, saved the 
lives of millions of fellow mortals.'* 

Leolf visited the bed of sickness, but 
he sliuddered at the sight so dreadful, of 
man bereaved of the first pledge of his im- 
mortality. Leolf gazed for a moment on 
the Prince, and then started in his sense- 
less ravings, and speedily fled to a remote 
corner of the vessel ; and there silent, he 
counted over in thouglit the miseries of 
existence, and never once reflected on its 
numberless charms. 

The sufferings of Atheling increased till 
the fourth day, when the Isle of Cyprus 
appeared in sight j and soon after, the Bri- 
tish sliip sailed with majesty into the port. 

No 



186 EDGAR. 

No sooner had the captain delivered to the 
principal officer the name of his guest, 
than the young Peter de Lusignan, son to 
the valiant King of Cyprus and Jerusalem, 
having watched the vessel's entrance, flung 
himself into a boat, and commanded to be 
shewn to his former friend. Edgar knew 
him not ; and the change of several years, 
together with the appearance of his illness 
and wan countenance, so touched the quick 
feelings of the young Asiatic, that his eye 
filled with griefj and he turned away. ** Let 
him, I entreat," said he to the captain, 
** be transpoited to the shore, where the 
physician of the court shall attend, and he 
shall have every care." The Briton hesitated 
through prudence ; but eastern impetuosity 
would not be resisted, and Atheling was 
conveyed in a litter, still insensible, but 
calm, to the royal apartments. Leolf, un- 
willing to quit his young friend, determin- 
ed also to wait the issue of his disorder ; 
and the vessel steered for Tyre, according 
to her instructions. 

Atheling continued quiet during several 
hours, and then a sweet and placid sleep 

lulled 



BOOK X. 1S7 

lulled away all sense of sorrow, passion, 
tumult, and pain. The Cypriot Prince 
gentlji lowered the light drapery that float- 
ed round the casement, and issued a com- 
mand that all should be still as death. A 
soft air insinaated itself round the chamber, 
bearing in its swell, a thousand rich per- 
fumes of autumnal luxuriance ; the white 
orange and lemon blossom sported with the 
little caressing zephyr j the olive and the 
nodding almond smiled in their pastime. 
Birds danced on the boughs, and warbled 
on the edge of silver basons ; whilst the 
neighbouring cultivated mountain sent 
forth such myriads of sweet-scented par- 
ticles to ride on the aerial stream, that the 
bee grew saucy in quaffing proofs of store 
inexhaustible. 

Then it was that the guardian angel ap- 
proached near to Edgar, and looked down 
upon him with pity, sweetness, and benign 
love. Over the couch of the Prince, he 
hovered; and thus breathed in still whis- 
pers the words of comfort, whilst thousands 
of attendant innocents fluttered around 
him, and hung on the celestial voice with 

the 



188 E D G A R. 

the smile of rapture, and in the tender dif- 
fidence of present exalted beatitude. 
- *' Enough, oh man ! thy suffering has 
oeen poignant, but thou art saved. From 
this moment cease, ye racking pains that 
gripe the fibres of this frail body ; thou 
film, that hung over his brain, rise and de- 
part ; be calm, boiling liquid of life ; and 
hush, thou agitated throb against the 
heaving breast. Thou hast not fallen into 
nothing, oh man, for the Omnipotent, mer- 
ciful, and all bounteous, afflicted thee that 
thou mightst not see death j thou art 
brought low, that thou mayst dread the 
path of evil, and turn avr'ay from the as- 
sault of temptation. Scrrovv has encom- 
passed thee round about, but it shall glide 
away as a dream, and be remembered only 
as a chastisement of mercy. The Almighty 
will not afflict weak man beyond what he is 
able : be comforted, thou flower of mor- 
tality, be comforted ; angels weep on the 
sorrows of Adam's race ; but their tears 
cease, and the golden harps swell in praises 
of thanksgiving and joy over him v/hose 
griefs have stopped him short in the career 

of 



BOOK X. 189 

of guilt, and have produced repentance and 
forgiveness. 

" Approach, heavenly innocents, and 
resume your charge ; some amongst ye, 
flutter round his perisliing frame, and let 
it blow as a parched bud, wliich raises its 
languid head to the first grateful glittering 
of dew. The sweet and refreshing slum- 
ber, give him in ample portions ; swell the 
hollow cheek, and with pure touch, let 
fresher tints than ever yet graced it, rise in 
the full beauty of manhood. Chase away 
the glazed and livid surface from the lip, 
and let it blush deep vermilion ; give to the 
dimmed eye bright majesty tempered by 
modest consciousness of virtue j and re- 
string every exhausted sinew, that he may 
rise anew from the bed of humiliation, and 
that his failings be remembered no more. I 
myself will take the pre-eminent seat in his 
mind, and I will lead up his views to his 
deliverance, to the favours granted him, to 
divine goodness, and to mistrust of his own 
strength. Great is the mercy granted him, 
for much has he resisted sin, and the de- 
vout prayers and anxious precepts of his 

virtuous 



190 EDGAR. 

virtuous parents, rise up as sweet and pow- 
erful memorials before tlie throne of hea- 
ven." 

No sooner had the spirit ceased, than the 
innocents, with a tear of hallowed joy, 
pressed lovely forward to kiss the bright 
plumes of his wing ; gently the guardian 
returned the caress, and instantly every 
one moved with sacred dehght to his trust; 
whilst the slioLit that rang round heaven, 
at the re-instatement of a mortal in the path 
of grace, swept through earth's concave, 
and fell harmonious and ravishing, on the 
senses of the enraptured throng. 

The Prince of Cyprus at this moment, 
entered softly the apartment, attended by 
his young sister, the Princess Berengaria, 
aged of scarcely thirteen summers. They 
listened — all was still. De Lusignan light- 
ly drew aside the drapery of the couch ; 
but how changed was the scene ! The 
breath of Atheling was so soft, so regular, 
that the silken coverlid hardly rose with 
the eftbrt ; the brow no longer frowned ; 
the eye was just closed ; the lashes in 
graceful negligence reposed pn the cheek, 

wliich 



BOOK X, 191 

which although wan, was yet gently re- 
laxed by a placid smile ; the altered lip was. 
scarcely severed, yet a line of pearls daz- 
zled on the nether side. " My brother,'* 
said the young maid, " methinks I should 
like to sleep thus myself; once I saw thy 
slumber, but it was not so soft." — " Hushl" 
replied the Royal Cypriot, " hush, let us 
retire," and he led her away. " Brother, 
surely th-at chamber never so before calmed 
one's thought ? 'twas very still, and I 
imagined the sick Briton had been very 
greatly tortured, and very mad ; my nurse 
tells me there is such a distemper as mad- 
ness ; and I thought the stranger had been 
mad," continued the Princess as she leaned 
on her brother, to go to her apartments. 
*' Who told thee he was mad, child ?" ask- 
ed the brother. " Truly, my lord," an- 
swered the maiden, *• it was a pilgrim 
whom I just now met in the gallery. My 
favourite told me he was the friend of the 
English Prince, and I spoke to the old 
man. He frowned and started, as he saw 
me ; and I heard him mutter in his own 
tongue, "Another Nourrayah !" Then I 

ad- 



19S EDGAR, 

addressed him in imperfect accents, such 
as thou hast taught me, of his country ; 
and I asked if the Princess of Cyprus re- 
sembled stny friend of the name he men- 
tioned ? he blushed deeply, hesitated, and 
said " No." Then I judged by his con- 
fusion, that some one, called Nounayah, 
might have left him to deplore her loss ; 
and I instantly shifted the conversation ; 
for thou rememberest, my brother, how sad 
we were vvlien the Queen was mentioned, 
long, very long, after she slept in the cold 
tomb. I asked the pilgrim concerning our 
guest, and he said that an illness had sti- 
fled all sense during several days, and that he 
could not endure the sight of a lady. Then 
the old man turned away, and I followed 
thee, determined to take the sad view of 
man, with eyes yet blind ; feet yet helpless; 
speech yet never to the purpose. Brother, 
if the stranger be mad, methinks there is 
a prettiness in that disorder. Shouldst 
thou not wish to see Berengaria mad, bro- 
ther ?" said the young Princess. " No, I as- 
sure thee, my little pearl," answered the Cj- 
priot ; ** thy brother would rather that tliou 

shouldst 



BOOK X. Vjo 

sliouklst be as thou art. But I retire ; I 
am anxious for the waking of my friend.'* 
But Atheling awakened not. Night 
leaned forward, and threw around her sable 
curtain ; but the sleep of the favoured 
Prince was sweet and profound : beyond 
the dawn of the next day it lasted, and 
Leolf with astonishment, crept to the 
couch, fearful that it might be the last 
great insensibility of nature, but he heard 
the soft breathing, and marked the grace- 
ful alteration j as he gazed, the sweet and 
placid dream snapped, and melted away ; 
the eye of the Prince met with joy that 
of Leolf, and so sweetly tuned was his 
soul, that he essayed to spring upward, and 
grasp the hand of his old companion ; but 
his limb was feeble, and trembled to the 
exertion ; then he fell again on his pillow, 
still beaming in hope and joy, and in clear 
and harmonious voice, thus broke into 
speech : — 

" Welcome, my friend, welcome, glorious 
day ! that once more smilest on my frame • 
welcome, beauteous creation ! fresh as if 
thou wert but just formed by the hand of 

VOL, n. K Omnipotenccv 



^§4) EDGAR, 

Omnipotence. All hail ! oh, my Maker, for 
this return of existence ; I ask not where 
I am ; I inquire not how vanished my suf- 
ferings ; all I know is, that the agonies of 
death were upon me, yet I live ; that my 
soul was plunged in roaring tumults, yet I 
Can now smile in joy ; that I was rushing 
towards the pit of destruction, yet a mer- 
ciful Almighty deigned to stretch forth his 
strong arm and save me. Oh, mercy ! 
joy ! hope ! goodness ! wonder ! Am I 
not a worm, a miserable worm, formed of 
the dust ? Of the dust wherewith Thou 
madest an ant, didst thou not make me. 
Lord? What am I, that Thou shouldst 
turn me aside from destruction ? What am 
I that Thou shouldst look from a throne of 
eternity and never-fading glory down, even 
unto me ? What act of my poor life has 
merited such gracious condescension? Even 
were my best endeavours clashed together, 
what would they be in thy presence, who 
art all-perfect? Oh, my God, melt my 
heart within me in gratitude.; teach my 
frail tongue to swell thy praise, and deign 

still 



BOOK X. 195 

still to look upon me, who live a monu- 
ment of thy forbearance and mercy." 

Thus rose the ardent voice of Edgar, 
who clasped his hands in the fervency of 
devotion. Leolf trembled with awe •, in- 
sensibly his knee bent ; so commanding is 
the strong majesty of piety. De Lusignan 
was entering the chamber, as the address 
rose from the lip of Ath cling, and he stood 
fixed in respectful silence, with his eye cast 
to the ground, till the voice ceased. Edgar 
continued his thanksgiving, but inwardly ; 
and then feeling weakness gather round 
his exhausted frame, he relaxed strong 
thoughts, and remained in sweet compo- 
sure. 

Then the Cypriot Prince moved towards 
him, and raising the curtain, gently said, 
*' How dost thou, Atheling ? Canst thou 
recollect the son of the King of Cyprus ?'* 
Edgar, with placid joy, extended his arms 
to meet his embrace. ** Well do I remem- 
ber thee, my friend," answered he, " am 
I indeed under thy roof?" — ** Yes," cried 
de Lusignan, " in my father's kingdom, 
entrusted to a steady council and his son, 

ji 2 during 



iDti EDGAR. 

during his absence in France and Jerusa- 
lem." — " In France ?" said Atheling, " is 
thy royal father so near to England ?'* — 
** He has spent some time even in Eng- 
land,"* answered the eastern Prince, ** and 
he should be now in Bourdeaux, the city 
of your renow'ned iJlack Prince ; for he has 
declared in his last advices, and publicly too, 
that he could never think he had done or seen 
aught worthy of notice,t till he had beheld 
the noblest captain, and most virtuous 
Prince of Christendom." — *' Did the ge- 
nerous monarch indeed say thus ?" asked 
Edgar, whilst a flash of delight kindled in 
his eye. ** How magnanimous !" and he 
stopped, for happy emotion swelled his 
breast. 

De Lusignan saw the languor of his 
guest, and judged it prudent to leave him 
awhile ; and in the mean time sent to his 
apartment purple clusters of the rich vine, 
the fragrant and exquisite food of the bee, 
fresh drawn streams from the young moun- 
tain goat, the pulverized millet formed into 
ibin cakes, and the luscious fig, with the 

s^veet 

♦ bpecd. Rapin, f Collins, ypced. Ilapia. 



B O O K X. 197 

sweet wines of the Olympian mount. 
Atheling partook of the repast with grati- 
tude and temperance. After it was finish- 
ed, he w^as assisted to the bath ; and then, 
wrapped in long robes, he with exertion- 
reached the saloon, where his royal friend 
impatiently expected him. 

The timid and simple Berengaria was 
seated at the upper end, with the favourite 
lady of her train ; and would have fled, 
when she perceived the English Prince, 
but her brother detained, and led Atheling 
forward to pay his homage. Tliis done, 
Edgar respectfully stood, till the young 
maid, distressed by his exhausted look, 
tacitly seconded the intreaties of de Lu- 
signan, who earnestly petitioned him to 
take to the sopha; but yet the Princess, 
confounded by the presence of the stranger, 
looked incessantly towards the door ; when 
her brother seized her hand, and smiHng 
said, *' Berengaria, thou art ever teazing 
me for stories, and marvellous travels, and 
histories of countries afar off: now, sure I 
am, that my friend the Lord Atheling will, 
tell thee his own story, and that of Britan- 

K 3 nia 



^08 EDGAR. 

Jiia also, whilst we are so happy to tietahi 
him here ; will you not,- my lord ?" Ed- 
gar smiled at the simplicity of the roy- 
al maid, and bowed in acquiescence. 
" There,'* cried de Lusignan, *' banish 
thy fears ; for my lord and thou shall be 
good friends j since thou art fond of tales, 
he will tell thee marvellous ones. Full well 
J remember, that he could at college even 
write stories in verse. Thus he will kindly 
amuse thee, and in return thou shalt strike 
out, with those little fingers, sweet sounds 
from the Spanish lute sent thee from Spain, 
and I will recline near, and quaff the fra- 
grant herb of eastern grovrth."^^ 

The Princess smiled j and drawing close 
to her brother, whispered, *' my favourite 
shall stay with me, for she too loves tales ; 
and perchance the English Prince may 
wish for his friend, for thou knowcst, 
my brother, when I tell thee a story.^s I 
sometimes hesitate, and my attendant as- 
sists me ; the Englishman may forget like 
me, and require his old man." De Lusig- 
nan laughed, and raising his voice, answer- 
ed, " be it so, my little gem. Atheling, 

when 



BOOK X. 199 

wlien tiioa wouldst recite thy wondrous 
story, have a care that thy old friend be 
near to aid thy memory, for so my sister 
commands." — •' The Princess shall be 
obeyed," replied Edgar, with animated 
eye ; '* and I doubt not, but an unprac- 
tised soldier may oft require correction 
and assistance, when he presumes to offer 
amusement to the nice ear of a young and 
gentle ladv." 

The maid was pleased with the courtesy 
of Edgar, and drawing her hand from the 
royal Cypriot, smiled and withdrew, intent 
upon adorning her slender person, to meet 
her guest in the evening ; and delighted 
with the expected entertainment. During 
several evenings, however, she could not 
be gratified, for Atheling, fatigued, retired 
with the setting sun. But at length, his 
spirits being recruited, he respectfully led 
the young Princess, when she entered the 
saloon, to an elevated and glittering cano- 
py ; the favourite rested at her feet, and 
the heir to the throne of Cyprus leaned on 
his sopha. Atheling, by the lady's com- 
mand, stationed himself immediately oppo- 

K 4 site, 



200 EDGAR. 

site, at some paces distant, and the sullen 
Leolf with much difficulty was prevailed 
on to stand by. During the relation of 
Edgar, the virgins*® and mutes of the royal 
train stole softly in the apartment, and 
scattered odoriferous waters and fresh flow- 
ers on the ground, and presented to the 
company sherbet, wines, ices, and fruits. 

But as Atheling felt some confusion, and 
hesitated, the Cypriot Prince suddenly 
rose up and whispered, " if the Princess 
see that thou art confounded, she will im- 
mediately judge that thou art not perfect 
in thy information, therefore do not pause ; 
ihou w41t forfeit her good opinion, for she 
is breathless nearly with impatience. Be 
plain in thy language, or she will not com- 
prehend thee, for our maids are not edu- 
cated as are those of thy country. My 
sister is a little cherished plant, and the 
King hath ever indulged her humours and 
prattle." 

Edgar bowed ; and raising his eye, ob- 
served that the Princess leaned forward 
with anxietv, to catch the least word, 
whilst she turned round in impatience the 

late 



BOOK X. 201 

late Queen's magnificent jewel bracelet, 
that half concealed her slender arm. 
Atheling immediately began : 

THE QUEEN OF THE ISLES. 

*< At the distance of seventeen hundred 
jniles from this island, there lives a queen 
of such noble descent, that she can trace 
back her genealogy for generations before 
the birth of the Redeemer." 

" Tell me, Prince," interrupted the lady 
Berengaria, •' the age of this queen ?" 

** Her age, noble lady," answered Athe- 
ling, " is reckoned to be one thousand 
three hundred and sixty years from the' 
christian era, and she is still in the bloom 
of youth and loveliness." 

The Princess Berengaria clasped her 
hands, and exclaimed, " charming ! the 
tale begins as do those of the east»" 

*' Nevertheless, madam," answered' 
Atheling, " I shall tell your highness but 
the truth. This queen has many relatives 
around her, whom she loves with extreme 
tenderness ; but her sisters, who are queens 
dep(5ndcnt upon her, are her chief pride, 

K 5. next 



202 E D G A K. 

next to the noble race to whom she h 
guardian. But, ere I advance further, 
permit me to acquaint your highness with 
her person and pecuharities. 

** The frame of this wondrous personage 
is of the noblest height, and every limb is 
exquisitely proportioned ; her aspect is 
grand and prepossessing ; her voice is 
powerful, yet sweet j tyrants tremble at its 
threat, and a babe smiles in its caress. 
Her dress is varied and costly, elegant and 
luxuriant. In grassy green she most de- 
lights, and the colours of the bow of 
heaven are not more sweetly blended than 
the shades of this her favourite hue, from 
deep black green up to the fading aqua 
marina of her vestments. The hem of her 
garment is fringed entirely by a depth of 
waving sih'er ; and on her bosom are neck- 
laces of brilliant gems and pearls, that are 
envied by several powerful states ^ of the 
world. With this wondrous beauty and 
grandeur, and the delicacy she is known to 
possess, she is endowed with a vigour of 
constitution that seems to defy every dart 
of time,, and with a bloom that gains in- 
crease- 



BOOK X. ^OS 

crease with every added year ; for she is 
still so attractive in the charms of youth, 
magnificence, and natural graces, that all 
the young princes, her neighbours, sigh 
for permission to throw themselves at her 
feet — but they sigh in vain ; for the queen 
refuses every offer, resolved never again to 
form any matrimonial alliance. 

*' What I'* exclaimed the Cypriot Prin- 
cess, " has this beautiful lady ever been 
united?" — " She has once married, Ma- 
dam,'* answered Atheling, *' as I will pre- 
sently explain — but suffer me to proceed 
to something of her character." 

" The Queen of the Isles, or, as she is 
familiarly called by those who tenderly love 
her, Britannia, that being her virgin name^ 
and Anglia her wedded one, — is high- 
minded, generous, sincere and just j mag- 
nanimous in her councils ; spirited in her 
actions, and cautious in her judgments ; 
open-hearted and liberal to excess in her 
dealings, and of an unconquerable per" 
severance in every honourable pursuit j 
steadfast in friendship, undaunted in trusts 
She has a feminine reserve to strangers,, 

K 6 and 



i-'O'l- EDGAR. 

and yet never refuses the rites of hospitality 
to any who may advance and require them. 
She is devout, charitable and unostenta* 
tious; and so extreme is her sensibility^ 
that a tear gushes into her eye, oftener for 
the miseries of others than for herself. 
With all these great qualities, this beau- 
tiful and magnanimous queen is at times 
mournful, melancholy, and in tears ; sighs 
heave her pure bosom, and chrystal drops 
gather ip her eye. But when she recovers 
her serenity, the sweet inhabitant of the 
grove warbles for joy ; the little brook mur* 
murs in echo ; old ocean smoothes down his 
ruffled wave, and ail nature looks harmony 
and love.. 

" Anglia, so highly gifted by Providence^ 
is also, perhaps, at this time, as highly ac- 
complished in science and art as any mo- 
narch existing, if we except the haughty 
elected prince who lives now where the 
aged Empress Roma died. Angha has a 
soul to enjoy every mental attainment; 
and, as I observed, a perseverance after 
every knowledge which no obstacle can 
daunt. Of poetry ^' and music, she has 

been J 



BOOK X. 205 

been, from infancy, so passionately fond, 
that to comply with her taste, the very 
laws °^ of her realm were wTitten in verse 
when she was a child, and all her subjects 
learned and generally sang them to music. 
In painting, she has alsa made a noble 
proficiency, as may be seen in her churches; 
and large edifices. ^' The stately buildings 
she has planned and consecrated to divine 
service, are raised by her care to such stu- 
pendous heights,"* are of such majestic pro- 
portion, and of such proud durability, that 
it is a doubt whether succeeding ages will 
be ever able to destroy them to their foun- 
dation, when time shall have bent the 
highest turrets, and have demanded repa- 
ration for his own wrongs. In lesser arts 
slie has for many centuries shewed her 
abilities. Cities which adorn her state, 
and which she herself has superintended,: 
are built of clay, burned into a beautiful 
and compact substance, and then cement- 
ed together ;^ or, of fine timber, from her 
noble and proud forests ; or, of dazzling 
stone, from her fi'uitful quarries. And 
these cities, orijamented by spacious pa- 
laces 



206 EDGAR. 

laces that unite in forming an ornament 
and a security, are all from designs of the 
queen. The grand fleets that have ^or so 
many ages ploughed to every quai ter of 
the known world, are built and supported 
by her genius and opulence. Even the 
mechanic arts, she has long befriended 
and studied. The working of metals ; the 
weaving of substances ; the constructing of 
numberless articles of utility, and even 
luxury, have all obtained her notice, and 
been improved in her exertion. 

" To agriculture the queen has been par- 
tial from first infancy j and, a thousand 
years ago, ^'^ having received a present of 
some vines, she employed such care in 
training them, that she has had*, and now 
has, wines of her own growth, of uncom- 
mon flavour and excellence. Her grain 
she has bestowed on hungry nations,*^ and 
has saved the lives of millions, even after 
her own wants were supj^lied, and her 
granaries filled. With the woolly coats of 
vast flocks of her animals,^* she traflScs over 
Europe ; and the minerals and fossils which 
she exports from magazines ^^ hundreds of 

miles 



BOOK X. 207 

miles in length, are alone sufficient to 
fill her treasury with riches. No study 
is too deep foi her capacious mind, no 
undertaking too bold for her original 
and vigorous genius to accomplish j and, 
as the loftiest virtues are enforced by 
her example, so her subjects are ready to 
dissolve in joy upon a smile from her, 
and to shed every drop of blood in her 
defence.'* 

The Princess Berengaria here interrupt- 
jed Atheling. " I do not wonder, my lord*" 
at the love of subjects for so charming and 
matclilefeS a queen. I am impatient to hear 
of her choice. Thou hast said she married 
— alas ! who could deserve so glorious a 
lady r* 

" It is the flite of royalty. Madam," re- 
plied the prince, " to make affection a se- 
condary consideration in the article of mar- 
riage. Vast are the privileges of majesty : 
•upon its happiness we may not calcula,te, 
excepting with the eminently good. And 
a revered king, who is never seen but to be 
hailed ; who is never thought upon, but to 
be blessed — this object may, if any can, 

draw 



208 EDGAR. 

draw angels to the verge of Iieaven, to 
lean and gaze» Royalty must pay then its 
pre-eminence over mankind, by sacrificing,, 
when sacrifice is requisite, to the good of 
nations ; and be content to drop some pri- 
vate feeling for the advancement of public 
interest. Thus the royal couple are seldom 
acquainted before the uttering of the sacred 
vow. The princess is given to her con- 
sort, and she timidly raises her eye to catch- 
the first glance of her future companion ; 
Vvhilst the royal bridegroom, not less 
anxious, hastens the meeting, and bends Co 
her feet in proud hope from the virtues 
and graces of his bride, or in sad dejectioUi 
in her sullen or gloomy aspect.. 

" When Britannia, wliich is the virgin 
name of the Queen of the Isles, was in 
childhood, her uncommon beauty '°° and 
noble qualities "" gave such indications of 
future greatness, that many princes of her 
own states, and from afar off, hastened 
betimes to make pretensions to her hand j 
and some of these were so desperate, as to 
attempt to secure the young princess by 
strength of arms. Of this nature were the 

effoirts - 



u o d K X, 209 

ciforts of the Empress Roma, who pas- 
sionately wished to affiance the royal maid 
to her son, who already possessed many 
wives,'°^ but her violent effort was strenu- 
ously resisted by the guardians of the prin- 
cess, v.'liohad been wisely appointed during 
her minority. The struggle, however, last- 
ed four hundred years, '°^ and it cost many 
lives ; till at length, the ambitious Roma, 
finding herself grow infirm and crazy, 
listened no longer to the praises wliich 
every one bestowed on the beautiful prin- 
cess, but resolved to turn all her attention 
to the contemplation of her own infirmities 
and necessities, and from her great age 
to abandon every scheme of conquest and 
ambition, and consider how best to meet 
the decay and fall that so rapidly approach- 
ed. 

" In the meantime, the guardians of Bri- 
tannia finding that the contests of other 
princes still continued with unabated vio- 
lence, and perceiving that she was now in 
the bloom of adolescence, determined to 
offer her hand to a powerful neighbour. 
Accordingly they dispatched emissaries to 

the 



i2lO EDGAR. 

the north of Germany, to invite over the 
Prince Angulus "" from Saxony, wlio with 
a vast train landed exulting on the isle of 
Thanet, which was given him for resi- 
dence. 

" When the young princess was informed 
of the Saxon's visit, and that too, under the 
sanction of her guardians, she burst into tears 
and conjured them not to press the matter. 
^* I am," said she, " still too young for a 
bride. Why should I ever marry ? Can- 
not I reign over my people with undivided 
love? I want no tie on my affections, I 
adore my people ; I feel that they love me ; 
then why force my hand to an alliance at 
which my heart revolts ? I like not the 
Saxon ; he may be, as you say, noble and 
invincible in courage ; but his look is so 
fierce, tliat I tremble in his ardent gaze. 
Oh, my people! my beloved people! rescue 
your lawful queen from foreign usurpation j 
let me not be sacrificed to ambition, let me 
not be eternally unhappy. I cannot be 
otherwise than as Britannia. Oh ! force 
not my inclinations j let my peo^^le be my 

spouse. 



B O O K X. 211 

spouse, and let their offspring be mine. I 
will have no other.'* 

" These words with the tears and grief of 
the royal maid, profoundly touched the 
hearts of every subject. Furious and hardy 
they unanimously declared the princess 
should not be forced in her natural rights 
and inclination ; and rushing into the pre- 
sence of the Saxon, commanded him to de- 
part; but he only smiled in the threat, 
secure in his number, eager and ardent in 
feis hopes of gaining the princess, and trust- 
ing to the encoiu'agement that had been 
held to him by hor guardians. 

" But all negociation failed, and both par« 
tics prepared for war. Britannia chose for 
her general a noble personage related to 
herself, and named Arthur, ^°* whose valiant 
deeds she herself loves to recount. He 
fought long against Angulus, but at lengtli 
he died, for he was mortal, covered with 
glory. 

" Thecontest lasted many years; no man 
sparing hi sblood, treasure or advice in the 
cause of a beloved princess. Then the 
royal maid, who had been injured by the 

first 



'21^ E D G A R. 

first imprudence of her guardians, could 
bear the distress no longer, and magnani- 
mously raised her hand to stop the carnage, 
'* Stay, my beloved people," cried she, 
" every drop of blood shed from those 
frames is as my own. I cannot endure it. 
Yes, I will submit. I will pledge my faith 
to the Saxon. I will change my name j I 
will be his j yet will I not desert my sub- 
jects. How dares a monarch thoughtlessly 
spill the blood of his people, and stifle na* 
tions unborn ? How dares he hope for 
Divme blessing, who for less than the most 
solid advantages will hesitate not to plunge 
his people in all the horrors of war ? AVho 
gave him the lives and fortu! es of men to 
sport rashly with ? or what precept of vir- 
tue sanctions him in lifting the sword, but 
at the call of justice or self defence ? What 
is the happiness of one compared to that of 
thousands ? No, my generous people ; I 
am resolved. I will many the prince, and 
I will strive by duty and affection to soften 
his mind into the same tenderness that I 
feel towards mv nation." 

** The great princes? spoke with quick- 
ness. 



BOOK X. Q13 

ncss. She instantly dispatched ambassadors 
to treat with the prince ; and gazing on her 
people with eyes swimming in tears, yet 
smiling through them, waved her white 
hand, and retired, leaving the multitudes 
speechless through admiration, gratitude, 
and love. 

" The Saxon waited not a second invita- 
tion. Intoxicated with joy, he rushed to 
the princess and flung himself at her feet. 
Strong was her emotion, and many of her 
people not being able to endure her agita- 
tion, and still disliking the Saxon, dropped 
one by one "^ from their royal mistress's 
presence, and were content to serve her at 
a distance — however an event afterwards 
took place, which drew these faithful ser- 
vants again around her. 

" Angulus hastened the celebration of his 
nuptials ; and the beautiful princess took 
the name of Anglia, from the prince her 
husband. Her people jealously guarded 
Xhe liberties of the young queen, and fierce- 
ly watched the behaviour of the new mo- 
narch ; determined to arm again in her 
cause, should not their royal mistress 

te 



214 - EDGAR. 

be respected as her high rank and diguitj 
deserved. Eut the Saxon was generous ; 
and his nature softened by the sweetness 
and sensibiHty, and grandeur of Angha's 
soul, by degrees came to seek no interest 
but her*s, and to find no happiness but in 
her gratification. The queen in return, 
loved him with tenderness, and instilled 
the same affection in her subjects. 

*' This illustrious pair were blessed with 
many children, who had by turns a share 
of government assigned them ; but they 
did not inherit the longevity of their pa- 
rents ; for not one lived beyond the age of 
ninety. Towards none of these princes, 
did Anglia ever feel such tender love, as 
to him named Alfred,'"' who signalized 
himself in an extraordinary manner, and 
shewed as much filial love, as genius, va- 
lour, and learning. 

" Ithappened that a Prince named Jutland 
who lived opposite to Anglia, on the verge 
of the Scandinavian Sea, had often heard 
the charms and riches of tlie Princess Bri- 
tannia extolled; and having sent his claims 
to her hand before the Saxon possessed 

her, 



BOOK X. S15 

her, had met hke other potentates with a 
refusaL No sooner did he understand the 
marriage of the lovely queen, and the hap- 
piness of his favoured rival, than he re- 
solved to make a daring attempt to wrest 
away the bride j or, at least, to sow a di- 
vision between the faithful couple. For 
three hundred years he kept this dark de- 
sign in his breast, contenting himself with 
sending spies to the court of Anglia, to 
bring him notice of the proceedings. At 
length he dispatched a host of his Danes^ 
and openly declared his wicked intentions. 
Anglia and her spouse addressed their 
faithful subjects in a short speech ; for the 
atrocity of the act of Prince Jutland was 
too clear in the minds of an incensed peo- 
ple to need much comment. The eldest 
Prince, was according to custom, invested 
with command, and the audacious invaders 
were quickly repulsed. Prince Jutland 
during some years refrained from open 
violence ; but his wicked and restless mind 
scorned to remain long at peace, and he 
made several other attempts ; but as I have 
asserted, was as often repulsed by the 

eldest 



216 EDOAR. 

eldest Princes of Anglia, of whom none made 
him suffer so severely as the noble Alfred, 
the delight of the people and the favourite 
of the queen his mother, who to this day 
can scarcely refrain from tears of admira- 
tion, at the mention of his name. 

" But soon after this, a terrible misfortune 
hung over the lovely queen. She was about 
a thousand years of age, had borne the king 
many sons, and was still in the first bloom 
of youth, when alas ! the Saxon, her hus- 
band fell into a sickness, supposed to be 
with the vexations occasioned by the 
Prince of Jutland. The queen, whose ten- 
der bosom swelled with agony in the fear 
of losing her beloved companion, attended 
him by night and by day, weeping when 
not observed by him, torrents of tears, 
and careless of every object in the world 
besides. 

** Jutland took ungenerous advantage of 
her domestic unhappiness, and sent his 
eldest son by a former marriage, who for 
some time by arts, bribes, and cruelties, 
wrested the command from Anglia*s son ; 
but in the end, the invader was subdued and 

driven 



BOOK X. 217 

driven away, and the lawful Princes were 
restored to their high offices. 

" Now the intermittent disorder of the 
Saxon reached its crisis. The lovely queen 
who had nursed him through a tedious illness 
of above sixty years, perceived with horror 
that convulsions seized him — he shuddered 
— gasped. " My son," he faintly exclaim- 
ed. The young Prince Edgar Atheling 
was conducted to him — he smiled — opened 
his arms for a last embrace — cast a tender 
glance upon Anglia, who fell senseless by 
his side, and expired. 

** The queen continued in insensibility for 
a whole year ; but at the end of it raised 
her languid head, summoned her most 
faithful domestics, and commanded Edgar 
to be brought to her. This young Prince, 
the only remaining one of her sons, she so 
fondly loved, that she called him " her 
darling,",08 was put in her arms, — she wept 
over him ; and as she lavished the sweet 
maternal caresses, desired a recital of all 
that had passed since the Saxon, her hus- 
band's decease — what resentment fired her 
bosom when she heard, that a foreign 

VOL. II. L suitor 



218 EDGAR. 

suitor faintly related to her late lord, had 
already approached to lay claim to her 
hand! Shocked at the outrage, Anglia 
rose, and having attired herself in dark 
W€eds, addressed a passionate speech to 
her subjects, and conjured them to guard 
her honour, and watch over the safety of 
her only son. Edgar Atheling, who was 
generous, active, and brave, already co- 
veted the glory of protecting his mother, 
and placed himself at the head of her de- 
fenders. Yet the usurper gained advan- 
tages, and after several turns of fortune 
threw the queen, who continued firm in 
her refusal of him, into bondage. Here 
she remained nearly five and thirty years, 
when prospects brightened ; — the niece of 
the Prince, Edgar Atheling, married the 
descendant of the usurper, Duke Norman- 
dy, and the children of the Saxon were 
thus restored to their rights. Edgar him- 
self nobly yielded to secure tranquillity to 
his niece, and happiness again beamed on 
Anglia*s brow. 

" So checquered are the vicissitudes of 
this lower world. From the family of 

Edgar 



BOOK X. S19 

Edgar Atheling am I sprung — he married 
privately — educated a daughter in retire- 
ment — in her descendants, after- ages re- 
vived the honour of Mercians house ; my 
maternal grandfather united his stock again 
to royalty, and of the race I am the last 
branch.'* 

" And is the charming queen still in 
existence, my lord?" inquired the Lady 
Berengaria. 

" She iSi madam,'* answered Edgar, 
*' lovely, blooming, happy, in her illus- 
trious grand-children — a royal line, whom 
she loves to dignify with the title of kings ; 
though she herself in the person of repre- 
>sentative of her people and nobles, is of 
highest authority. How would your high- 
ness be charmed were I to relate, — but 
vi^ould time ever suffice me ? The won- 
drous achievements of Anglia and her sons, 
besides their institutions for the advance- 
ment of learning and piety. Their laws 
framed so just, equitable, and merciful ; 
their grant of freedom, everlasting free- 
dom, by an act called Magna Charta* 
Their establishment of a great council pur- 

L 2 posely 



220 EDGAR. 

posely to examine into the affairs ,and to 
argue upon the dearest interests of the 
queen and people. Their encouragement 
of every art and science already known, 
and the zeal which they give to new disco- 
veries. Their generous undertaking for 
the rescuing of poor oppressed Christians 
from the grasp of the Turks, though at many 
hundred leagues distance ; with the ho- 
nours and grandeur of Anglia's name in 
every part, and the vast and splendid offers 
that have been made her, even within the 
last twenty years, of which above all those 
of West Empire, '"^ a rich and noble prince, 
are most honourable, but which she too 
has refused — were I to endeavour at such 
a relation, the sun might run his daily 
course, and still leave me the story to 
relate. 'Tis enough, madam, I am proud 
that my endeavour to excite the interest of 
the Princess of Cyprus in this great queen 
have not wholly failed. Of such a queen, 
equally famed for majesty, virtues, and 
talents. Lovely model for royalty ! pattern 
of excellence ! wondrous in constitution, 
sublime in piety ! beauteous Anglia, if I 

have 



BOOK X. 221 

have spoken feebly of thee, it was because 
my soul laboured to blazon thy famej it 
strove, and trembled in its own eagerness, 
as the little infant attempting too ardently 
to overtake its mother, steps forward and 
drops panting, in the first emotion. Oh 
Anglia ! never forget thy great self. Let 
no example ever lead thee to descend from 
the proud throne of honour, duty, and 
religion — so billows may roar, cities may 
quake, states may be overthrown, but thou 
shalt remain fixed and unchanged," 



i' S NOTES. 



2^2 EDGAR. 



NOTES. 

Note 00] Whilst England enjoyed a profound 
tranquillity, France was in extreme desolation, by the 
intestine troubles caused by tbe King's imprisonment. 
Charles the Dauphin, John's eldsst son^ held the reins of 
government, by tiie title of Lieutenant-Geneval, after- 
wards changed into that of Regent. His regency was 
so much disturbed by the cabals of some restless men, 
who found their advantnge in the confusion of affairs, 
that it was not possible to think effectually of freeing 
their King. The affairs of France were then in a de- 
plorable situation. Charles the Bold, King of Navarre, 
though sprung from the royal family of France, raised 
daily commotions and tumults in Paris, where he had a 
powerful party. — {Rapin, p. 430.) 

At the head of one of the most violent factions, was 
Kobert le Coq, Bishop of Laon, the avowed enemy of 
his masters, who had raised him from a low station to 
the highest offices of trust. He caused himself to be 
appointed President of the Council, and by his autho- 
rity, usurped an entire dominion over the Dauphin. 

This Prince strove in vain against the torrent, he even 
cqndescended to harangue the people, and give them a 
relation of his motives and conduct to gain their affec- 
tion. For the moment, the populace was affected, but 
one of the rebels spoke and all impression instantly 
vanished. Success emboldened the most daring of the 
factious; the Marshals of Champagne and of Normandy 
were assassinated in the very palace, and in the very 
sight of the Dauphin. In short, disorder reigned \w 
every part of the kingdom, — {Millot, Histoire de France, 
p. 117—120.) 

Note 6i.] — As one of the author's cares in writing 
a national work has been to preserve throughout, as 
much as possible such imagery as her country affords, 
she here observes, that according to Chambers, 
the torpedo is found in the British seas, and parti- 
cularly at Torbay, near Waterford, on the coast of Ire- 
land. 

This 



NOTES. 



223 



This extraordinary fish loves to bury itself lightly in 
the sand, in which situation the torpedo gives his most 
forcible shock, which throws down the astonished pas- 
senger who inadvertently treads upon him. Upon 
touching the fish with the fingers, it frequently, though 
not always, happens that the person feels an unusual 
painful numbness, which suddenly siezes the arm up to 
the elbow, and sometimes to the very shoulder and 

head. , 

The piinis of a very particular species, and is not to be 
described by any words j yet Messieurs Lorenzlni, Borelli, 
Redi, and Reaumur, who all felt it severely, observe it 
to bear some resemblance to that painful sensation felt 
in the arm, upon striking the elbow violently against a 
hard body : though M. Reaumur assures us, this gives 
but a very faint idea of it. 

Oppian affirms, that it will benumb the astonished 
fisherman, even through the whole length of the line 
and rod. See the passage cited and translated by Pen- 
nant, vol. iii. 

The torpedo is so far amphibious as to live in air 
twenty-fours, and but little longer in fresh water, — 
{^Chambers's Cyclopedia.) 

Notes 62 and 63.] II ne manquoit plus au malheur de 
la nation, que la delivrance du Roi de Navarre. Jean de 
Pecquigny, gouverneur d'Artois, le tire de sa prison, le 
Coq et Marcel obligent le Dauphin de le recevoir ; il 
entre i\ Paris comme en triomphe, harangue la populace 
enchantee de son eloquence, fait elargir tous les pri- 
sonnieis, apparemment pour grossir son parti d'une 
foule de scelerats. Enfin apres avoir attente sur la vie 
de I'heritier de la couronne, il leve une armee, et Maicel 
avec ses complices se declare hautement en sa faveur.— 
MiUot, Elimensde IHistoire de France, tome ii. p. ilQ. 
— And the Dauphin was obliged to abandon the capital. 

Note 64.] The Princess Isabella of France was, 
when her father returned from England, bestowed on 
Galeas, the son of John Visconti, Duke of Milan, and 
John King of France, her father, received from his new 
son-in-law, the sum of six hundred thousand crowns; 
The Jews, who had been banished from France, were, 

I. 4 by 



224 



EDGAR. 



by similar arguments, permitted to return for the term 
of twenty years j but the subjects of John beheld with 
equal disgust the sordid barter of a princess whom they 
respected, and the restoration of a people whom they 
despised, — {Hist. France, edit. London, l/QO, p. 386.) 

Note 65. J — Cotton Paper, — In the French King's 
library are MSS. on this paper, which by the character, 
and other circumstances, appear to be of the tenth cen- 
tury. Be this as it will, from the twelfth century, cot' 
Ion MSS. were more frequent then parchment ones, — 
Ltinen paper appears to have been first introduced among 
us towards the beginning of the fourteenth century. 
The learned Conringius denies that there are many ma- 
nuscripts of this paper above four hundred years old ; 
with whom agrees the Count MafFei, who finds no 
marks of its use before the year 1300. — The Jesuit 
Balbinus produces divers instances of paper manuscripts, 
written before the year 1340. An ingenious writer of 
our own country, assures us, he had a piece of paper 
which agreed well with (he charter daied in 135S, in the 
thirty-second year of Edward III, He adds, that in the 
archives of the library belonging to the dean and chap- 
ter of Canterbury, is an inventory of the goods of 
Hen'-y, prior of Christchurch, who died in 1340, writ- 
ten en paper ; and that in the Cotton libiary, there are 
several writings on our paper, in the times of most of 
our kings and queens, as high as the fifteenth of Ed- 
ward III. which coincides with the year 1335. And 
Dr. Prideaux assures us, he has seen a registration of 
some acts of John Cranden, prior of Ely, made on 
paper, which bears date in the fourteenth year of King 
Edward II. that is, A.D. 1320. 

The invention of paper niay appear more modern than 
it is, because records were not used to be written on it, 
but it was a considerable time confined to letters, and 
other fugacious compositions j and to this day, few in- 
struments of any consequence are written on it. — 
{Chambers's Cyclopedia, vide Paper.) 

Note 66.'] The beautiful country of Switzerland 
was after the decay of the Roman Empire, subjected to 
Germany, but so oppressive was the conduct of the 

Austrian 



NOTES. 22 

Austrian governors that the people, exasperated^ waited 
only an opportunity to shake off the yoke. This offered 
in 1307, when William Tell refused to pay homage to 
the governor's hat, and raised the first standard of re- 
volt. He was quickly joined by the inhabitants of his 
own and two other cantons, who in a body drove away 
their Austrian masters, and established the indepen- 
dence of their country. — (5ee Count Hotbergs Travels.) 

Note Q7-'\ Freedom Hud openness of manner cha- 
racteristise this beautiful people, who among their Alps, 
friendly, dignified, and unaffected, exercise that virtue 
which the Romans and Greeks supposed was only to be 
found in cities, and wliich they called urbanity. The 
unenslaved shepherds are free in their advances, because 
they cannot suspect where there is nothing to fear. 
They approach with a grace, for as they want for no- 
thing, they ask for nothing, they love, and are beloved 
hy strangers. 

Among the Swiss, luxury is unknown: the only 
costly ornament they occasionally possess is a large bell 
of silver, which hangs from ihe neck of sotne labourite 
cow, and which has adorned perha[)S inany successive 
herds : and even these bells are not for mere ornament, 
they are necessary, for when a single co.v, or a whole 
herd shall have strayed, by the tmkling of the sweet- 
toned bell they are not only recovered by the herdsman, 
but they find each other. 

D'-T-ing summer, vhdt the goats and kine graze upon 
the Alpine heights, and yield stores of sweet iniik^ the 
herdsoian prep ues his chi-eses and spreads thni in a 
temporary hut n^>ar the fine pastures ; bm a> wmier ap- 
pro.iclies, the shepheicl with l)is tauiiiy packs the cheeses 
upon iuieiwoven bianches of the pine, ano transports 
them unon sleil^es '■> his cottage iu the v alloy below, 
vvhi'her he i-. followed by his faiihful t fiber, of c.iitle.— - 
{^Co'irii Hi hems 'Iraveh) 

Ni.Tii i)S [- — [he Swisi have an air so sweei ;iid so 
touchni;; to H Swiss eai , th it uo i ative can rests, .ne de- 
sire I') refiirn !o h ■. ho'iie an ■ hi-i Alps upon catching 
itslovrd .lonnds. It i-cilU'i '• the K- uteclien, " and i ihe 
meloay sung by the iiiljabiianls ot the ^^\.•^, eM);xial)jr 
when they drive their cattle from the vallies to lije liigh. 

I. 5 niountaing^ 

J 



2^6 EDGAR. 

mountains. (See Count Holberg's Travels ) Ifinwar- 
Kke courage the Greeks and Romans were their equals, 
this noble, this generous, this affecting people, rise su- 
perior to them in goodness, in mild humanity towards 
their foes j iji concord and in purity of manners among 
themselves. 

Note 69. The successes of the Venetian arms in 
the thirteenth century awakened the envy and jealousy 
of their neighbours in the West. The Genoese were 
the first who manifested this disposition, bv seducing 
the Candians from their allegiance, exciting tliem to 
revolt, and infusing in them a spirit of perpetual sedi- 
tion. The rebels were, however, reduced to obedience, 
and the Genoese were defeated at sea. 

The illustrious Andrew Dandolo, the Doge of Venice, 
concluded an advantageous treaty of alliance, of friend- 
ship, and of commerce, with the Sultan of Egypt. The 
riches of the Indus and of the Ganges now flowed down 
the Nile into the ports of the republic ; and her mer- 
chant ships, protected by a flourishing navy, freely na- 
vigated every sea. But the Genoese, envious of her 
prosperity and extensive commerce, which proved ruin- 
ous to theii's, began to persecute their ships in all 
parts. These insults aroused the vengeance of the Ve- 
netians, till, at length, after alternate victories and de- 
feats. General Fisani completely routed thetn near the 
Island of Sardinia. Andrew Dandolo died in 1354, and 
was succeeded by Contarini. 

The power of Venice was, at this epocha, so great, 
that scarcely a war broke out, but she was involved in 
it, either as mediator of the quarrels of others, for the 
protection of her own commerce and independence, of 
her rights and possessions, or to revenge insults to some 
of these. At this period too, the trade of Venice ex- 
tended to the three quarters of the globe then known. — 
{See Ike Fall of f^oiice, translated Jrom the Italian, p. 
15 — 18 ) 

It is also certain that during the Saracen wars, the 
nations of northern Europe must have had great com- 
munication with the several states of Italy, from the 
ports of which great armies embarked for the East j be- 
sides which, the free stales of Italy that were all mari- 
time, supplied foreign powers with ships for merchan- 
dize 



NOTES. 227 

dize or war ; for Geoffry Chaucer was sent to Genoa, 
upon exactly such an embassy : namely, (he securing of a 
number Of ships for our use, notwithstanding (he great 
navy we then possessed. — (See Biograpfiica BritannicOf 
p. 455) 

Ail this is only to prove tliat ihere could have been no 
difficuhy 10 an English or Frenchman to gain employ in 
the service of tlie Ji ii.n stales upon the first applica- 
tioi' ; anu in asserting this, I take no notice whatever of 
the Knglishmin, Sir John Hawkwood, who was with a 
great tr;.Mn ot followers, employed as General in all the 
Genoese wars of this very peiiod j nor do I insist upon 
the grandeur of the Englisli name in the time of Edward 
III. which spread all over the known world, and in- 
duced even the King of Cyprus to say, " he could think 
he had done or seen nothing worthy of note, till he had 
visited the hero of Cre.scy and Poictiers." — {See Col- 
lins's Life of the Black Prince. Speed. Rapin's Note 
upon the famous Sir John Hawkwood.) 

Note 70.] Few people above the common rank, are 
seen in the streets during the heat of the day in the hot 
countries of Enrope. The large curtains are generally 
half drawn, the shutters nearly closed, to exclude the 
sun and insects ; and the inhabitants indulge in sleep. 
Towards the evening, they rise, dress, and prepare 
either for amusements within doors, visitings, or walks 
upon the terraces of their flat-roofed houses.— (5ee 
Barretti's Italy.) 

Note 71O It is scarcely necessary to mention what 
is so well known, that the fourth quarter of the world 
was not discovered till the reign of Henry VII. in the 
year 1402. 

Note 72] In the southern countries of Europe, 
and those between the tropics, the crespuscle, or twi- 
light, is very short. The author has herself been sur= 
pristd and overtaken in '^ortugaL, by the darkness that 
succeeds v/ith such rapidity to the setting of the sun. 

Note 73.] Petrarch, the sweet poet of Italy, was 
born in 1304. He resided some time with his father 
at Avignon, but afterwards settled at Vaucluse, five 
miles from that city. In this retreat he became ac- 

L 6 acquainted 



2S8 EDGAR, 

quainted with the beautiful Laura, to whom he ad- 
dressed his exquisite sonnets. In 1341, Petrarch's fame 
had extended so widely, that lie was solicited by three 
powerful states to come and receive ihe public honours 
that awaited him. The offer of one was modestly ac- 
cepted, and the poetical crown was fixed on his head, 
with great solemnity at Rome. This elegant and dis- 
tinguished writer, died at Argna, near Padua, in July 
1374, aged seventy. (Lempriere's Biooraphy.) 

Note 74.] Victor Pisani, an illustrious Venetian 
general, who fought in many battles against the Dal- 
matians and Genoese, In one expedition he failed, and 
his ungrateful country condemned him to death, but 
this sentence was mitigated to impiisonment. At the 
expiration of his confinement, the sailors of Venice 
loudly demanded him to conduct them Ro;ainst the Ge- 
noese, who threatened their country with a dreadful 
war; he was received with acclamatiot-s, and lei his 
countrymen to victory. He died in the midst of his 
successes, 1380. — {Lempriere, and the Fall of Venice.) 

Note 75.] GeoflFry Chaucer, a celebrated English 
poet, and the first great improver and reformer of our 
language, flourished in the fourteenth century, and was 
supposed to be born in the second year of Edward III. 
A.D. 1328. He was partly educated at Cambridge, and 
completed his studies at Oxford. After a considerable 
stay here, he became, as Leland tells us, a ready logi- 
cian, a smooth rhetorician, a pleasant poet, a grave 
philosopher, an ingenious mathematician, and a holy 
divine. After he left this University, he travelled 
abroad through France and the Low Countries, in order 
to seethe world, and to improve the knowledge which 
he had acquired from books. After his return, his first 
employment at court was in quality of the King's page, 
nnd at this time the English court was the most gay and 
splendid in Europe, h^iward IlL a prince equally dis- 
tinguished by civil and marlial virtues, sat then upon 
the throne, blessed with an illustrious consoit, by whom 
he had a numerous posterity. His reveience for the laws, 
nnd his kindness for his people, made him beloved at 
home ; so that our chronicles boast of few reigns so 
glorious, and of none brighter, than his. Among other 

great 



NOTES. 229 

great qualities, with which this fattious monarch was 
endowed, his love of learning and learned men, was 
not the least conspicuous ; and therefore it is no matter 
of wonder, that Chaucer, who was continu;illy giving 
some specimen or other of the vivacity of liis genius, 
wrought himself into high favoui«-, insomuch that it 
appears, that he was a constant attendant on the court, 
and when it was at Woodstock, resided at a stone 
house, near the park gate, which still retains his name, 
since, being consecrated in his j'oems, the whole coun- 
try round about, is become, in respect to Englishmen, 
a kind of classic ground. Besides his employment 
about the person of the Prince, Chaucer attached him- 
self to the service of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancas- 
ter, by whom, and by his Duchess Blanch, a lady 
equally remarkable for her wit and virtue, he was ex- 
ceedingly beloved, nor was it long before he became a 
part of their lamily also. Our great poet was much 
esteemed by his royal master. King Edward, who 
loaded him with kindness, and placed hira in very high 
offices of trust. Among these was the app ointment on 
a mission to Genoa, which he executed so faithfully, 
that the King ordered him, with other bounties, a pit- 
cher of wine daily, to be delivered by the butler of 
England, In Italy, he was introduced to Petrarch, at 
the wedding of Vinlante, djughter of G^lleazzo, Duke 
of Milan, with the Duke of Clarence, and it is not im- 
probable that Boccacio was of the party. 

This great poet's works are too voluminous to enu- 
merate ti.em ; that they are not more generally known, 
is owing to the defects of the langoiige in his day, not 
to any want o! beauiies that geniu-. or nature can be- 
stow, for it is observed, that, if we look upon hini as an 
autiiyr, he may be tiuly styled the Father of English 
Poetry, and perhaps tti- nri.-tce of it, for excejjiing the 
unavoidable deftcisof language, liis works have siill ail the 
beauties lh;it can be wishe.lf^r, or expected in every kind 
of composition. He was deepU' ver'.eii in moral, and 
in natural phil ^sophy. and as (.crhaps no iiKin under- 
stood l:n;iian naiure belter, so it may be truly said, that 
no writer ii, any language, has either piinted it with 
greater force, exactness, or ji^dgment. His writings 

have 



230 EDGAR. 

have been held in the greatest honour, and transmitted 
to posterity with such care ;md circumspeciion, and by 
the united labours of so many eruuient pfisoi.s, as will 
do lasting honour to his memory, and pl-i'uly prove, 
that true genius, extensive learning, and a frees.irit, 
are cap.ible of comm;!nding reveience ihrviugh ail ages. 
Chaucer saw his end approach with Christian patience, 
for there ig s.ill an ode extant that he is .said lo have 
composed in liis last agonies. He expired in 14O0, in 
the full reputation which he deserved, and vi'as buried 
in Westminster Abbey. 

In peiMcn, too, this great poet was a favourite of 
Nature. He was reckoned one of the handsomest men 
about the Court, as appears from a picture taken in 
]360 ; his complexion was fair and beautiful, bis lips 
very red and full, his size a just proportion, and his air 
very graceful and majestic. — (Bioi^Ta/)hka BrilaniAca, 
p. 451, 4.54, 462.— IFartou's Obsavuiions on English 
Poetry, p. 43 ) 

Note 76.] — Tn the meane space, from what part of 
the world did not the English bring testimonies of their 
valour ? For such as had warred under the Cypriot 
King against the Turkes, and had taken a part of 
Alexandria in Egypt, returned with much riches in 
cloths of gold, velvets, and precious stone. About 
the.se times (1365), and long after also, Sir John 
Hawkut (or Hawkvvood), that valiant man of armes, 
made his ovvne name, and his countrimens the Eng- 
lish, very honourable, by martiall vertue in sundry 
parts of Italy. And as 'heir vilour was one way seene 
beyond the Alps, so there fell out occasions not long 
after, which made it knowne another w.^y, beyond 
the mountains Pyrenen. — (Speed, p. 70O.) 

Note 77] — 5" the time of Alexander, and of the 
Kings of Egypt, Alexandria did not «i3nd, as it does 
now, in the midst of sind ; the lake Mareotis, which 
was but at a short distance, and two large c^uaJs, one of 
them descencing from Upper Egy^t, and the other 
coming from the branch of the Nile, which was deno- 
minated the Bolhilic, kept up a salutary coolness, at 
the same time that they favoured culture and vegeta- 
tion. These works, which attest the grandeur and 

power 



NOTES. 231 

power of ancient Egypt, and the existence of which 
was equally useful and agrc^eable, were still kept in 
repair under the government of the caliphs. Abulfeda, 
an Arab'an historian, speaks of Alexandria as of an 
inomense city, unrounded by delightful gardens. The 
ruin of what had cost so much pains and labour, was 
reserved for the Turks. — (^Sonnoni's Egypt, [i. 80.) 

Note 78.] — Alexandria. — The making of Alex- 
andria is also attended with danger, this part of Egypt 
being so low that it cannot be approached without great 
caution.— (p. 6l.) 

The coast of Egypt, situated to the eastward of 
Alexandria, is easily distinguishable from that to the 
westward. It is not so low, is mere iiregular, and 
does not wear the same appearances of bar.-'enness ; 
some traces of cultivation, a few palm trees, and habi- 
tations being there to be seen. At lengih the nav'gator 
is assured that he is in the direction of Alexandria, by 
getting sight of Fompey's Pillar. Yet, from whatever 
quarter he may steer for this dangerous coast, he can- 
not be too cautious, because none of these marks are 
perceptible at any great distance ; nod because currents, 
the rapidity of which it is more easy to foresee than to 
calculate, lay hold of vesse's, and drift them towards 
the coast of Africa — {Sonnonis Travels in Egypt, 
p. 62.) 

Note 79 ] — In Egypt, as in Syria, everyone, whe- 
ther Mahornetan or Ciiristian, speaks Arabic, nor is 
any other language under?tood. About the end of the 
first century of the Kejira, the Caliph Waled I. prohi- 
bited the Greek tongue throughout his whole empire. 
From that time the Arabic becaiije universal.— (/^oi- 
vry's Travels, p. 64.) 

Note 80. J — Franks. — The appellation of Franks 
is given, by the Turks and inhabitants of the east, to 
the inhabitants of Europe in general. — (S.'e Sononni 
and Volney's Travels.) 

Note 81.] —Terrace. — The houses of Alexandria 
like all those of the Levant, have terraced roofs. — 
{Sonnoni, p. 63.) 

Note 



232 EDGAR. 

Note 82. J — The Mussulman law divides into two 
classes all the inhabilanis uf the earth : those who pro- 
fess the faith of Miihoaiet are cilled, without distinc- 
tion of rites, eef'ts, i^c. Mus.-lim, an Arabic word, 
signifying a person resigned to God ; the dual of which 
is Mussulman, &c. Ibe nations who deny the divine 
rnission, and reject the doctrine of the Prophet, are 
confouLided under the common denomination of keafir, 
infidel cr blasphemer, a wretch wandering in darkness, 
whose eyes are shut to the light of revehition. Thus 
all infidels form but one aijd the same peo[de. — (Thorn- 
ion's Turkey, p. 183.) 

An Egyptian Mussulman, still more brutal, never 
calls him (an European) any thing but dog. Euro- 
peans, in llitir usual dress, were also exposed at Ro- 
setta, to be hooted in the populous quarters, and to be 
pursued by the redoubled cries of Nouzraniy Nazarean. 

If the inhabitan:s of Ilosetla be less barbarous than 
those of the othLT pnrls of Egypt, they are not less 
ignorant, less superstitious, nor less intolerant. We 
find among them, though with shades more softeiied 
down, the same roughness of character, the same 
implacable aver.io?i towards the nations of Europe, the 
same revengeful disposition, in a word, the same trea- 
chery, &c. 

, , .Woe to the European, who ventured (in Cairo) 
to appear in the streets in the dress of his own country ! 
He would soon have fallen a victim to his imprudence, 
and woiild intalibly h.'.ve been knocked down or mur- 
dered. — {Sonnuvi <i Travels, p. 422 ) 

Note S3.] — When the r^ce of the Ptolemies be- 
came extinct in the person ot Cleopatra, the kingdom 
of Eg\ ;>t sunk into a Uonian prov uce j in the division 
of the kuiu II empire, t-y,ypt afterwauls f U u> Arca- 
dius, the son of Theudosuis and oontuuied to form 
part of ilie Ea^lern Mupire till the year 6-41, niUL-teen 
years af'^r 1*'.e fiigh: <)f Mahomet j when Omar, the 
third Calipli subjected Egypt n. the ri-ing empire of 
the iSJuibuiiiia'ts, end Alcxandri. was taken, atter a 
siese oT louriecn months. 

The dyna.sty of the Ornmiades terminating in /^p, 
the descendants of Abbns retained possession of Egypt 

tiU 



NOTES. 233 

till the revolt of Ben-Toulon, whose successors reigned 
only thirty-seven years, being dethroned by the Caliphs 
of Bagdad. 

Saladin, a Curdeen by birth, availing himself of the 
dissentions between the Fatimites and the Abbassides, 
took Egypt from the latter, and erected a dynasty of 
the Aionbites. The family of the Abbassides, how- 
ever, remained under the dominion of these usurpers ; 
and one of them was always permitted to enjoy the 
empty title of Caliph. 

Touran-Schah was the last of the Aionbites, and 
was assassinated in 1250^ to make way for a Turcoman 
named Azzeddin, who was also assassinated, after a 
reign of seven years and eleven irontbs. 

Salah-Nuginmeddin, the taiher of Touran-Schah, 
established the military institution of the Mamaluks 
a name which in Arabic signifies Waves. He accord- 
ingly forined it of the slaves brought by the Tartars to 
Caiio f('r sale. The greater part of them w«. re Circas- 
sians, which occasioned their being cai.'ed iniiifferently 
Circassians or jMamaiuks, They became .so poweiful, 
that, according to some Arabic authors, ihey raised 
one of their own boJy to the throne, in the year 1381. 
He was called Abousaid-Be kouk. or Jtddhaber-Ber- 
kouk, a name which h d beta given him by his master, 
as expressive of his courage i his was the last dynasty 
that reigned in Egypt : ti,e death of Toman B<-y, who 
was the twenty-ninth of its sultans, and the submission 
of this kingdom to the Oitomans,* having leiminated 
the empire of the Mamaluks. — (Sonnoni'i Travels, p. 
427.) 

Note 84.1 — Towards the end of autumn, arrive in 
Egypt, at diff rent times, flights of ducks, teals, turtle- 
doves, thrushes, woodcocks, larks, quails, snipes, 
blackbirds, starlings, lapwings, cranes, wild geese, 
woodpecker*, &c.. None of these arrive in greater, 
and at the same time more unaccountable numbers than 
quails. Many of them, exhausted with fatigue, drop 
and disappear in the waves j but whatever may be the 

dangers 

* This event is supposed to have happened in 1517. — (Descrip- 
tion dc I'Egyptc, par Mailkt.) 



234. EDGAR. 

dangers of the long voyage, to which these birds do 
not seem destined, whatever losses these bodies of 
feeble travellers may sustain in the course of the pas- 
sage, there still arrives so great a multitude in the en- 
virons of Alexandria, that the number to be seen there 
•is truly incredible. The Egyptian fowlers catch ihem 
in nets. During the first days of their arrival, such 
quantities are for sale, that threb or four were to be 
purchased for a medine. Tiie crews of merchant ships 
lived upon them. — {Sonnoni's Travels, p. "05.) 

Note 85.} — The nightingale is known to spend the 
season cf our winter in Lower Egypt. I met with 
several in difFerent parts of the Delta, where they fre- 
quent the most shady thickets, in the vicinity of the 
water. They do not here display the art cf Philomela, 
or exhibit that melodious voice, those brilliant modula- 
tions, which are loudly re-echoed in our forests and 
orchards ; the only sound they utter is a raucous 
croaking, that kind of rattling in the throat, which 
• ««rith us succeeds their delightful warbling, after they 
have ceased to sing theii loves. They arrive in Africa 
in autumn, and depart in the spring, when these 
songsters of nature repair to our woods, to celebrate its 
return. — {Sonnoni's Travels, p. 277-) 

Note 86.] — The invention of the compass is by 
some ascribed to a Neapolitan ; bui it is generally sup- 
posed to have been brought from China in the year 
I260j by Marcus Paulus, a Venetian. What confirms 
this conjecture is, that at first th-ey used the compass in 
the same manner as the Chtn-^se still do ; i. e. they let 
it float on a little piece of cork, instead of suspending 
it on a pivot. It is added, that their Emperor Chinin- 
gus, a celebrated astrologer, had » knowledge of it 
1,120 years before Christ. Tin* French lay clnim to 
the invention of tlie compass, from the fleur-de-lis, 
with which all nations still distinguish the nuith point 
of the card — [Chnmlers.) 

But the appropiiation of the fleur de-lis to this point, 
is not a conclusive argumeni in favour o{ the invention 
by the people of Fmnce, since once of their own most 
interesting and scientific writers has declared, that the 

fleur-de-lia 



NOTES. 235 

fleur-de-lis was not introduced into the arms of France, 
until seven hundred years after the establishment of the 
monarchy. " But," he immediately adds, *' if the 
fleur-de-lis was not in very ancient times the privileged 
and characteristic ornament of the crown ar.d sceptre of 
France, it was, in several countries of the east, the 
emblem of power among the nations of antiquity. 
Herodotus and Strabo relate, that the Kings of Syiia 
and Babylon formerly bore the fleur-de-lis at the end of 
their sceptre. Monntfaucon also speaks of that of 
David, found engraved in miniature, in a manuscript 
of the tenih century, and which is surmounted by the 
fleur-de-lis. — {Sonnoni's Travels in Egypt, p. 5Q5.) 

Though the niariner's compass has been long in use, 
the best construction of it was attended with inconve- 
nience, till the late improvements it has received, for 
•which it is indebted to English talent and perseverance. 

Note 87-] — The tobacco of Turkey (used also in 
Egypt) is the best and mildest in the world; it has not 
that acrid taste, which in our countries provokes a con- 
tinual spitting ; then the length of the shanks, in which 
the smoke rises, the odoriferous nature of the wood 
of which they are made, the amber tube that is held in 
the mouth, the aloes wood wiih which the tobacco is 
scented, contribute to make it siill milder, and to ren- 
der the smoke of it not unpleasing in a room. Even 
the beautiful women are fond of passing their time in 
pressing the yellow amber with their rosy lips, and 
gently inhaling the smoke of Syrian tobacco, pei fumed 
with that of aloes. Neither is it necessary to draw up 
the smoke strongly, it almost rises of itself. People 
turn aside their pipe, chat, look, now and then rest it 
in the middle of the lips, and gently inhale the srnoke 
which immediately escapes from the half open mouth. 
Sometimes they amuse themselves, with making it pass 
through the nose j at others they fill their mouths with 
it, and blow it wi'h extended hand, where it forms a 
spiral column, which remains there some moments. 
The glands are not pricked, nor are the lungs dried up 
by a saliva, with which the floors of our smokers are 
covered. They do not experience the want of spitting j 

and 



23d j: c G A R. 

and this action, so frequent among us, is considered as 
an indecency in the east, before persons to whom any 
respect is due. — {Sonno/ii's Travels in Egypt, in the 
year 1777, p. 159.) 

Note S8.] — All through the Levant, story-tellers, 
or emprovisaiori, are greatly encouraged ; i;ot a coffee- 
house, or place of public resort, is without a regular 
story-teller, who is ever talking, and whom the com- 
pany is never tired of hearing, '' The stories of these 
indefatigable narrators are," says Sonnoni, p. 16I, "in 
general very tedious. 'J he Arabian writers^ however, 
from whom they are taken, sometimes furnish them 
with very plensanl tales " 

The skiirui or.ifor walks about as he recites, suiting 
his action in a lively manner to his discourse ; and 
occasionally delivers tales or fables of his own compo- 
sition When he hai finished, he collects his remune- 
ration frt)m the company ; and as this will commonly 
be proportionate to ti)e skill of hs performance, he 
has ancHher incentive to excel, in addition to the desire 
of fame. — (f^wwi and Observations in Egypt, hy Luizi 
Mayer, p. 6/ ) 

Note 89.] — Youths and virgins of great beauty were 
accustomed to wait in the royal apartments, in the 
eastern courts. At the marriage of Bajazet with the 
daughter of Germtan Ogli, A. D. 1369, Eurenoses, a 
noble, sent as a present upon occasion of the feast, one 
hundred boys and as many virgins, richly apparelled, 
each having a cup (in one hand) filled with rich jewels 
and stones, and in the other a silver cup full of gold.— 
{Isaaciuns Chrouolo^^, ed. J 633 ) 

Note 90]^ — When Caesar invaded Britain, it was 
believed ih'-.t it produced neither gold nor silver; but 
the Rumans had not long settled in it before they dis- 
covered their mistake, and found that it was not alto- 
gether destitute of these precious metals. A modern 
writer is of opinion, that gold and silver were not then 
found in sucn quantities, as to furnish an article of 
British exports : but the following passage of Strabo 
seems to imply the contrary. " Britain produceth 

corn. 



NOTE S. '^S'T 

corn, cattle, gold, silver, iron ; besides which, skins, 
and dogs, naturally excellent hunters, are exported 
from that island," The gagates, or jeat-stone, is be- 
lieved by some to have constituted another article of the 
British exports of this ppriod. This stone was highly 
esteemed by the ancients, both on account of its 
beauty, and the many medicinal virtues they imagined 
it possessed. Solinus, in describing the productions of 
Britain, mentions the gagates as one of the most valu- 
able, in the following terms : " besides, to say no- 
thing in this place of the many large and rich veins of 
metals of various kinds, with which the soil of Britain 
abounds, the gagates is found there in great quantities, 
and of the most excellent quality." 

Gems, and particularly pearls, may be classed among 
the British exports of this period. Julius Caesar was so 
great an admirer of the British pearls, which he had seen 
in Gaul, and used to weigh in his hand, that Suetonius 
affirms, the hope of obtaining a quan.tity of them was 
his chief inducement to the invasion of Britain. This 
much is certain, that after his return from this island, 
he consecrated a breastphite, of great value and beauty, 
to Venus, in her temple at Rome ; which he signified, 
by an inscription, was composed of British pearls.— 
{Henry's England, p. 388 ) 

The fine pearls of Britain are noticed, as Speed ob- 
serves (book v. p. 3.) by Tacitus. 

Speed says, that the seas by which this country is 
surrounded, not only yield " entercourse for tratfique 
into all ports of the world, but plentifully abound with 
all sorts of fi.ih, to the great benefit of the inhabitants, 
and bring forth pearles, as Tncitus sheweth, which 
were usually cast out ■with, the Jlood, and gathered at 
the ehle. These pearles, though not altogether so orient 
as they are in India, by Amianus, in his xxiii booke, 
and 12 chapter, are called rich gems ; and Hiny, in his 
ix booke and 35 cliapter, useth the like terme : the 
desire whereof (as Suetonius sayth) drew Ceasars affec- 
tion for the conquest of Britain." 

Notes 91 snd p2.]— Poetry, Laws, Music— 
The British kingdoms, we have reason to believe, were 

ia 



238 EDGAR. 

in possession of a system of laws of considerable extent 
before they were subdued by the Romans. Some of 
these kingdoms had subsisted several ages before that 
period. Almost a whole century had elapsed between 
the first invasion under Julius Caesar and the second 
under Claudius, and yet we find no material difference 
in the political siate of Britain in these two periods. 
In both it was divided into several little monarchies, 
each of which was governed by its own king; and it 
had, no doubt, been in this state long before the first of 
these invasions. In so long a course of time, they 
must have acquired some skill in government and legis- 
lation, especially the Druids, who devoted their whole 
time to the study of learning, religion, and law, of 
which they were the great oracles and interpreters. 

The laws, as well as the other branches of learning 
among the ancient Britons wetc couched in verse. 
Though this may appear a little extraordinary to us, it 
was far from being peculiar to the ancient Britons. 
The first laws of all nations, says a learned writer on 
this subject were composed in verse and sung. This 
practice of composing their laws in verse, and forming 
them into songs, was owing to that surprising love 
which nations of antiquity bore to poetiy and music. 
(Henry's England, p. lOQ ) 

An eminent sage of the law hath indeed affirmed, 
that the ancient Britons, before they were subdued by 
the Romans were in }x)ssession of that admirable sys- 
tem of jurisprudence, the present common law of Eng- 
land ; and that no material changes have been made in 
that system either by the Komans, Saxons, Danes, or 
Normans, (p. 218). 

Before the invasion of the Normans there were several 
states of Britain, in which a very numerous body of 
men was supported in honour and affluence, at the 
public expense, foi the study of learning and religion. 
These were the Druids, who were ihe philosophers, as 
well as the priests of the Britons, Gauls, and all other 
Celtic nations. " They pay the highest honours (says 
Diodorus Siculus of the Gauls) to their divines and 
philosophers, which are called Druids. It is their 
custom never to perform any sacred rite, without one 

of 



NOTES. ^39 

of these philosophers ; for as they believe them to be 
well acquainted with the will of the gods, they think 
them the most proper persons to present both their 
thanksgivings and prayers. There are three classes of 
men (says Sirabo) which are highly and universally 
esteemed. These are the Bards, the Vates, and the 
Druids. The Bards are poets and musicians, the Vates, 
are priests and physiologists, and the Druids add the 
study of moral philosophy to that of physiology. 

When we reflect on the great antiquity, and prodi- 
gious numbers of the Druids, the many immunities 
which they enjoyed, the leisure and tranquillity in 
which they lived, and on the opportunities and encou- 
ragements which they had to study ; we must be inclin- 
ed to believe that they had made considerable progress in 
several branches of learning before they were destroyed 
by the Romans. We shall be confirmed "n this opinion, 
by observing the respectful terras in which the best 
Greek and Roman writers speak of their learning. 
Diogenes Laertius places thern in the same rank, in point 
of learning and philosophy, with the Chaldeans ot 
Assyria, the Magi of Persia, and the Gymnosophists 
and Brachmins of India. Both Caesar and Mela observe, 
that they had formed very large systems of astronomy 
and natural philosophy j and that these systems, together 
with their observations on other parts of learning, were 
so voluminous, that their scholars spent no less than 
twenty years in making themselvc; masters of them. It 
is acknowledged by all the writers of antiquity who 
mention the Druids, that ihey were greatly admired 
and respected by their countrymen, who not only 
listened with reverence and submission to their religious 
instructions, but also committed the two most impor- 
tant charges, the administration of justice, and the 
education of their most noble yoath, entirely to their 
management. This is a demonstration that they en- 
tertained a very high opinion of their wisdom and learn- 
ing, as well as of iheir probity. The British Druids in 
particular, were so famous, both at home and abroad, 
for their learning, that they were generally believed to 
have been the investors of their systems of religion 
and philosophy, and universally acknowledged to be the 

be«t 



240 EDGAR. 

best teachers of them ; so that such of the noble youth 
of Gaul, as were desirous of becoming perfect mastersof 
these systems, found it necessary to make a voyage into 
this island for that purpose. — fHenrj's ETtnlanJ,p. 24S.J 
The British kings and chieftains, who were educated 
by the Druids, were in particular famous for their elo- 
quence. This is evident from the many noble speeches 
that are ascribed to them by the Greek and Roman wri- 
ters. For though these speeches may not be genuine, 
yet they are a proof that it was a well-known fact that 
these princes were accustomed to make harangues on 
these and the like occasions. This we are expressly 
told by Tacitus. " The British chieftains, before a 
battle, fly from rank to rank^ and address their men 
with aiiimaling speeches, tending to inflame their 
courage, increase, their hopes, and dispel their fears." 
These harangues were called, in the ancient language 
of Britain, Brosnichiy Kah, which is literally translated 
by Tacitus, * incitamenta belli,' incentives to war. The 
genuine posterity of the ancient Britons long retained 
their taste for eloquence, and their high esteem for 
those who excelled in that act, (p. 2/9). 

After having spoken honourably ot the knowledge of 
the Druids, and supported his assertions with strong ar- 
guments and respectable testimonials of ancient writers, 
the learned and indefatigable Dr. Henry thus proceeds: 
'' Though the above account of the state of learning 
among the ancient Britons, before they were conquered 
by the Romans, is not so particular and satisfactory as 
we could have wished to make it, if history had afforded 
clearer lights ; yet it is evidently sufficient to shew 
that our British ancestors did not wholly neglect the 
improvement of their minds and the cultivation of the 
sciences; and consequently that they did not deserve 
that contempt v^ith which they have been treated by 
some of our own historians, nor the odious names of 
savages and barbarians, which have been so liberally 
bestowed on them, as well as on other nations, by the 
supeicilious literati of Greece and Rome. It plainly 
appears that many of the youth of Britain were ani- 
mated with the love of learning, and a taste for study, 
before their country was subdued by the Romans ; and 

that 



NOTES. 241 

that this victorious people only put them under the 
direction of new masters, and gave a new turn to their 
studies. 

Julius Agricola persuaded the noble youth of Britain 
to learn the Latin language, and to apply to the study 
of the Roman eloquence. These persuasions were suc- 
cessful, because they were seasonable; the British 
youth being deprived of their former instructors, by- 
the destruction and expulsion of the Druids (which ' 
happened about this time) willingly put themselves 
under those teachers which were provided for them by 
the Romans. These youth applied with so much ar- 
dour to this new course of study, that they obliged 
Agricola very soon to declare that they excelled the 
youth of Gaul in genius and erudition. This declara- 
tion of so great a man was no doubt very flattering to 
these noble and ingenuous youths, and contributed not 
a little to increase their love of the Roman learning,- this 
learning consisted in grammar, rhetoric, philosophy, 
medicine, and law, (p. 295). 

The next order of men to the Druids were the an- 
cient poets. These were divided into two classes ; the 
first comprehending their sacred poets, who composed 
and sung their religious hymns, and were called in 
Greek Eubates; in Latin Vates ; and in their own lan- 
guage Faids : the second comprehending all their secu- 
lar poets, " who sung of the battles ot heroes, or the 
heaving breasts of love," and were called bards. The 
word bard signified one who was a poet (and of course 
a musician, for these professions in early limes were 
never separated) by his genius and profession, and who ' 
employed much of his time in composing and singing 
verses on many various subjects and occasions. The 
bards constituted one of the most respected of men in 
the ancient British states, and many of the greatest 
kings, heroes, and nobles esteemed it an honour to be 
enrolled in this order. They enjoyed, by law and cus- 
tom, many honourable distinctions and valuable privi- 
leges. Their persons were held sacred and inviolable j 
and the most blcwdy and cruel tyrants dared not oSfur 
them any injury, (p. 364). A profession sohonourableand 
enjoving such distinctions would not be deserted ; and 
VOL. II, M indeed 



242 EDGAR. 

indeed it was so cipwded, that the accounts of the num- 
bers of bards in some countries, particularly in Ireland 
are hardly credible. We often read, in the poems of 
Ossian, of a hundred bards belonging to one prince, 
singing and playing in one concert for his entertainment. 
—(Henry's England, p 365.) 

There is not any one circumstance in the history of 
the ancient Britons more surj.rising than that of their 
early and admirable taste for poetry, (p. 352), Every 
subject was couched in verse, as being easier to retain 
in the memory when nothing was written. Religious 
songs, or hymns, prayers, laws, moral precepts, the 
natural philosophy, astronomy, and mathematics of 
the Druids, were conaposed and taught to the youth in 
verse, (p. 334). 

But above all other subjects the bards especially 
devoted their genius to celebrating the glory of some 
king, or hero. As soon as a king, or chieftain had 
resolved on a military expedition, he made choice of 
some famous poet, or poets, to attend his person ; to 
behold, record, and celebrate his great exploits, in the 
most magnificent and flatteiing strains to the music of 
his voice and harp, (p, 355.) Indeed so great was the 
fondness of the ancient Britons for poetry, and so much 
were they accustomed to express their thoughts on all 
great occasions in verse, that they sometimes composed 
verses, and sung them in their dying moments, (p. 359.) 

Next to the martial feats of heroes, the charms of 
the fair, and the cares and joys of virtuous love, were 
the most frequent and delightful subjects of the songs 
of the ancient bards. Their descriptions of female 
beauty are always short and delicate ; expressive of the 
modesty and innocence of the ladies' minds, as well as 
of the charms of their persons, (p. 359.) 

The ancient poets of Britain, and of the other na- 
tions of Europej'are said to have used a prodigious 
variety of measures, and many different kinds of versi- 
fication in their poetical compositions, (p. 3Q3.) 

The ancient inhabitants of Britain, as well as of 
many other countries, had at least as great a taste and 
fondness for music as they had for poetry, (p. 366.) It 
is impossible to discover at what time, and by whom, 

instrumental 



NOTES. 243 

instrumental music was first invented, or rather intro- 
duced into this island ; though we may be certain that 
it was long before it wns invaded by the Romans. 

In the first slages of society in all countries, the two 
sister arts of poetry and music seem to have been al- 
ways united ; every poet was a musician, and sung hi& 
own verses to the sound of some musical instrument. 
" The bards," says Ammianus, " celebrated the brave 
actions of illustrious men in heroic poems, which they 
sung to the sweet sounds of the lyre." (p. 367-) 

Though the ancient Britons ware not altogether un- 
acquainted with wind instruments of music, yet they 
seem to have delighted chiefly in the lyre or harp. This 
instrument is said to have been invented by the Scy- 
thians, and was much used by all the Cejtic nations, 
p. 368. — {Henry's England.) 

Note 03.] — Painting. — Before the use of clothes 
was extended to the central and northern parts of Bri- 
tain, the natives are observed to have painted their 
bodies, not by rubbing or besmearing them with colour, 
but in a much more artificial manner, and consisting of 
a variety of figures of beasts, birds, trees, herbs, and 
other things. We learn from other authors, that this 
body-painting was a distinct trade or profession in those 
times, (p. 350). 

But in proportion as clothes came into general use 
among the ancient Britons, this practice of body- 
painting declined; and as soon as they were completely 
clothed, it was wholly laid aside. But the art of paint- 
ing did not suffer any thing by that change. For, in 
order to preserve their family distinctions, and the an- 
cient badges of their nobility, they then painted the 
same figures of various animals and other things on 
their shields, which they had formerly painted on their 
bodies. The art of painting even gradually improved, 
and those figures which had been painted of one colour 
only on their bodies, were painted of various colours, 
in imitation of life, on their shields, (p. 351). 

From the improvements the Britons must necessarily 
have made by their intercourse with the Romans, it 
may be well supposed that among the great multitude 

M 2 of 



244 E D G A R. 

of artificers carried out of Britain, AD. 296, by the 
Emperor Constantius, to assist in building and adorning 
his favourite city of Autun, there were sculptors and 
painters, as well as architects. — {Henry's Hist. England.) 

Notes 94 and 95.] — It is almost as difficult to dis- 
tinguish the age of a building by the masonry used in it, 
when nothing more than the plain walls appear, as it is 
to distinguish when a foundation was laid, by the mate- 
rials and manner of laying it only. We find the seve- 
ral species of masonry which the Romans introduced, 
were used by the Saxon, the Norman, and more mo- 
dern masons, notwithstanding the various styles of 
architecture which prevailed in different ages. But 
though it is probable, the several species of masonry 
used in Britain were introduced by the Romans, it is 
certain the Britons used stone long before the Romans 
were settled among them, or before Caesar invaded 
their country. How they acquired the art of cutting 
stones, and erecting them in circular or other figures, 
will ea'Sily be conceived, when we consider the traffic 
they are supposed to have carried on with the Phoe- 
nicians and Egyptians J either of whom could have 
furnished them with men, if not materials, for erect- 
ing such a work as Stonehengej such temples being 
very common among those people, as they were among 
thc'Hebrews and other nations before the time of the 
written law, until the tabernacle was erected by Moses. 
In Stonehenge we find the masons imitated the work of 
the carpenter, by connecting the stones with mortices 
and tenons ; and it is probable, in those pans of the 
island where timber was scarce and stones plenty, they 
used them for building huts, whose door posts and 
lintels were made of stones framed together after the 
same manner, as in some places where there is stone 
fit for the purpose, they now make posts and rails of 
them instead of timber: and thus far we may suppose 
the Britons had advanced in the art of masonry before 
the Romans were settled among them. 

The only remains of British masonry in England is 
the temple of the Druids on Salisbury plain; but in ' 
that we may observe the marks of the chisel, and the 

traces 



NOTES. Q45 

traces of a geometrical design ; and from thence we 
may conclude, that the Britons had more knowledge 
of building at the time it was erected than was necessary 
for erecting huts and hovels with boughs and turves. 
But at what time this temple was made is uncertain, 
though we may suppose it was long before the Romans 
visited the island under the conduct of Caesar, or before 
Rome itself had a being: and as we may conclude, 
that the Britons understood the art of building with 
stone in those early ages, we may likewise suppose that 
they were not ignorant of the art of making bricks ; as 
it is probable both were introduced by the people who 
first discovered and settled upon the island, tlunigli we 
know not the precise time when this settlement was 
made. But as these and many other useful ai is were 
invented by the inhabitants of the old world, and used 
by the Patriarchs soon after the Deluge, they were 
never lost by any of their descendants, except those 
who followed the pastoral life, lived in tetits, and had 
neither cities nor towns to dwell in, but were perpe- 
tually shifting their habitations from place to place. 
Among these people, not only the art of making brick, 
but many arts which were useful to others, were 
neglected and lost, because they were of no use to 
them. But among those people by whom the first 
kingdoms of the world were founded, all the arts which 
were useful to mankind were preserved ; and as those 
people multiplied, and sent forth new colonies, so 
those arts were carried into different countries wherever 
they settled. If Britain then was an island before it 
was inhabited, which is very probable (though it might 
have joined the continent before the deluge), the first 
inhabitants, whether driven by chance upon the coast, 
or invited by the distant prospect from the opposite 
shore, must have come from a country where the art of 
naval architecture and navigation had been retained, 
and without doubt other useful and necessary arts, such 
as agriculture, and the art of building with brick and 
atone. These arts being once introduced, could not 
easily be forgotten ; for as the inhabitants increased, 
more land must be cultivated, new habitations were 
wanted, and the old required frequent renewal ; but 

M 3 being 



246 EDGAR. 

being situated at the extremity of the world, and little 
known by the most civilized part of it, they k»ng re- 
tained their ancient simplicity of manners, and made 
few improvements in their habitations; and until their 
country was invaded by the Romans, some traces of that 
religion which prevailed in the world before the call of 
Abraham appeared among them, and the form of the 
patriarchal temples was still then retained, though it 
had long been disused in the more civilized nations of 
the world, where the Greek and Roman architecture 
bad been introduced. From hence we may suppose 
that the Britons had but little skill in masonry before 
the Romans settled there, though they were not entire- 
ly ignorant of the use of brick and stone 3 but we are 
ignorant of the manner in which they used them; whe- 
ther they cemented them with mortar, or bedded' fhena 
in slime like the builders at Babel. —(Mr. Essex on 
the antiquity of brick and stone buildings in England, 
Archaologia, Vol, IV.) 

IrtKJlT^ \)\J, CCC ACTS ^i. V INK. — J. uc use 01 .«^»S 

mented liquors is very ancient in Britain. Ale is men- 
tioned by the Roman writers, and the way of making it 
is thus described, " The grain is steeped in water, 
and made to germinate, by which its spirits are excited 
and set at liberty ; it is then dried and ground ; after 
which it is infused in a certain quantity of water ; 
which being fermented, becomes a pleasant, warming, 
strengthening, and intoxicating liquor." This ale was 
most commonly made of barley, but sometimes ef 
wheat, oats, and millet, p. 484. — {Henrys England}. 

Note g7. — Corn. — Great care was taken by the 
ancient legislators to preserve the fruits of the earth from 
all injuries, and to procure full compensation for any 
damages they had sustained, that the industrious hus- 
bandman might not be robbed of the rewards of bis toil. 
The most antient laws of Britain appear to have been 
reraaikably severe on this head, and to have allowed 
very high damages to the husbandman, (p. 2!/), 

Agriculture was perhaps little known in this island 
(ill about one hundred and fifty years before the begin- 
njn<' of the Christian era, when great multitudes of 

Celtic 



NOTES. 247 

Cehic Gauls being expelled their native seats between 
the Rhine and the Seine, by the Belgse fi'om Germany, 
took shelter in the south of Britain, where they met 
with a favourable reception, and formed several small 
states. These states received reinforcements from time 
to time from the same coasts, whose inhabitants were 
then called Belgae, and practised husbandry ; a way of 
life which they were encouraged to pursue in Britain 
by the fertility of the soil, which produced all kinds of 
grain in great plenty and perfection, (p. 311.) 

It appears that the Britains were not unacquainted 
with the use of manures, for renewing and increasing 
the fertility of their grounds 5 and that besides those 
which were common in other countries, they had one 
peculiar to themselves and the Gauls. This was marie. 
" The people of Gaul and Britain," says Pliny, " have 
found out another kind of manure, for their grounds j 
which is a fat clay, or earth, called marie, of which 
they entertain a very hrgh opinion." (p. 312). As for the 
instruments and methods of ploughing, sowing, and 
reaping in Britain, they were no doubt the same as in 
Gaul, from whence they were brought. This island in 
a little time not only produced a sufficient quantity o( 
corn for its own inhabitants and the Roman troops, but 
afforded every year a very great surplus for exporfation. 
This became an object of so great importance, that a 
fleet of ships was provided for this particular service of 
bringing corn from Britain ; and capacious granaries 
were built on the opposite continent for the reception^ 
of that corn; which from thence was conveyed into 
Germany and other countries, for the use of the Roman 
armies. The great number of the ships which were 
employed by the Emperor Julian, A.D. 359, in bring- 
ing corn from this island, must give a very high idea of 
the fertility and cultivation of it in these times. Having 
collected prodigious quantities of timber from the 
woods on the banks of the Rhine, he built a fleet of 
EIGHT hundred ships, larger than the common barksj 
which he sent to Britain to bring corn from thence. 
"When this corn arrived, he sent it up the Rhine in 
boats, and furnished the inhabitants of those towns and 
eaun tries wbich had been plundered by the enemy, 

M. 4. with. 



248 EDGAR. 

with a sufficient quantity to support them during the 
winter, to sow their lands in the spring, and to main- 
tain them till next harvest, p. 314.— CHe?iry's England}. 

Note 98.— Wool.— -The most civilized of the Bri- 
tons previous to the invasion of the Romans were ac- 
quainted with the use of woollen cloth of different tex- 
tures ; of coarse felt, of dying their garments in many 
colours, of linen, of bleaching, of soap. 

■ In very ancient times the Britons of the Scilly islands 
to which the Phoenicians traded, were clothed ; and 
Csesar writes that the people in the interior of the coun- 
try were clothed in skins j but the people of the south- 
ern parts of Britain were well acquainted with the arts 
of dressing, spinning, and weaving both flax and wool, 
when they were invaded by the R«mans, (p. 3l6). One 
of the several kinds of cloth which was manufactured 
by the Belgse, and their tribes established in this island 
was made of a coarse, harsh kind of wool. It was 
woven very thick, which rendered it remarkably warm. 
Of this they made their mantles or plaids, which they 
used in winter. The Romans themselves, when they 
were in cold northern countries, wore this cloth on ac- 
count of its warmness. Another kind of cloth which 
the Gauls and Britons manufactured was made of fine 
wool dyed several different colours. This being spun 
into yarn, was woven checquerwise, which made it fall 
into small squares, some of one colour and some of 
another. This seems to have been the same kind of 
cloth which is still made and used by some of the com- 
mon people in the highlands of Scotland and is known 
by the name of tartan, (p. 326). 

The art of making, and the custom of wearing linen, 
were probably brought into this island by the Belgic 
colonies, at the same time with agriculture, and kept 
pace with the most useful 6f all arts, in its progress north- 
wards. For as • there is direct evidence that the Belgs 
manufactured linen, as well as cultivated their lands on 
the continent, we have good reason to conclude that 
they continued to do the same after they settled in this 
island, (p. 328). 

The manner in which the ancient Gauls and Britons 

bleached 



NOTES. 



249 



bleached their linen cloth was simple and imperfect as 
it is described by Pliny. The Gauls and Britons also 
used soap made of the tallow, or fat of animals and the 
ashes of certain vegetables for the cleansing of the linen, 
p. 329. — (Henry s England, vol. i.) 

Note 99. — Besides the lead and tin, which were the 
principal articles of traffic between the ancient Britons 
and the Phoenicians and Greeks, the iron, brass, and 
copper which our ancestors manufactured before and 
after the Roman invasion ; and the silver, gold, and jec 
and fine pearls, which Strabo reckons among the exports, 
Britain also produced and exported lime, chalk, and marie, 
as Dr. Henry says ; he continues : " that chalk and 
marie abound in many parts of this island is well known, 
and that they were used as manures by the ancient Bri- 
tish husbandmen hath been already proved. By an in- 
scription which was found, with many others, near 
Dombnrg, in Zealand, it appears that chalk was ex- 
ported from Britain to the continent in very ancient 
times ; and that this trade was carried on by a class of 
men who were called British chalk-merchants, who 
seem to have iiad a particular veneration for the Goddess 
Nehalennia."— (p. 388, ibid,) 

In those British states which were frequented by 
foreign merchants, and where commerce was carried on, 
there would be occasion for another class of penal laws,' 
to protect the goods of the adventurous merchant and 
mariner from being seized or stolen, especially iri case 
of shipwreck, when they are most exposed to such in- 
juries ; and it will be made to appear that foreign mer- 
chants enjoyed very great security for themselves and 
their effects m this island, in the ancient British times. 

-(217) 

The exportations of the ancient Britons were chiefly 
in tin, lead, and skins, both of wild and tame animals? 
Undei this article was probably comprehended the wool 
of the British sheep, which hath been so excellent in all 
ages, and would be of great use to the PhcEnicians (the 
principal traders) in their woollen manufactures — (377.) 

The intercourse of the southern islanders of Britain 
with foreign traders could not have been at one time 

M 5 incon- 



S50 EDGAR. 

inconsiderable, for Diodorus Siculus says:— "These 
Britons who dwell near the promontory of Beleriuoi 
(the Land's ^nd), live in a very hospitable and polite 
manner, which is owing to their great intercourse with 
foreign merchants." — (Henry s England, vol. i. p. 381.) 

As Britain, according to the testimony of Caesar, very 
much abounded in cattle of all kinds, we may be cer- 
tain that they furnished the merchants of tlie^e times 
with several articles for exportation. The hides of 
horned cattle, and the skins and fleeces of sheep, were 
exported from this island by the merchants, as they had 
been long before by the Phoenicians and Greeks. — 
(389.) 

The British horses were so beautiful, and so admira- 
bly trained, that they were much admired by the Ro- 
mans, and exported for the saddles of their great men, 
and for mounting their cavalry. It is also probable that 
oxen were exported for the yoke, and their carcases for 
provisions for the Roman fleets and armies. 

The British dogs, too, constituted no inconsiderable 
article in the exports soon after the Roman invasion.. 
These dogs seem to have been of three kinds, and de- 
signed for three different purposes. Some of them were 
very large, strong, and fierce, and were used by the 
Gauls and some other nations, in war ; others were tht> 
satee with our present mastiffs, or bull-dogs, and were 
purchased by the Romans for baiting bulls in the am- 
phitheatres ; but the greatest numbers, and those which, 
bore the highest price, were designed for hunting, and 
excelled all others, both in swiftness and the exquisite- 
nessof their scent. — {Henry's England, p. SpO.) 

Note 100.] — Speed, in order to set forth the beauty 
and fertility of England, thus translates the address of 
the Roman orators to Constantius : — 

" O, happy Britaine, and more fortunate than all 
other lands beside, which first didst see Constantino 
Emperor. For good cause hath Nature endowed thee 
with all blessings both of aire and soilej wherein there 
is neither excessive cold of winter nor extreme heat of 
summer ; wherein there is so great abundance of graine 
that it suflaceth both for bread and drinke. There the 

forrests 



jr O T E s. 



551 



fbrrests are free from savage beasts, and the ground 
voyd of noysome serpents j in whose stead an infinite 
multitude of tame cattle there are, laden with fleeces 
to the ground. And verily, (that which, for the use of 
©nr Uves we most esteeme) the daies are therein very 
long, and the nights never without some hght, for that 
those utmost plaines by the sea-side cast and raise no 
shadows on high ; and the aspect both of sky and starres 
passeth beyond the bound of the night ; yea, the very 
sunne itselfe, which unto us seemeth for to set, ap« 
peareth there only to pass by a li^ttle, and goe aside." 
—(p. 3) 

And Constantius, the father of Constantine the Greats 
js elsewhere thus addressed, says Speedy 

" Though Britaine be but a single name, yet surely 
the State's losses have been manifold in forgoing a land 
so plentifull in fruit and grain, so rich in pasturage, so 
full of mines and veins of metall, so gainfull in tributes 
and revenues, so accommodated with many havens, and 
for circuit so large and spacious." — {Speed's History, 
p. 3.) 

Note ]01.] — The ancient Britons were remarkable 
for the largeness of their bodies and tallness of their sta- 
ture. '• The Britons,'* (says Strabo), " exceed the 
Gauls in stature ; of which I had ocular demonstration j 
for I saw some young Britons at Rome, who were half 
a foot taller than the tallest men." — {Henry's England, 
p. 435.) 

I'hey were no less remarkable for tlie great strength 
than for the great bulk of their bodies. The ancient 
Britons were likewis»-very swift of foot, and excelled 
in running, swimming, wrestling, climbing, and all 
kinds of bodily exercises in which either strength or 
swiftness were required. They were also very patient 
of pain, toil, and hardships of various kinds. The Bri- 
tish ladies greatly excelled in fairness, and in the white* 
ness and softness of their persons. — (p. 436.)' 

Nature seems to have been no less liberal to the Celtic 
nations, and in particular to the Gauls and Britons, in. 
the natural powers and faculties of their minds, than in 
the formation of their bodies. The Gauls are repre- 
sented^ by all the ancient authors who speak of thenj,. 



252 EDGAR. 

as an acute and ingenious people, very capable of ac- 
quiring any art or science to which they applied. But 
the Britons were declared, by one who was well ac- 
quainted with both nations, to be still more acute than 
the Gauls, and to have had a happier genius for the 
acquisition of the sciences. And tiuiy, the imaginations 
of a people who dehgiited so much in poetry as the 
ancient Britons, and who courted the muses with so 
much ardour, and (if we may judge from their few re- 
mains) with so much success, must have been very 
warm and lively.— (p. 43S.) 

The boldness and intrepidity of the ancient Gauls and 
Britons was so great, that they despised even death it- 
self in its most frightful forms. — (Henrys England, 
p. 440 ) 

The ancient Britons were no less remarkable than the 
other Celtic nations for their love of liberty and abhor- 
rence of slavery, and for the bravery which they exerted 
in preserving the one, and defending themselves from- 
the other. They submitted with pleasure to the govern- 
ment of their own princes, which was mild and legal ; 
but they were struck with horror at the thought of 
being reduced to servitude. The character which Ta- 
citus gives of them is very honourable — "The Britons 
are a people who pay their taxes and obey the laws 
with pleasure, provided no arbitrary illegal demands are 
made upon them 5 but these they cannot bear without 
the greatest impatieuj^^ ; for they are only reduced to 
the state of subjects, not of slaves." — {Ibid. 443.) 

Hospitality and kindness to strangers was another of 
the most shining virtues of the ancient Britons, and of 
all the Celtic nations. As soon as they beheld the face 
of a stranger, all their haughtiness and ferocity were 
laid aside; they felt the sincerest joy at his arrival, 
accosted iiim with the most friendly greetings, and gave, 
him the warmest invitations to enter their doors, which 
flew open for his reception. It was even Jong esteemed 
infamous, by the ancient Britons, for a chieftain to shut 
the door of his house at all, lest (as the bards expressed 
it) the strangers should come and behold his contracted 
soul. As soon as a stranger accepted the friendly invi- 
tation, and entered the hospitable door, water was pre- . 

sented 



NOTES. 253 

sented to him to wash his feet; and if he received and 
used it, and at the same time delivered his arms to the 
master of the house, it was understood as an intimation 
that he designed to favour him with his company for 
some time, at least one night. This diffused joy over 
the whole mansion, the music of the harp arose, and 
an entertainment was immediately prepared and served 
up, as sumptuous and abundant as the entertainer 
could afford. After the entertainment was finished, 
the host might, without any breach of the laws of hos- 
pitality, enter into a familiar conversation with his guest, 
ask his name, from whence he came, whither he was 
going, and such-like questions. — (444.) 

As the houses of the ancient Britons consisted of but 
one large circular room, or hall, with a fire in the mid- 
dle, around which the whole family and visitants, men, 
women, and children, slept on the floor, in one con- 
tinued bed of straw or rushes, it was conjectured by 
Ceesar and other strangers, that the Britons were not 
influenced by any notion of conjugal fidelity ; but Dr. 
Henry has clearly proved the contrary; and principally 
upon the ground of the exceeding remarkable chastity 
of the ancient Germans, who lived in exactly the same 
crowded manner; and the conjugal fidelity of the de- 
scendants of the Britons, both in Wales and the high- 
lands of Scotland, who continued for ages to live in the 
same promiscuous manner, without suffering in the 
least in a moral point. " The truth is," (says Dr. 
Henry, page 44/) " the laws of matrimony appear to 
have been held as sacred, and the violations of them as 
odious among the ancient Britons as among the Ger- 
mans. The universal indignation of the Brigantes 
against their Queen Cartismandua, on account of her 
gallantries, is a sufficient proof of this." 

For a considerable time the ancient Britons and other 
Celtic nations had no other garments but their plaids or 
mantles ; which being neither very long nor very 
broad, left their legs, arms, and some other parts of 
their body naked ; as this defect in their dress could 
not but be sensibly felt, it was by degrees supplied. It 
is, indeed, uncertain, whether the tunick or doublet, 

for 



S54i EDGAR. 

for covering more closely the trunk of the body, or 
breeches and hose, for covering the thighs and legs, 
were first invented and used by these nations ; but it is 
abundantly evident that the ancient Gauls, Britons, and 
other Celtic nations, wore a garment which covered 
both their thighs and legs, and very much resembled 
our breeches and stockings united. — (4/2.) 

What Tacitus says of the difference between the dress 
of the men and women among the nncient Germans 
may, probably, be applied to the Britons of this period. 
" The women make more use of linen in their dress 
than the men ; and the sleeves of their tnnicks do not 
reach to their wrists, but leave their arms bare, as is 
also some part of their bosoms." The following account 
is given by Dio, of the dress of the famous British 
heroine Boadicea — " She wore a tunick of various 
colours, long and plaited, over which she had a large 
and thick mantle. This was her common dress, whiclv 
she wore ;it all times." — (474.) 

The ancient Briions, and all other Celtic nations> 
were extremely proud of the length and beauty of their 
hair, and were at much pains in dressing and adorning 
their heads. — (?/(^«r)/'s England, p. 4/6.) 

Note 102,]— At the time that Cassar, ar>d after him^ 
the Emperors, laid claim to Britain, the Roman empire 
was extended to the finest parts of the known world.. 
The policy ot the Romans is well understood : when 
they subdued a people (hey immedip.tely naturalized 
them. Colonies from Rome were established, and mar- 
riages with the natives encouraged. Thus, in a fev/ 
years, the people of distinct countries became blended' 
under one designation, and looked on Rome as the com- 
mon parent. 

Note 103.}- Rapin says, (p. 12,) " That the Britons- 
were not considered a conquered nation in the days of 
Horace and Tibullus, and that the fame acquired by 
Caesar in his two expeditions to Britain, came far short 
of the idea he would give of it in bis commentaries." 
and in p. 13 — " After Julius Caesar's second invasion, 
to which some very improperly give the name of con- 

qpestj. 



NOTES. 255 

quest, the Britons preserved their liberty above ninety- 
years, during the reigns of the four first Emperors."— 
{Rapin's England, p. 13.) 

General lesser arts among the Britons. — In 
the lesser arts the Britons must also have had knowledge 
before the Roman invasion. Wood and metals re- 
quired artificers, and we shall prove that such there 
were. Wherever they built houses of wood that were 
tolerably substantial and convenient, they must have 
understood how to cut beams to a certain length, to 
square and smooth them, to frame and join them toge- 
ther, so as to form the walls and support the roofs. 
This last operation was the more difficult, and required 
the greater art, as these roofs were made in a conical 
form, with an aperture at the top. These Britons, who 
practised agriculture, must have known how to make 
plougiis, harrows, and other implements of husbandry; 
and those who manufactured linen and woollen cloth 
must have had the art of making distaffs, spindles, 
looms, shuttles, and other instruments. There is one 
circumstance which is truly surprising, and would in- 
cline us to believe that the ancient Britons, even in the 
most northern parts of this island, had made much 
greater progress in the carpenter's and joiner's arts than 
could have been expected from a people in their condi- 
tion in other respects ; this circumstance is their war 
chariots. Many of the Roman and Greek authors 
speak with admiration of the prodigious number and 
neat elegance of the British chariots, as well as of the 
wonderful dexterity of the Britons in managing them. 
■ — (331.) — These writers, of unquestionable credit, 
mention no less than six different kinds of irA^e/ car- 
riage, or charriot, among the Britons ; and these either 
for pleasure or for war, of various forms, and of elegant 
workmanship. — {Henry's England, p. SSp.) 

Colours, standards, and military ensigns of various 
kinds, to distinguish th« different corps in an army, and 
to animate them with courage in defence of their in- 
signia, appear to have been of great antiquity in all 
countries, and were not unknown to the ancient Britons. 
Instruments of martial music, for rousing the courage 
of the combatants^ calling them to arms, sounding the 

charge 



^56 



EDGAR. 



charge and the retreat, were also of great antiquity in 
this \%\avidi,— {Henry' s England, p. 343.) 

Working of metal, — It is abundantly evident that 
our British ancestors had either discovered or had been 
taught the use and the art of working leveral metals, 
as tin, lead, brass, and iron, before they were invaded 
by the Romans. Tin was, probably, the first metal 
that was known to the ancient Britons. This much at 
least is certain, that the people of Cornwall and the 
Scilly Islands understood (he arts of refining and work- 
ing this valuable metal several centuries before the Ro- 
man invasion. Their progress in digging and refining 
tin, is thus briefly described by Diodorus Siculus. 
" The Britons, who dwell near the Promontory Bel- 
crium (Land's End), are very hospitable ; and, by their 
great intercourse with foreign merchants, much more 
civilized in their way of living than the other Britons. 
They dig tin ore out of their mines, and prepare it with 
great dexterity and art," 

Lead was another metal with which the ancient Bri- 
tons were very early acquainted, as is evident from its 
having been one of the commodities which the Phoe- 
nicians exported from Cornwall and the Scilly Isles. — 
(332.) 

Utensils. — Brass, or rather copper, was known to 
and used by some of the people of Britain in very an- 
cient times ; and they were probably made acquainted 
wifh it first by the Phoenicians, who gave them brass 
in exchange for their lead and tin. But from whatever 
quarter they received their brass, it is certain they 
made much use of it, and understood the art of work- 
ing it into various shapes ; this is evident from ihe pro- 
digious number of instruments 'oi different sizes and 
kinds, as axes, swords, spear-beads, arrow-heads, &c. 
made of copper, and known among antiquaries by the 
general name of celts, which have been found in Bri- 
tain. Even the Maaeatae and Caledonians were not 
strangers to the ait of working biass J for we are told 
by Dio NicQEus, that they had a round ball of brass, 
like an apple, at the end of their spears, with which 
they made a great noise, and endeavoured to fright 
their enemies horse. 

It 



NOTES. 257 

It is certain, that the Britons had both silver and 
gold, and understood the art of working them, before 
they were subdued by the Romans under Claudius. 
This is evident from the testimony of Tacitus, who 
tells us, " Britain produceth silver, gold, and other 
metals, to reward its conquerors," and from the great 
number of gold chains that were taken from Carac- 
tacus, and carried in a kind of triumph into Rome. 
The arts of discovering, refining, and working these 
precious metals, had probably been brought into this 
island from Gaul, where they had long flourished.— 
(p. 334.) 

Earthenware.— The people of Britain were fur- 
nished with earthen vessels by the Phoenicians, in very 
ancient times j and they no doubt soon learned to make 
others in imitation of them, for their own use. Many 
urns of earthenware, supposed to have been the work- 
manship of the ancient Britons, have been found in 
barrows in different parts of Britain. — (p 335). 

Coins. — Between the first and second invasion of the 
Romans, rhe Britons began to form their metal into coins. 
These coins were at first made, with the fii»ures of a hu- 
man head on one side, of an tiseful animal, as a horse or 
sheep, on the other By degrees the reigning princes 
caused their own likenesses to be stamped on one side, 
encircled by their names, or a date, which was an im- 
provement, and is thereby a great help to history. — 
(403.) We have no fewer than forty coins of Cuno- 
beline alone, in gold, silver, and copper, which are all 
of different dies or stamps ; this is a proof that this 
prince had forty coinages at least, which must have 
produced 3 considerable quantity of coin ; to say no- 
thing of what was coined by other British princes in 
that period. — (411.) 

Ships The first British ships are represented as 
very slight and rude, but in time, some of the Britons, 
who inhabited the sea-coasts opposite to Gaul, began to 
build small vessels, and to export their own tin, lead, 
skins, and other commodities to the continent. It is 
impossible to discover with certainty and precision when 
this happened, though it is most probable, on several 

accounts. 



258 EDGAR. 

accounts, that it wns at least a century before the first 
Homan invasion. — (42i.) 

We have sufHcient reason to conclude, in general, 
that the numbtr of British merchant ships in the Ro- 
man tinries was very considerable. When the city of 
London, in the reign of Nero-, A.D. 6l, had become 
a great city, abounding in merchants and merchrandize, 
it certainly abounded also in shipping : and when,- 
A.D. 359, no fewer than eight hundred ships were 
employed in the expertation of corn, the whole num- 
ber employed in the British trade must have been very 
great. — (Henry's England, vol. 1. p: 424.) 

War. -~ All the young men among the a-ncient Bri' 
tons, and all the other Celtic nations (the Druids only 
excepted) were trained to the use of arms from their 
early youth, continued in the exercise of them ta their 
old age, and were always ready to appear when they 
•^^ere called by their leaders to actual service. Their 
very diversions and amusements Nvere of a niarlial and 
manly cast, and contributed greatly to increase their 
agility, strerigth, and courage. They had even aca« 
demies, ia which their young noblemen were instruct- 
ed in the use, and accustomed to the exercise, of arms. 
By these and the like means, the ancient British States, 
though neither large nor populous, were enabled to 
bring prodigious multitudes of warriors into the field, 
all e.xpert in the use of their arms, and coi>ducted by 
brave and able leaders. The troops which composed' 
the armies of the ancient Britons were of three kinds : 
infentry, cavalry, and those who fought from chariots* 
— (Henry's England, 337.) 

Dancing. — ^The Germans, and probably the Gauls 
and Britons, had a kind of martial dance, which was 
exhibited at every entertainment. In one word, feast- 
ing, accompanied wilh songs, music, and dancing,, 
seems to have been the ehief, if not the only domestic 
amuseraenr of the ancient Britons. 

Hunting was a favourite diversion of the ancient 
Britons, especially of those who were unacquainted 
with agriculture. — (48/ ) 

Sports. — When the British youth were neither en- 
gaged in war nor hunting, they did not (like tl)e less 

active 



• NOTES. 259 

active and lively Germans) spend their time in sleep or 
indolence, but in swimming, leaping, running, wrest- 
ling, throwing the stone, darting the lance, riding the 
chariot, and such exercise as fitted them for the tield 
and for the chace. It is not to be imagined, that the 
Britons could have arrived at that wonderful dexterity in 
managing their horses, and driving their chariots, des- 
cribed by C«sar, without having been almost constantly 
engaged m these exercises from their yoi\th:'~{Henry's 
England, p. 46Q.) 

Note 104.] — Rapin's translator, in the Notes, gives 
us this observation upon the Angles, who joined the 
Saxons when they settled in Britain : " Bede has di- 
rected us to look for the country of the Angles between 
the Saxons and Jutes. (Wites or Goths.) " The 
Angles (says he) come out of that country, which is 
called Angulus, and is said from that time to lie waste, 
between the countries of the Jutes and Saxons." See- 
ing between Juitland and Holsatia, the antient seat of 
the Saxons, there is a small province in the kingdonj 
of Denmark, under the city ot Flemsburg, called at this 
day Angle, which Lindebergius in his epistles terms 
Little England, " I am pretty well assured," says Cam- 
den, " that I have found the ancient seat of our fore- 
fathers j and that from this very place the Angles earae 
iHto our island. " (p. 27.) 

Note 105.) — Arthur, arenowned British prince, whose 
actions were so famous that they have been seVzed by dif- 
ferent writers, to form the base of chivalrous fictions. 
From this circumstance and the true time of the hero's 
life being enveloped in so much of the marvellous and im- 
probable, some grave persons have been induced to give 
up the whole and even to deny his existence, Dr.Whita- 
T<er has however examined the character and pretensions 
of this prince witli such learning, ingenuity, and truth, 
that had the Great Arthur no other modern historian to 
d'aw forth old authorities, to register remarkable coin- 
cidences between tradition, andfactj to sift the reality 
frem romance, and to arrange the sum and substance in 
the dignity and truth of history, we might henceforward 
banish every idea of doubt upon the subject. 

This 



260 EDGAR. 

This renowned warrior fought twelve battles, which 
the historian of Manchester severally points out. His 
character is thus drawn by the same able writer. 

" Arthur possessed all the personal gallantry of his 
predecessor Arabrosius, yet had none of that headlong 
fire which seems so strongly to have marked the military 
genius of Ambrosius. And all his great talents were 
requisite to reirieve the British affairs. He appears to 
have been enterprising but cool, judicious but resolute, 
circumsptct alert, and vigorous. He laid his mea- 
sures with the greatest prudence, and he executed them 
with the greatest spirit. He never attacked an enemy 
but he defeated him. He never engaged in battle but 
he obtained a yictory."— {IF hilaker's Hist. Manchr. 
vol. ii. p. 56). 

Note 1o6.] — The Britons being unable to defend 
themselves against the Saxons, supported by their 
countrymen already settled in the island, took the only 
course left them, and retired into Cambria beyond the 
Severn. 

Cambria not being sufficient to contain so many fami- 
lies, multitudes of Britons fled into Armorica, where 
great numbers of their countrymen were already settled. 
Those that remained in Cambria, a country defended 
by nature, kept their ground against all the power of 
their conquerors, who could not till long after extend 
their conquests beyond the mountains. This little cor- 
ner of the island, where the Britons were cooped up, 
was afterwards divided into several petty kingdoms j but 
at length in the reign of the first Edward, the king's 
eldest son, who was born among them, took the title of 
Prince of Wales, and the country has ever since been 
faithful in its allegiance to England. — {See Rapin, p. 41.) 

Note 107. — Alfred. — Before the reign of this great 
prince, there were many kings who took the title, yet there 
was none who could with propriety be called monarch 
ofjthe English nation. For notwithstanding there was 
always, after the time of Egbert, a prince who held a 
kind of pre-eminence over the restj yet had he no 
direct dominion over their subjects, as in the latter part 
of his reign Alfred had 3 neither was this great power 

attained 



NOTES. 261 

attained by the sword, or through his ambition of ruling, 
but rather through the fame of his wisdom and mild- 
ness. Of the laws he made there remain but few, that we 
have assurance are truly his, yet are we well informed, 
that to his constitution we owe many of those advantages 
which render our constitution dear to usj for instance, 
trials by juries. He divided the kingdom into shires, 
according to some, but it is certain that he settled those 
boundaries and lesser distinctions that remain at this 
day. In consequence of this, he framed a book, called 
the book of Winchester, which contained a survey 
of the kingdom j and of which the Doomes-day 
Book stiU preserved in the Exchequer is no 
more than the second edition. He, likewise, 
made use of this division for the proper distribution of 
justice, and before his death he brought all things into 
such order, as that never any kingdom was better go- 
verned, and so effectually tamed the covetous spirit 
that induces one man to take from another, that money 
or jewels might be left on the public roads, and no 
passenger attempt to touch it. In the inanagement of 
affairs of state, he after the custom of his ancestors, 
the kings of the West Saxons, made use of the great 
council of the kingdom, consisting of bishops, earl'Sj 
the king's aldermen, and his chief thanes or barons. 
In respect to military concerns, let it he observed, that 
though this nation could never boast of a greater soldier 
than he, since he fought fifty-six battles by sea and 
land, and of these eight in one year ; yet he was so far 
from being of a cruel, blood-thirsty or ambitious tem- 
per, that he never willingly made war on any, or re- 
fused to grant peace whenever it was desired. His 
troops he rendered by degrees invincible, through just 
and regular discipline, and appointed such methods of 
raising, recruiting, and distributing them in winter 
quarters, that his subjects and his militia were synoni- 
mous terms, every man who could bear arms being a 
soldier, and no man serving but in his turn, and accord- 
ing to law. His coasts he secured by guard-ships, 
making his navy his peculiar care. His frontiers were 
covered by castles well fortified ; add to all this, that 
his instructions and example raised numbers of able 

officers, 



262 EDGAR, 

officers, •whose abilities the king constantly cherished 
by proportionable rewards. In respect to other affairs 
Alfred was no less knowing and industrious, as appears 
by his repairing the cities throughout his dominions 
demolished by the Danes, erecting new ones, and 
adorning and embellishing such as were in a mean and 
low condition. He restored and settled the university 
of Oxford, endowed it with revenues, and sought out 
and placed there the famous professors in several 
sciences. 

This illustrious prince was in his private life the most 
worthy, the most industrious and the most amiable man 
in his dominions, of so equal a temper, that after he 
had once taken the crown, he never suffered either 
sadnesj, or unbecoming gaiety, to enter his mind ; but 
appeared always of a calm, yet cheerful disposition, 
familiar to his friends, just, even to his enemies, kind and 
tender to all. Taking all his qualifications together, re- 
membering the many virtues he had, and consideiing 
that he had few or no vices, we need not wonder, that 
he died universally lamented by his subjects, as he 
lived admired and applauded both by them and by 
foreigners. This happened after a glorious reign of 
upwards of twenty-eight years on the twenty-eighth of 
October, A.D. 9OO. — {Biographia Britannica, Alfred.) 



A FEW PARTICULARS RELATING TO THE ANGLO-SAXONS 
BETWEEN THE INTRODUCTION OF CHRISTIANITY 
AND THE NOKMAN CONQUEST, A D. lOQQ. 

Learning. — As the youth in those parts of England 
which had embraced the Christian religion, began to 
apply to learning with some eagerness in the seventh 
century, several schools were then established for their 
instruction. One of the most Illustrious of those schools 
was that of Canterbury, founded by Augustin, the 
apostle of the English and his companions, and g'eatly 
improved ^by Archbishop Theodore. In this school a 
library was also founded, and enriched from time to 
tim; with many valuable books, brought from Rome by 
Augustin, Theodore and others. — (Henr^'i England^ 

p. 322). 



1 



NOTES. 263 

p. 322.) Several monasteries were founded in different 
parts of England in the course of the same century ; and 
in each of tliese a school was opened for the education 
of youth, so that as Bede, the great luminary of England 
and the Christian world, observes, " these were happy 
and enlightened times, in comparison of those which had 
preceded them ; for none wanted teachers who were 
willing to be instructed." (p. 3'23.) 

Egbert, who was brothei to Eadbert, King of 
'i>Jorthumberland, founded a noble library at York for 
the advancement of learning, Alcuinus, who was his 
pupil, and the keeper of this library, speaks of it in 
several of his letters, as one of the most choice and 
valuable collections of books then in the world. " O 
that 1 had," says he, in a letter to the Emperor 
Charlemagne, " the use of those admirable books on 
all parts of learning which I enjoyed in my native 
country, collected by the industry of my beloved master 
Egbert. May it please your imperial majesty, in your 
great wisdom, to permit me to send some of our 
youth to transcribe the most valuable books in that 
library, and thereby transplant the flowers of Britain 
into France." — (Henry's England, p. 333.) 

That learning was esteemed a fashionable accom- 
plishment in the Saxon times even in ladies of the 
highest rank, we may learn from se%'eral particulars 
mentioned relating to the ladies ; but Dr. Henry to 
prove this decisively, brings a speech of Ingulphus, 
who says, that when he was a boy at Westminster 
school, and used to visit his father, who lived in the 
court of Edward the Confessor, he was often examined 
both on the Latin language and on logic by the beautiful 
and virtuous Queen Edgilha, who excelled in both 
these branches of literature. — {Hen. Fng. vol. ii, p. SOy.) 

Painting. — In the seventh century the churches 
were not only adorned with many single portraits, but 
also with a considerable collection of historical paint- 
ings. Some of these, it is true, were imported from 
Rome, but as the inconveniency was soon felt of bring- 
ing pictures from foreign countries, such of the English 
as had a taste for painting, applied to that art, in 
order to furnish their own churches with these admired 
ornaments. The famous St. Dunstan^ who seems to have 

been 



Q64< EDGAR. 

been an universal genius, was esteemed an excellent 
painter by his coniem^orar'ies.— {Henry's Engl. p. 423.) 

Even history paintings, representing the principal 
actions of the lives of great princes and generals, do 
not seem to have been very uncommon in England in 
this period. Edelfleda, widow of the famous Brithnod, 
Duke of Northumberland, in the tenth century, pre- 
sented to the church of Ely, " a curtain which had the 
history of the great actions of her deceased lord painted 
upon it, to preserve the memory of his great valour, 
and other virtues." (p. 424.) 

The art of colouring and painting glass were probably 
now known and practised in England in the ages we are 
considering, as the use of glass was certainly established. 

Poetry and Music. — But of all the pleasing arts, 
poetry was most admired and cultivated in the Saxon 
times. To many of the poems written in this period 
are the historians indebted for parts of their writings 3 
and one of the heroic songs composed on the great 
victory Athelstan obtained over the Scots and Danes, 
A D, 938, is inserted verbatim in the Saxon chroni- 
cle, and literally translated by Henry of Huntingdon, 

Never were poetry and poets so much admired and 
honoured as in the above-mentioned period. The greatest 
Princes were no less ambitious of the laurel, than of 
the royal cro\^m. Alfred the Great ^vas the Prince of 
Poets. Adhelm, who was a Prince of the royal family , 
of Wessex, and Bishop of Shereburn, was also the 
best poet of his age ; and his poems were the delight 
and admiration of the English several centuries after 
his death. Canute the Great, was also a famous poet. 
Poets were the chosen friends and favourites of the 
greatest kings ; they seated them at their tables, ad- 
vanced them to honours, loaded them with riches, and 
were so much delighted with their sweet and lofty 
strains, that they could deny them nothing. — {Henry's 
England, p. 42/.) 

Though the Saxon, Danish, and other Northern 
scalds,* had no fewer than one hundred and thirty-six 
different kinds of verse, without including rhyme, 
theje is the clearest evidence that they were not unac- 
quainted with this last species of versification. To 
say nothing of their introducing rhyme into their Latin 

poetry, 
* Danish name for poet. 



NOTES. 2f^-'5 

poetry, there are not a few of their poem's in their 
own language still extant, wliicb are most exactly 
ifcymed, and some of them have even double rhymes, 
fp. 436, Henry''s England). 

Music was as much admired and cultivated as poetry 
by all the people who inhabited England in this 
period. Tliese two pleasing arts were inseparable and 
universal. The halls of all the Kings, Princes, and 
Nobles of Britain, rung with the united melody of the 
poet's voice, and the musician's harp ; while every 
mountain, hill, and dale, was vocal. The poet and 
the musician was, indeed, most commonly the same 
person ; who, blessed at once with a poetical geniuSj a 
tuneful voice, and skilful hand, sung and played the 
songs which he had composed. Alfred the Great, who 
united every pleasing to every great accomplishment, 
excelled as much in music as he did in war; and rn- 
vished his enemies vvith his harp, before he subdued 
them with his sword, (p. 438). 

Though the harp was the most common, it wa? 
far from being the only musical instrument that was 
used by the Saxons, Danes, Welsh, and other inhabi- 
tants of this island, in this period. They had indeed a 
great variety, both of wind and stringed instruments, 
which are occasionally mentioned by the writers of 
those times, some of which are now unknown. Bede 
in his treatise upon music, says, " artificial instru- 
ments are the organ, the violin, the harp, the atola, 
the psaltery, &c." The same venerable author in other 
parts of his treatise mentions the trumpet, the tabor, 
the pipe, and the flute. And in writers of the 
middle ages, we read of the lute, the cymbal, the ci- 
tola, the lyre, the sistrum.and the campanula, (p, 441.) 

Organs v.^ere used in churches in the seventh and be- 
ginning of the eighth century : the famous St. Dun- 
stan made a present of an organ with brass pipes, to 
the Abbey Church of Malmsbury : and the famous 
Ailwyn, alderman of all England, expended as much 
as nine hundred pounds of oar money in building an 
organ with brass pipes, in the Abbey Church of Ram- 
say, p. 442. 

VOL. II. N FoaEioH 



^66 EDGAR. 

Foreign Commerce. — In the reign of Alfred, that 
great prince sent an ambassador to lud'a, who brought 
back with him magnificent jewels aud ofher riches ol 
the east. Ami, Dr. Henry adds, " As-<:Mius, th^ 
friend of Alfred, and histoiian, tells u^. liuit one 
morning after Alfred h^d risade him a grai.t of two 
abbeys, with all their fiiiniiure, he gave him a present 
of a tine silk cloak, and of nn nusch fninkincense as a 
strong man covild Cctrry ; this is n ^vlfficil nt proof, that 
Alfred was possessed of cons der,d;le iiuantities of the 
most precious prodnctions of ihe east, the happy effects 
of a flourishing trade," (p 470) 

In lOOy the lOV'^l navy of England consisted of eight 
hundred ships (p. 47^, Henry's En^laiul). 

The foreign tiadeof England was so extensive, even 
at this rtnuite period, as to furnish such of her inha- 
bitants as could afford to pay f r them with a share of 
all the commodities that were then known in any part 
of Europe (p. 483). 

Chukches of Stone — It has been ronjectined that the 
Saxons had no buildings of stone in En^'land before the 
conquest, but theie is abundant proof to the contrary. In 
Dr. Henry we seeqnuted several passages wirich establish 
this fact PHulinuSj the first Bishop of Yoik, built a 
church cf stone in the ciiy of Lincoln, whose walls 
(says Bcde) art still standing, though the rouf is fallen 
down. 

Naitan, King of the Picts, in bis fi.mous letter to 
the Abbot of Weremouth, A.D. 710, desires masons 
to be sent him that he too way buiid a church of 
stone in his dominion's And we read that English 
masons were accordintily sent, (p. 391, Ibid). 

The Cathedral of Hexham was so magnificent an 
edifice, constructed of the finest polished stones, that 
it excelled in beauty any church on this side of the 
Alps. 

Benedict Biscop founded a magnificent stone monas- 
tery, A.D. fi7o, and he not only made six journeys 
to Rome to procure for it books, pictures, and sta- 
tues, but when the work was far advanced, sent 
agents into France to procure some glass makers, 
and bring them over to glaze the windows of bis 

chuich 



NOTES. ^67 

church and nionastei'v. These a;!;eots were success- 
ful, and br^^l^ht several s^lass-niakers with them ; wbo 
not only performed the work required by Benedict, but 
instructed the English in the art of making glass for 
windows, lamps, drinking vessels, and other uses, (^. 
393). 

Thus were the arts of building edifices of stone with 
windows of glass and other ornaments, introduced ia 
the latter end of the seventh century. 

Mechanics — Danstan was a perfect master in phi- 
losophy, divinity, music, painting, writmg, sculpture, 
working in gold, silver, brass, and iron, &c. At lei- 
sure hours he used to entertain King Athelstan and his 
courtiers, with playing on his harp, or some other mu- 
sical instrument, (p. 190). 

There were in the Saxon period in England arti' 
Jicers of various kinds, carpenters of great excellence, 
who made dilfcKent kinds of furniture, arms, and tools, 
in wood J plumbers who must have well understood 
their business, as all the churches that were built of 
stone, were covered with lead ; smiths, of whom one 
always attended the person of a military officer to 
keep his anus and armour in order ; workers in gold, 
silver, and jewels,, in which all the clergy were very 
expert ; polishers and setters of precious stones ; 
gold and silver gilders of wood and metals 3 thread 
makers of j^old and silver for embroidery 5 colourers 
of ivory, wood, and parchment ; embroiderers of va- 
rious figures in gold and silver thread, before or after 
the cloth was woven ; dyers in all colours, but espe- 
cially of scarlet from an insect of the cochineal kind ; 
furriers who dressed the skins, without taking off the 
hdlr or wojI ; and weaoers, professed by British arti- 
ficers, who m ule woollen cloth for the use of all the 
different ranks of society 3 (p. 400, 408, of Henrys 
England). 

Of rich metals there were produced table services in 
silver and gold, for the use of the great ; and the 
churches, coronets, bracelets, a i 1 other utensils. — 
some of these were used before the reign of Alfred, 
for the famous Bishop VVilfrid, who flourished two 

N 2 centuries 



-68 EDGAR. 

centuries before Alfred the Great, is said to have 
incurred much envy by bis magnificence, and particu- 
larly by his great quantities of silver-plate. Queen 
Elgiva, the wife of King Ethelred, presented a cha- 
lice and patten of fine gold, weighing thirteen marks, 
about two pounds and a half, to the church at Can- 
terbury ; and his second wife, Queen Emma, gave 
many ornaments of gold and silver to the church of 
Winchester. But besides the quantity of gold and 
silver-plate, of which every convent and cathedral had 
a considerable quantity, many private persons possess- 
ed Shese precious metals in shape of ornaments and 
trinkets — such as coronets, chains, bracelets, half-cir- 
cles foe dressing the hair upon, collars, cups, &c. as 
appears from their testaments, which arc still pre- 
served. 

The Anglo-Saxon ladies were so famous for their 
skill in needle-work and embroidering with gold, that 
those elegant nmr.ufactures were called Anglicum 
opum (English Work). The four princesses, daughters 
cf King Edward the Elder, and sisters of King Athel- 
stan, are highly celebrated by historians for tbeir 
assiduity and skill in spinning, weaving, and needle- 
work } which was so far from spoiling the fortunes 
of these royal spinsters, that it procured them the 
addresses of the greatest Frinces then in Europe. 
Queen Matilda, wife to William, Duke of Normandy, 
ubout the end of this period, is supposed to have di- 
rected a piece of needle -work of sixty- seven yards in 
length, containing many hundred figures of horses, 
beasts, birds, churches, &c. of which the greatest 
part (if not the whole) was performed by English 
women. — {Henry's England, p. 40/). 

Dogs. — Dogs of sport of all kinds were also the 
favourites and constant companions of the great in 
this period, and a prodigious lunnbcr of laws were 
made to prevent their being killed or stolen, (p. COO). 

Horses. — English horses, which were universally ad- 
mired, made another valuable article of exports in this 
period) but the following law of King Athelstan, pro- 
bable- gave some che<;k to that branch of trade. " No 

man 



NOTES. 2G9 

niaa shall export any horses beyond seas, except such 
as he designs to give in presents " (P. 481 ) 

Horse-iacjng was one ot t!ie diversions of this pe- 
riod ; amofig the presents niaJe to King Athelstan, 
ambassador from Hugh, King of France, when he 
dem.-.nded the English Piiiicess for his master, we are 
told, " tliere wtre several running horses with their 
saddles, and bits of yellow gold in their mouths." 
A proof that such horses were achnired and used in 
England at that time, (p. 598, Hennfs England.) 

Note 108.] — Edgar Atheling. — This much injured 
and niifortiuiHtf Prince was the son of Eivvard, the sonof 
E(hnond Ironside, Kmgof EM|iland, bvAiiatha daughter 
to Solomon, King of Hungary, or rather of the Emperor 
Heniy II. 1m what year he was born is not certain; 
but he was very young in 1057, when his father and 
family were recalled into their native country by their 
kinsman, Edward the Confessor, then King thereof 
His father died soon after his return, before the King 
had time to give him any essential marks of that kind- 
ness, which he professed to him. Edgar was carefully 
bred up by him, who wts iiis great uncle, and was 
undoubiediy intended for his successor, as the best 
authors assure ns, and as his title, Atheling, or Most 
Noble, imfdies ; — but, on King Edward's death, Ed- 
gar was deprived of his right, because of his youth, 
his being born abroad, and his having too little expe- 
rience, for a crowned head in such troublesome times. 
Harold, the S'.n ot Earl Godwin, chiefly through the 
intrigues of the clergy was preferted before him, for 
which they are severely censured by some writers. 
This happened in the beginniu:^ of A.D. lOoO. Ha- 
rold, however, treated him with great respect, as long 
as he lis'ed ; after who>e deaih and defeat in the fatal 
battle oi Hastings, the nn!)les and people, in general, 
looked upon Edgar as King, and even acknowledged 
him as such. But, William Duke of Normandy, 
awing them with his victorious army, was owned and 
crowned monarch of England, at Westminster, in the 
same year. In 1067, Edgar, attended by many of the 

N 3 prime 



^70 EDGAR. 

prime nobility, retired first into Northumberland, af- 
terwards into Scotland. The persons who adhered to 
him, bad so considerable an interest both at home 
and abroad, that they quickly drew together a nume- 
rous aroiy, and therewith began to bid fair for un- 
settling the new establishment. In 1069, a great 
succour came to these malcontents from Denmark, 
and more English Lords reconciling themselves to Ed- 
gar, he made head against the Normans, and after se- 
veral successive engagements, made himself master of 
the City of York, and wintered between the Ouse and 
Trent, notwithstanding all the efforts of the Duke of 
Normandy. In 1070, he was less fortunate. William 
found means by money and promises, to draAv otithe 
Danes and some of the Lords of his party, and in the 
end, obliged him to retire again into Scotland. Mal- 
colm, King of that country, married this year his 
sister Margaret, so excellent a woman, that in her 
life-time she was styled the Gooil, and after her decease 
was regarded as a Saint. This marriage enabled Edgar 
to make new attempts, in which he had mostly the 
better, the King of Scots openly assisting him, not- 
withstanding King William had demanded him, and 
threatened to invade Scotland in case of refusal. Some 
domestic troubles hindered that Prince from perform- 
ing his threat for' two years. In 10/2, however, 
King William entered Scotland with an army, but with 
inditierent success. Upon this, he readily made peace 
with Malcolm, and regulated, according to ancient 
treaties, the bounds of their respective dominions. In 
this peace, the Scots historians say Edgar Atheling was 
included, and, on his submission, received into King 
William's favour; which is very probable, since the 
war vv#is on his account. In 1074, Edgar left Scotland, 
where he had been so kindly entertained, and where 
his sisttr was Queen. He crossed the sea into Nor- 
mandy, and v/as kindly received by King William. 
After this submission our histories are silent concern- 
ing him for many years. This, however, is a plnin 
proof, that he acted like a man of honour towards the 
Norman, since in that space there were many stirs, of 
which he might have made his advantage. In 1086, 

thai 



that is about twelve years after his agreement .with 
William, Edgar, conceiving himself ill-treated at court, 
retired from thence. This does not set*m to speak of 
him so mean a spirit as Malmsbury (who wrote of 
him) would make him. Certain it is, that even now 
he hud the hearts of the Eufcti^h n-ition ; since in the 
old Abhey Chronicles, we meet with this prayer on 
the mention of his retreat : " may the Almighty give 
him honour," alluding to the little respect shewn him 
at court. But this, however, was not without the 
■King's consent. On the contrary, Edgar obtained 
license to sail with a certain number of ships, and 
two hundred soldiers on board, to Apulia. This, 
therefore, was no disgraceful flight, but rather an ho- 
nourable exile. Ill 1091, on the conclusion of a so- 
lemn treaty between the brethren, Iluberi and Willia.ai, 
the latter procured Edgar Atheiing's being dispossessed 
of the laniis that had been given him, upon which he 
withdrew out of Normandy, and went into Scotland, 
to his brother in-law. King Malcolm. 

After this the lawful heir to the English throne, 
whose common appellation was : 

Edjrar Atheliiisr 
England s darling. 

acted as mediator betAveeen the Scots King and King 
William II. upon account of a quarrel in which they 
had engaged. He then went again into Normandy, 
but soon after returned to England, and was importun- 
ed by his brother-in-law, Malcolm, King of the Scots, 
to settle again differences according to treaty, on 
which William summoned him to Gloucester, and sent 
Edgar to conduct him. Soon after this, Malcolm with 
his eldest son, Edward, was slain. This unfortunate 
event could not but afflict Edgar exceedingly, espe- 
cially when he saw his nephews deprived of their 
rights, the Scots setting up Donald Bane, i. e. Donald 
the White, for their King, who was brother to Mal- 
colm. Edgar sent for his five nephews into England, 
and carefully brought them up ; but not without some 
danger to himself, if we may credit the Scots histo- 
rians. 



§72 EDGAR. 

rians. Two of Edgar's nephews died before they were 
of age; but. the third, being invited by the Scots, 
Edgar .ipidied to Willia;n Rufiis for a small assibtance, 
and wiili his forces which increased, entered ScotUuid, 
took JJoii.dd pii>oner, seated his ni'phew on the 
throne, and then came back to Englnnd. This expe- 
dition was ei.tcred npon in the winter of 1097, and 
conciinled in the next spring After this we meet with 
no account ot bun, till surh time as with Robert the 
son of Godwin, a tmnoiiS Knight, he u' I'eitook a 
journey into tiie Holy L:uid. He was with BaUiwin 11, 
King of ./'einsalem, when besieged in Rome, and 
having in their h tzaidous sally, wberein they escaped 
thence, \- >t his knight, he tliought of returning 'Hits 
was in 1]02, and^ accordingly, he came back soon 
after int«) b>urope, reteived gieat civilities from the 
Greek and German Emperors, who importuned him to 
remain in their courts, which be ci\illy refused, and 
continued his journey either into England or Norman- 
dy, llenrv 1. had now ascended the English thronCj 
and esponset! Maud, Edgar's niece ; he had therefore, 
every reason to expect a good reception at conrt, 
which, ho\v< ver, he either did not find, or else, it may 
be, dethiied For it is certain he was some time with 
Duke Uobe't, after his return from the East He 
was even tiiui in his friendship to him, when King 
Heniy hivaded his dominions, and w,is taken prisoner 
whilst fighting in his cause at the fat;:l battle of Ten- 
chebray. King Henry dealt very severely with the 
rest ot the prisoners ; but, as f )r Ed^ar, he disiuissed 
him freely. This is the last time be is mentioned in 
our histories, and alter his return to Eni^land, he went 
to pass the remainder of his d ys in the country, 
where, according to Malmsbury, he w;.s liviitt; in 1120j 
when he must have been seventy or thereabouts. In 
what year he died ap])eais not, — he was born during 
his father's exile, lost him when his life would have 
secured him a crown, stiuggled, though to no pur- 
pose, against the conqueror, was through his whole 
life the sport of fortune, and died full of years and in a 
dark obscurity. To which we add, that till now, his 

life 



NOTES. 273 

life was never written, from a supposed want of mate- 
rials, and from a real want of inclination, to glean 
from our ancient historians, a multitude of little me- 
morandums, concerning an injured unfortunate Prince. 

Tiiese few particalais relating to Edgar Atheling are 
such as do him honour, and when we reflect upon the 
fact of their being chiefly recorded by a man preju- 
diced against him, who would have been glad to say 
of him what ill he could collect, we may fairly sup- 
pose, that this Prince cannot deserve the neglect or 
aspersion which has been thrown on his character by 
modern historians, who scarce think him worthy of 
mention, or else tax him with imbecility. In the 
note to Edgar's life in the Biographia Britannica, are 
drawn very different conclusions : 

" We shall hereafter demonstrate Malmsbury's spite 
to Edgar. A: present let us consider 

" That he had behaved well in several battles 3 

" He bad now and afterwards the hearts of the 
English nation j 

" He was always courted by Foreign Princes : 

" He was trusted by William 11, with an array to 
restore his nephew to the throne of Scotland, which 
he performed j 

" And we shall see that these actions speak him 
neither weak, nor mean spiiited : even our author's 
(Malmsbury's) story, proves no more than that he 
despised money, from which, and his loving this coun- 
try, the Monk concludes him a fool." — iBiographia Bri' 
tannica, Edgar Atheling.) 

Note 109.] — To adii still a fresh lustre to Edward's 
glory, ambassadors from Germany arrived the next 
year with ofi'eis of the Imperial dignity. The election 
of Charles IV. who was now crowned at Bonn, not 
being agreealde to all the Electoral Princes, some 
were resolved to make a new choice, To that end 
they cast their eyes on the King of En';land, whom 
tlie Battle of Crescy and taking of Calais, had ren- 
dered very famous. But Edward, who was not igno- 
rant how much the acceptance of this dignity at a 
like juncture, had cost Richard, brother of Henry III, 

was 



274 E D G A H. 

was too wise to tluow himiself into tbc same difificut- 
ties — besides, lie hatl need of si! I bis forces and endea- 
vours, to aci]uire the irowii of Fiance, which to him 
seemed a more substantial {Jf^od. On these accounts, 
be refused the boiior.r JDtended him by the Gtrnian 
J'rinceS;, and declined tidying so great a burden on 
bini. — {Rapin ) 



ENJ3 OF VOL. II, 



1 



Primed by Cox oiirt Ravlis, 
Oreat fiaCi-ji Sueet, LiiiC'iln'i-inii-Fields. 



NEW NOVELS, 

BY DISTINGUISHED WRITERS, 

JU.ST PUiiLISHED BY H. COLBURN, CONDUIT-STRE£T. 



1. GLENARVON, 

In 3 volumes. 'I'he second Kdition, with a Preface. 

A name to a!! succeeding a,!>,es curst : 

For close desiniis, nnd crno!;e(l councils fit ; 
Sagacious, bold, and turhiiji'iit of wit : 
Hestles*:, unfixed in principles and place ; 
In power unpleased, impatient of disgrace. 

2. ADOLPHUS. Translated from the Frencli of M. Ben- 
Juniin (is Cunstaiic, author of the tragedy of Walstein, &c. 

1 vjI. 12mo. 

Ditto, in French. 

3. JANE of FRANCE. By iMad. de GeriUs. 2 vols. l2.o. 

Thii Tale is o'f '•/ the most beautiful and inslruciive of the 
kind thai has perhaps ever been wrillen. — Lit. Reg. 

4. RHODA : a novel. By the ingen'nus author of Things by 
their Right Names, and Piaiu Sense. 2d edit. 4 vols. 28s. 

5. THE SHIPWRECK, by Miss Biirnpi/, author of Traits of 
Nature, Geraldine Fauconberg, &c. 7s. Cd. , 

6. CLARENTINE, by Miss jB«'7<ey, 2d edit. 3 vols. 2ls.' 

7. O'DONNEL: a National 'Jale, by Lad;/ Morgan, late 
Miss Owenson, a\ithor of the Wild Irish Girl, Novice of St. 
Uominick, &c. 3d edit. 3 vols. 2ls. 

8. HUMAN NATURE, 3 vols. I8s. 

" TVnmen are madf for SfiisibiUty, 7wt for passion — let I hem 
not complain of iheir lot — to love no farihtr than is agreeable tt> 
reaso?t, is only to renounce those errors which cause uJihappi}iess," 
— Mad. de Geulis. 

y. THE HEROINE, or Adventures of a Fair Romance 
Reader. By E. S. Barrett, Esq. 3d edit. 3 vols. 18s. 

In point of tuit and humour, we do not scrvple to place this 
tfork in the iame rujik with Tristram Shandy, — Lit. Reg. 



INTERESTING WORKS 

Published by II. Colburn, Conduit Street. 

TRAVELS in- EUROPE and AFRICA. By Co\. Maurice 
Keatingr, author of the History of the Conquest of Mexico, &c. 
comprising a Journey through France, Spain, and Portugal to 
Morocco, with a particular account of that Empire; also a 
second Journey through France in I814, in which a comparison 
is drawn between the present and former state of that country 
and its Inhabitants. 

In one handsome volume, royal 4to. illustrated with 34 plates of 
Scenery, Antiquities, and Costume, from drawings made on the 
spot, by the author, price 41. 4s. bds. 

NARRATIVE of a TEN YEARS' RESIDENCE at the 
COURT of TRIPOLI. From the original Correspondence in 
the Possession of the Family of the late Richard Tully, Esq. the 
British Consul; comprisin ■ authentic Memoirs and Anecdotes of 
the reigning Bashaw, his Family, and various Persons of Distinc- 
tion ; an Account of the domestic Manners of the Moors, Arabs, 
and Turks, &c. &c. 

This volume u ill be found tn le an olject of particular curiosity , 
ftom the vivid and an less mmnicrin which it lays epen the interior 
if the Civrt of the Bashaw of Tripoli. It contains the only aii- 
Ihenlic Accn/vl uhich has tvsr reached the vjorld of the private 
Maimers and Conduct of this Despot of the East, and details suck 
scenes and events, such sketches of human weakness and vice, the 
effects of omlition. avarice, envy, intrigue, &'c, as will scarcely 
appear credible in the eye of a Euiopean. 

AMUSEMENTS in RETIREMENT; or, the Influence of 
Literature, Science, and the Liberal Arts, on the C<jnduct anrl 
Happiness of Private Life. By the author of the " Philosophy 
of Nature." Uuiformly printed in 1 vol. small 8vo. Price 
106. 6(1. boards. 

EVERY-DAY CHRISTIANITY. By the author of llhoda, 
&c. 1 vol. l2uio. .3s. 6d. 

The FLORIST'S P4ANUAL, or Hints for the Constnac- 
tion of a Gay Flower Garden, witii Instructions for preventing 
the Depredations of Insects, &c., by the authoress of" Botanical 
Dialogues," aud " Sketches of the Physiology of Vegetable Life." - 
1 vol. l2mo. 

ITALIAN PHRASEOLOGY, a necessary Companion to all 
Grammars of that Language. By M. Santasnello, author of 
a new and compendious Italian Grammar, with Exercises, tlie 
Italian Reader, &c. &c. I vol. l2mo. price 7s. 6d. 

PRIVATE EDUCATION, or a Practical Plau for the StH- 
«jes of Young Ladies, by Miss Appkton. 2d edit, revised, 
/'s. 6d. hoards. 
