M E L M O T H 



THE 



WANDERER: 



TALE. 



BY THE AUTHOR OF " BERTRAM/' &c. 



IN FOUR VOLUMES. 

VOL. n. 



EDINBURGH: 

PRINTED FOR ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE AND COMPANY, 

AXD HT7HST, ROBINSON, ANT) CO. CHEAPSIDE, 
LONDON. 

1820. 



^23 
fr\H3 
/^a o 

V. 2. 



KB^ 



MELMOTH, 



CHAPTER VI. 



Homer. 



W HEN, after some days interval, the 
Spaniard attempted to describe his feelings 
on the receipt of his brother's letter, the 
sudden resuscitation of heart, and hope, and 
existence, that followed its perusal, he trem- 
bled,— uttered some inarticulate sounds,- — 
wept ; — and his agitation appeared to Mel- 
moth, with his uncontinental feelings, so 
violent, that he entreated him to spare the 

VOL. II. A 



2 MELMOTH : 

"aescription of his feelings, and proceed 
with his narrative. 

" You are right," said the Spaniard, dry- 
ing his tears, " joy is a convulsion, but 
ffrief is a habit, and to describe what we 
never can communicate, is as absurd as to 
talk of colours to the blind. I will hasten 
on, not to tell of my feelings, but of the 
results which they produced. A new world 
of hope was opened to me. I thought I 
saw liberty on the face of heaven when I 
walked in the garden. I laughed at the 
jar of the doors as they opened, and said 
to myself, " You shall soon expand to me 
for ever." I behaved with uncommon 
complacency to the community. But I did 
not, amid all this, neglect the most scru- 
pulous precautions suggested by my bro- 
ther. Am I confessing the strength or 
the weakness of my heart ? In the midst 
of all the systematic dissimulation that I 
was prepared and eager to carry on, the 
only circumstance that gave me real com- 
punction, was my being obliged to destroy 



A TALE. S 

the letters of that dear and generous 
youth who had risked every thing for my 
emancipation. In the mean time, I pur- 
sued my preparations with industry incon- 
ceivable to you, who have never been in a 
convent. 

" Lent was now begun, — all the com- 
munity were preparing themselves for the 
great confession. They shut themselves 
up, — they prostrated themselves before the 
shrines of the saints, — they occupied them- 
selves whole hours in taking minutes of 
their consciences, and magnifying the tri- 
vial defects of conventual discipline into 
offences in the eye of God, in order to 
give consequence to their penitence in 
the hearing of the confessor, — in fact, 
they would have been glad to accuse 
themselves of a crime, to escape from the 
monotony of a monastic conscience* 
There was a kind of silent bustle in the 
house, that very much favoured my pur- 
poses. Hour after hour 1 demanded pa- 
per for my confession. I obtained it, but 
my frequent demands excited suspicion, — 



% MELMOTH : 

they little knew what I was writing. 
Some said, for every thing excites inquiry 
in a convent, " He is writing the history 
of his family ; he will discharge it into the 
ears of the confessor, along with the se- 
crets of his own soul." Others said, " He 
has been in a state of alienation for some 
time, he is giving an account to God for 
it, — we shall never hear a word about it." 
Others, who were more judicious, said, 
'•' He is weary of the monastic life, he is 
writing an account of his monotony and 
ennui, doubtless that must be very long;" 
and the speakers yawned as they uttered 
these words, which gave a very strong attes- 
tation to what they said. The Superior 
watched me in silence. He was alarmed, 
and with reason. He consulted with some 
of the discreet brethren, whom I mention- 
ed before, and the result was a restless 
vigilance on their part, to which I supplied 
^n incessant fuel, by my absurd and per- 
petual demand for paper. Here, 1 ac- 
knowledge, I committed a great oversight. 



A TALE. 5 

It was impossible for the most exaggerated 
conscience to charge itself, even in a con- 
vent, with crimes enough to fill all the 
paper I required. 1 was filling them all 
the time with their crimes, not my own. 
Another great mistake I made, was being 
wholly unprepared for the great confession 
when it came on. I received intimations 
of this as we v.alked in the garden, — I 
have before mentioned that I had assumed 
an amicability of habit toward them. They 
would say to me, " You have made ample 
preparations for the great confession. " " I 
have prepared myself" " But we expect 
great edification from its results." " I 
trust you will receive it." — 1 said no 
more, but I was very much disturbed at 
these hints. Others would say, " My 
brother, amid the multitudinous offences 
that burden your conscience, and which 
you have found necessary to employ quires 
of paper to record, would it not be a re- 
lief to you to open your mind to the Su- 
perior, and ask for a few previous mo- 



b MELMOTH : 

ments of consolation and direction from 
JiimJ' To this I answered, " I thank you, 
and will consider of it." — I was thinking 
all the time of something else. 

" It was a few nights before the time of 
the great confession, that I had to entrust 
the last packet of my memorial to the 
porter. Our meetings had been hitherto 
unsuspected. I had received and answer- 
ed my brother's communications, and our 
correspondence had been conducted with a 
secrecy unexampled in convents. But this 
last night, as I put my packet into the 
porter's hand, I saw a change in his appear- 
ance that terrified me. He had been a 
comely, robust man, but now, even by the 
moon-light, I could perceive he was wast- 
ed to a shadow, — his hands trembled as he 
took the papers from me, — his voice faul- 
tered as he promised his usual secrecy. 
The change, which had been observed by 
the whole convent, had escaped me till 
that night ; my mind had been too much 
occupied by my own situation. I noticed 



A TALE. 7 

it then, however, and I said, " But what 
is the matter ?" " Can you then ask ? I 
am withered to a spectre by the terrors of 
the office 1 have been bribed to. Do you 
know what I risk ? — incarceration for life, 
or rather for death, — perhaps a denuncia- 
tion to the Inquisition. Every Hne I de- 
liver from you, or to you, seems a charge 
against my own soul, — I tremble when I 
meet you. I know that you have the 
sources of life and death, temporal and 
eternal, in your hands. The secret in 
which I am an agent should never be in- 
trusted but to one, and you are another. 
As I sit in my place, I think every step 
in the cloister is advancing to summon me 
to the presence of the Superior. When I 
attend in the choir, amid the sounds of 
devotion your voice swells to accuse me. 
When I lie down at night, the evil spirit 
is beside my bed, reproaching me with 
perjury, and reclaiming his prey ; — his 
emissaries surround me wherever I move, 
— I am beset by the tortures of hell. The 



8 MELMOTH : 

saints from their shrines frown on me, — I 
see the painting of the traitor Judas on 
every side I turn to. When I sleep for a 
moment, 1 am awakened by my own cries. 
I exclaim, " Do not betray me, he has 
not yet violated his vows, I was but an a- 
gent, — I was bribed, — do not kindle those 
fires for me." I shudder, — I start up in a 
cold sweat. My rest, my appetite, are 
gone. Would to God you were out of 
this convent ; — and O ! would that I had 
never been instrumental to your release, 
then both of us might have escaped dam- 
nation to all eternity. I tried to pacify 
him, to assure him of his safet^f, but no- 
thing could satisfy him but my solemn 
and sincere assurance that this was the 
last packet I would ever ask him to deliver. 
He departed tranquillized by this assur- 
ance ; and I felt the dangers of my at- 
tempt multiplying around me every hour. 
" This man v/as faithful, but he was ti- 
mid ; and what confidence can we have in 
a being whose right hand is held out to 



A TALE. 9 

you, while his left trembles to be employ- 
ed in transferring your secret to your ene- 
my. This man died a few weeks after. I 
beheve I owed his dying fidelity to the 
delirium that seized on his last moments. 
But what 1 suffered during those mo- 
ments I — his death under such circumstan- 
ces, and the unchristian joy I felt at it, 
were only in my mind stronger evidences 
against the unnatural state of life that 
could render such an event, and such feel- 
ings, almost necessary. It was on the even- 
ing after this, that I w^as surprised to see 
the Superior, with four of the monks, en- 
ter my cell. I felt this visit boded me no 
good. I trembled all over, while 1 receiv- 
ed them with deference. The Superior 
seated himself opposite to me, arranging 
his seat so as that 1 was opposite the light. 
1 did not understand what this precaution 
meant, but 1 conceive now, that he wished 
to watch every change in my countenance, 
while his was concealed from me. The 
four monks stood at the back of his chair ; 
A 2 



10 MELMOTH r 

their arms were folded, their lips closed, 
their eyes half shut, their heads declined — 
they looked like men assembled reluctant- 
ly to witness the execution of a criminal. 
The Superior began, in a mild voice, " My 
son, you have been intently employed on 
your confession for some time — that was 
laudable. But have you, then, accused 
yourself of every crime your conscience 
charges you with ?" " I have, my father." 
** Of all, you are sure?" " My father, I 
have accused myself of all I was conscious 
of Who but God can penetrate the abyss- 
es of the heart ? I have searched mine as 
far as I could." " And you have recorded 
all the accusations you found there ?" " I 
have." ** And you did not discover among 
them the crime of obtaining the means of 
writing out your confession, to abuse them 
to a very different purpose?" — This was 
coming to the point. I felt it necessary 
to summon my resolution — and I said, 
with a venial equivocation, " That is a 
crime of which my conscience does not ac- 



A TALE. 11 

cuse iner " My son, do not dissemble 
with your conscience, or with me. I 
should be even above it in your estima- 
tion ; for if it errs and deceives you, it is 
to me you should apply to enlighten and 
direct it. But I see it is in vain to at- 
tempt to touch your heart. I make my 
last appeal to it in these plain words. A 
few moments only of indulgence await 
you — use them or abuse them, as you will. 
I have to ask you a ^^w plain questions, 
which, if you refuse to answer, or do not 
answer truly, your blood be on your own 
head." I trembled, but I said, « My father, 
have I then refused to answer your ques- 
tions ?" '* Your answers are all either inter- 
rogations or evasions. They must be direct 
and simple to the questions I am about to 
propose in the presence of these brethren. 
More depends on your answer than you 
are aware of The warning voice breaks 
forth in spite of me." — Terrified at these 
words, and humbled to the wish to propi- 
tiate them, I rose from my chair — then 



12 ' ivielmoth: 

gasping, I leant on it for support. I said, 
" My God ! wlmt is all this terrible prepa- 
ration for? Of what am I guilty? Why 
am 1 summoned by this warning voice so 
often, whose warnings are only so many 
mysterious threatenings ? Why am I not 
told of my offence ?" 

'* The four monks, who had never spo- 
ken or lifted up their heads till that mo- 
ment, now directed their livid eyes at me, 
and repeated, a I together, in a voice that 
seemed to issue from the bottom of a se- 
pulchre, " Your crime is — " The Supe- 
rior gave them a signal to be silent, and 
this interruption increased my consterna- 
tion. It is certain, that when we are con- 
scious of guilt, we always suspect that a 
greater degree of it will be ascribed to us 
by others. Their consciences avenge the 
palhations of our own, l.y the most hor- 
rible exaggerations. I did not know of 
wbat crime they might be disposed to ac- 
cuse me ; and already 1 felt the accusation 
of my clandestine correspondence as dust 



A TALE. 13 

in the balance of their resentment. I had 
heard the crimes of convents were some- 
times unutterably atrocious; and 1 fielt as 
anxious now for a distinct charge to be 
preferred against me, as 1 had a few mo- 
ments before to evade it. These indefinite 
fears were soon exchanged for real ones, as 
the Superior proposed his questions. '* You 
liave procured a large quantity of paper — 
how did you employ it?" 1 recovered 
myself, and said, " As 1 ought to do." 
" How, in unburdening your conscience?" 
" Yes, in unburdening my conscience." 
'* That is false ; the greatest sinner on 
earth could not have blotted so many pages 
with the record of his crimes." " 1 have 
often been told in the convent, 1 ictm' the 
greatest sinner on earth." " You equi\o- 
cate again, and convert your ambiguities 
into reproaches — this will not do — you 
must answer plainly : For what purpose did 
you procure so much paper, and how have 
you employed it?' " 1 i ave told you al- 
ready." " It was, then, employed in your 



14 MELMOTH ; 

confession ?" — I was silent, but bowed as- 
sentingly. — " You can, then, shew us the 
proofs of your application to your duties. 
Where is the manuscript that contains 
your confession ?" I blushed and hesitat- 
ed, as I showed about half-a-dozen blotted 
and scrawled pages as my confession. It 
was ridiculous. It did not occupy more 
than a tenth part of the paper which I had 
received. " And this is your confession ?'* 
" It is." " And you dare to say that you 
have employed all the paper entrusted to 
you for that purpose." — I w^as silent. 
«* Wretch!" said the Superior, losing all 
patience, " disclose instantly for what pur- 
pose you have employed the paper grant- 
ed you. Acknowledge instantly that it 
was for some purpose contrary to the in- 
terests of this house." — At these words I 
was roused. I saw again the cloven foot 
of interest peeping from beneath the mo- 
nastic garb. I answered, " Why am I 
suspected if tjou are not guilty .? What 
could I accuse you of? What could I 



A TALE. 15 

complain of if there were no cause ? Your 
own consciences must answer this question 
for me." At these words, the monks were 
again about to interpose, when the Supe- 
rior, silencing them by a signal, went on 
with his matter-of-fact questions, that para- 
lyzed all the energy of passion. " You will 
not tell me what you have done with the 
paper committed to you ?" — I was silent. 
— " I enjoin you, by your holy obedience, 
to disclose it this moment." — His voice rose 
in passion as he spoke, and this operated 
as a signal on mine. I said, " You have 
no right, my father, to demand such a de- 
claration." " Right is not the question now. 
I command you to tell me. I require 
your oath on the altar of Jesus Christ, and 
by the image of his blessed Mother." 
" You have no right to demand such an 
oath. I know the rules of the house — I 
am responsible to the confessor." " Do 
you, then, make a question between right 
and power ? You shall soon fee], within 



16 MELMOTH : 

these walls, they are the same." " I make 
no question perhaps they are the same." 
" And you will not tell what you have 
done with those papers, blotted, doubtless, 
with the most infernal calumnies?" " I 
will not." " And you will take the con- 
sequences of your obstinacy on your own 
head ?" " I will." And the four monks 
chorussed again, all in the same unnatural 
tone, " The consequences be on his own 
head." But while they spoke thus, two 
of them whispered in my ears, •' Deliver 
up your papers, and all is well. The 
whole convent knows you have been 
writing." I answered, *• I have nothing 
to give up — nothing on the faith of a 
monk. I have not a single page in my 
possession, but what you have seized on." 
The monks, who had whispered in a con- 
ciliatory tone to me before, quitted me. 
They conversed in whispers with the Su- 
perior, who, darting on me a terrible look, 
exclaimed, *' And you will not give up 



A TALE. 17 

your papers ?" " I have nothing to give 
up : Search my person — search my cell — 
every thing is open to you." " Every 
thing shall be soon," said the Superior in 
fury. In a moment the examination com- 
menced. There was not an article of fur- 
niture in my cell that was not the object 
of their investigation. My chair and table 
were overturned, shaken, and finally bro- 
ken, in the attempt to discover whether 
any papers had been secreted in them. 
The prints were snatched from the walls, 
— held up between them and the hght. — 
Then the very frames were broken, to try 
if any thing was concealed in them. Then 
they examined my bed; — they threw all 
the furniture about the floor, they unrip- 
ped the mattress, and tore out the straw ; 
one of them, during this operation, actual- 
ly applied his teeth to facilitate it, — and 
this malice of activity formed a singular 
contrast to the motionless and rigid torpor 
with which they had clothed themselves 
but a few moments before* All this time. 



IS MELMOTH : 

I stood in the centre of the floor, as I was 
ordered, without turning to right or left. 
Nothing was found to justify their suspi- 
cions. They then surrounded me; and 
the examination of my person was equally 
rapid, minute, and indecorous. Every 
thing I wore was on the floor in a mo- 
ment : The very seams of my habit were 
ript open ; and, during the examination, I 
covered myself with one of the blankets 
they had taken from my bed. When it 
was over, I said, " Have you discovered 
any thing?" The Superior answered, in 
a voice of rage, strugghng proudly, but 
vainly, with disappointment, " I have 
other means of discovery — prepare for 
them, and tremble when they are resorted 
to." At these words he rushed from my 
cell, giving a sign to the four monks to 
follow him. I was left alone. I had no 
longer any doubt of my danger. I saw 
myself exposed to the fury of men who 
would risk nothing to appease it. I watch- 
ed, waited, trembled, at every step I heard 



A TALE. 19 

in the gallerj^ — at the sound of every door 
that opened or shut near me. Hours went 
on in this agony of suspense, and terminat- 
ed at last without an event No one came 
near me that night — the next was to be 
that of the great confession. In the course 
of the day, I took my place in the choir, 
trembling, and watching every eye. 1 felt 
as if every countenance was turned on me, 
and every tongue said in silence, " Thou 
art the man." Often I wished that the 
storm I felt was gathering around me, 
would burst at once. It is better to hear 
the thunder than to watch the cloud. It 
did not burst, however, then. And when 
the duties of the day were over, I retired 
to my cell, and remained there, pensive, 
anxious, and irresolute. 

" The confession had begun; and as I 
heard the penitents, one by one, return 
from the church, and close the doors of 
their cells, I began to dread that 1 was to 
be excluded from approaching the holy 
chair, and that this exclusion from a sacred 



^0 MELMOTII : 

and indispensible right, was to be the com- 
mencement of some mysterious course of 
rigour. I waited, however, and was at 
last summoned. This restored my cou- 
rage, and I went through my duties more 
tranquilly. After I had made my confes- 
sion, only a few simple questions were 
proposed to me, as. Whether I could ac- 
cuse myself of any inii:ard breach of con- 
ventual duty ? of any thing I had reserv- 
ed'^ any thing in my conscience? he- — 
and on my ansv/ering them in the nega- 
tive, was suffered to depart. It was on 
that very night the porter died. My last 
packet had gone some days before, — all 
was safe and well. Neither voice or line 
could bear witness against me now, and 
hope began to revisit me, as 1 reflected 
that my brother's zealous industry would 
discover some other means for our future 
communication. 

" All was profound calm for a few days, 
but the storm was to come soon enough. 
On the fourth evening after the confession^ 



A TALE. 21 

1 was sitting alone in iny cell, when I 
heard an unusual bustle in the convent. 
The bell was rung, — the new porter seem- 
ed in great agitation, — the Superior hur- 
ried to the parlour first, then to his cell, — 
then Sonne of the elder monks were sum- 
moned. The younger whispered in the 
galleries, — shut their doors violently, — all 
seemed in agitation. In a domestic build- 
ing, occupied by the smallest family, such 
circumstances would hardly be noticed, 
but, in a convent, the miserable monotony 
of what may be called their internal exist- 
ence, gives an importance, — an interest, to 
the most trivial external circumstance in 
common life. 1 felt all this. I said to m)''- 
self, " Som.ething is going on." — 1 added, 
" Something is going on against me." I 
was right in both my conjectures. Late in 
the evening I was ordered to attend the 
Superior in his own apartment, — 1 said 
I was ready to go. Two minutes after the 
order was reversed, and I was desired to 
remain in my cell, and await the approacli 



22 MELMOTH : 

of the Superior,—! answered I was willing 
to obey. But this sudden change of orders 
filled me'with an indefinite fear ; and in all 
the changes of my life, and vicissitude of 
my feelings, I have never felt any fear so 
horrible. " I walked up and down, I re- 
peated incessantly, " IVIy God protect me ! 
my God strengthen me !" Then I dreaded 
to ask the protection of God, doubting 
whether the cause in which I was engaged 
merited his protection. My ideas, how- 
ever, were all scattered by the sudden en- 
trance of the Superior and the four monks 
who had attended him on the visit pre- 
vious to the confession. At their entrance 
I rose,— no one desired me to sit down. 
The Superior advanced with a look of 
fury, and, dashing some papers on my 
table, said, " Is that your writing?" I 
threw a hurried and terrified eye over the 
papers, — they were a copy of my memo- 
rial. I had presence of mind enough to 
say, " That is not my writing." " Wretch ! 
you equivocate, it is a copy of your writ- 



A TALE. 23 

ing." — I was silent. — " Here is a proof of 
it," he added, throwing down another pa- 
per. It was a copy of the memoir of the 
advocate, addressed to me, and which, by 
the influence of a superior court, they 
had not the power of withholding from 
me. I was expiring with anxiety to exa- 
mine it, but I did not dare to glance at it. 
The Superior unfolded page after page. 
He said, " Read, wretch ! read, — look in- 
to it, examine it line by line." I approach- 
ed trembling, — I glanced at it, — in the 
very first lines I read hope. My courage 
revived. — I said, " My father, I acknow- 
ledge this to be the copy of my memorial. 
I demand your permission to read the an- 
swer of the advocate, you cannot refuse 
me this right." " Read it," said the Supe- 
rior, and he flung it towards me. 

" You may readily believe. Sir, that, 
under such circumstances, I could not read 
with very steady eyes ; and my penetra- 
tion was not at all quickened by the four 
monks disappearing from the cell, at a sig- 



J» MELMOTH : 

nal I did not see. The Superior and I 
were now alone. He walked up and down 
my cell, while I appeared to hang over 
the advocate's memoir. Suddenly he stop- 
ped ; — he struck his hand with violence on 
the table, — the pages I was trembling over 
quivered from the violence of the blow, — I 
started from my chair. " Wretch," said the 
Superior, " when have such papers as those 
profaned the convent before ? When, till 
your unhallowed entrance, were we in- 
sulted with the memoirs of legal advo- 
cates ? How comes it that you have dared 
to " " Do what, my father?" " Re- 
claim your vows, and expose us to all the 
scandal of a civil court and its proceed- 
ings." " I weighed it all against my own 
misery." " Misery ! is it thus you speak 
of a conventual life, the only life that can 
promise tranquillity here, or ensure salvation 
hereafter." These words, uttered by a man 
convulsed by the most frantic passion, were 
their own refutation, JNly courage rose in 
proportion to his fury ; and besides, I was 



A TALE. 2o 

driven to a point, and forced to act on my 
defence. The sight of the papers added 
to my confidence. I said, " My father, 
it is in vain to endeavour to diminisli my 
repugnance to the monastic life ; tlie proof 
that that repugnance is invincible lies be- 
fore you. If 1 have been guilty of a step 
that violates the decorum of a convent, I 
am sorry, — but I am not reprehensible. 
Those who forced me into a convent, are 
guilty of the violence which is falsely as- 
cribed to me. I am determined, if it be 
possible, to change my situation. You see 
the efforts I have already made, be assured 
they will never cease. Disappointment 
vrill only redouble their energy ; and if it 
be in the power of heaven or earth to pro- 
cure the annulment of my vows, there is 
no pov/cr in cither I will not have recourse 
to." I expected he would not have heard 
me out, but he did. He even listened 
with calmness, and I prepared myself to 
encounter and repel that alternation of re- 
proach and remonstrance, of solicitation 

VOL. II. B 



36 MELMOTH : 

and menace, which they so well know how 
to employ in a convent. " Your repug- 
nance to a conventual life is then invin- 
cible ?" " It is." " But to what do you 
object ? — not to your duties, for you per- 
form them with the most edifying punc- 
tuality, — not to the treatment you receive, 
for it has been the most indulgent that our 
discipline admits of, — not to the commu- 
nity itself, who are all disposed to cherish 
and love you ; — of what do you complain ?" 
" Of the life itself, — ttiat comprehends 
every thing. I am not fit to be a monk." 
" Remember, I implore you, that though 
the forms of earthly courts must be obey- 
ed, from the necessity that makes us de- 
pendent on human institutions, in all mat- 
ters between man and man, they never 
can be available in matters between God 
and man. Be assured, my deluded child, 
that if all the courts on earth pronounced 
you absolved from your vows this moment, 
your own conscience never can absolve 
you. All your ignominious life, it will 



A TALE. 27 

continue to reproach you with the viola- 
tion of a vow, whose breach man has con- 
nived at, but God has not. And, at your 
last hour, how horrible will those re- 
proaches be !" " Not so horrible as at the 
hour I took that vow, or rather at the hour 
when it was extorted." " Extorted!" 
" Yes, my father, yes, — I take Heaven to 
witness against you. On that disastrous 
morning, your anger, your remonstrances, 
your pleadings, were as ineffectual as they 
are now, till you flung the body of my 
mother before my feet." '' And do you 
reproach me with my zeal in the cause of 
your salvation ?" " I do not wish to re- 
proach you. You know the step I have 
taken, you must be aware I will pursue it 
with all the powers of nature, — that I will 
never rest till my vows are annulled, while 
a hope of it remains, — and that a soul, de- 
termined as mine, can convert despair it- 
self into hope. Surrounded, suspected, 
watched as I have been, I yet found the 
means of conveying my papers to the 



28 MELMOTIl : 

hands of the advocate. Calculate the 
strength of that resolution which could 
effectuate such a measure in the very heart 
of a convent. Judge of the futility of all 
future opposition, when you failed in de- 
feating, or even detecting, the first steps of 
my design." At these words the Superior 
w^as silent. I believed I had made an im- 
pression on him. I added, " If you wish 
to spare the community the disgrace of 
my prosecuting my appeal within its walls, 
the alternative is easy. Let the door be 
left unguarded some day, connive at my 
escape, and my presence shall never mo- 
lest or dishonour you another hour." 
" How ! would you make me not only a 
wdtness, but an accomplice in your crime ? 
Apostate from God, and plunged in per- 
dition as you are, do you repay the hand 
stretched out to save you, by seizing it, 
tliat you may drag me into the infernal 
gulph along with you ?" and he walked up 
and down the celt in the most violent agi- 
tation. This unlucky proposal operated 



A TALE. 29 

on his master-passion, (for he was exempla- 
rily rigid in discipline), and prodnced only 
convulsions of hostility. I stood waiting 
till this fresh burst had subsided, while he 
continued to exclaim incessantly, " My 
God, for what offence am I thus humiliat- 
ed ? — for what inconceivable crime is this 
disgrace precipitated on the whole con- 
vent ? What will become of our charac- 
ter ? What will all Madrid say ?" " My fa- 
ther, whether an obscure monk lives, dies, 
or recalls his vows, is an object of little im- 
portance beyond the walls of his convent. 
They will forget me soon, and you will be 
consoled by the restored harmony of the 
discipline, in whicli I should always be a 
jarring note. Besides, all Madrid, with all 
the interest you ascribe to it, could never 
be made responsible for my salvation." 
He continued to walk up and down, re- 
peating, " AVhat will the world say ? What 
will become of us ?" till he had worked 
himself into a state of fury; and, sudden- 
ly turning on me, he exclaimed, " Wretch! 



30 MELMOTH : 

renounce your horrible resolution, — re- 
nounce it this moment ! I give you but 
five minutes for consideration." " Five 
thousand would make no change." " Trem- 
ble, then, lest you should not have life 
spared to see the fulfilment of your im- 
pious purposes." 

" As he uttered these words he rushed 
from my cell. The moments I passed 
during his absence were, I think, the most 
horrible of my life. Their terror was 
aggravated by darkness, for it was now 
night, and he had carried away the light 
along with him. My agitation did not at 
first permit me to observe this. I felt I 
was in the dark, but knew not how or 
why. A thousand images of indescrib- 
able horror rushed in a host on me. I 
had heard much of the terrors of convents, 
— of their punishments, often carried to 
the infliction of death, or of reducing their 
victim to a state in which death would 
have been a blessing. Dungeons, chains, 
and scourges, swam before my eyes in a 



A TALE. 31 

fiery mist. The threatening words of the 
Superior appeared emblazoned on the 
darkened walls of my cell in characters of 
flame. I shuddered, — I cried aloud, though 
conscious that my voice would be echoed 
by no friendly answering tones in a com- 
munity of sixty persons, — such is the ste- 
rility of humanity in a convent. At last 
my very fears recovered me by their ex- 
cess. I said to myself, " They dare not 
murder me, — they dare not incarcerate me ; 
- — they are answerable to the court to which 
I have appealed for my forthcoming, — 
they dare not be guilty of any violence." 
Just as 1 had come to this comfortable 
conclusion, which indeed was the triumph 
of the sophistry of hope, the door of my 
cell was thrown open, and the Supe- 
rior, attended by his four satellites, re-en- 
tered. ]My eyes were dim from the dark- 
ness m which I had been left, but I could 
distinguish that they carried with them a 
rope and a piece of sackcloth. I drew the 
most frightful presages from this apparatus. 



S2 3IELM0TH : 

I altered my reasoning in a moment, and 
instead of saying tliey dare not do so and 
so, I instantly argued, " What dare they 
not do ? I am in their power, — they know 
it. I have provoked them to the utmost, 
— v;hat is it monks will not do in the im- 
potence of their malignity ? — what is to be- 
come of me ?" They advanced, and 1 ima- 
gined the rope was to strangle me, and the 
sackcloth to inclose my murdered body. 
A thousand images of blood swam before 
me, — a gush of fire choaked up my respi- 
ration. The groans of a thousand victims 
seemed to rise from the vaults of the con- 
vent, to which they had been hurried by 
a fate like mine. I know not what is 
death, but I am convinced I suffered the 
agonies of many deaths in that moment. 
My first impulse was to throw myself on 
my knees. I said, *' I am in your po^ver, 
— 1 am guilty in your eyes,— accomplish 
your purpose, but do not keep me long in 
pain." The Superior, without heeding, 
or perhaps hearing \nc, said, " Now you 



A TALE. 33 

are in the posture that becomes you." At 
hearing tliese words, which sounded less 
dreadful than I had feared, I prostrated 
myself to the ground. A few moments 
before I would have thought this a degrada- 
tion, but fear is very debasing. I had a 
dread of violent means, — I was very young, 
and life was not the less attractive from its 
being arrayed only in the brilliant drapery 
of imagination. The monks observed my 
posture, — they feared its effect on the Su- 
perior. They said, in that choral mono- 
tony, — that discordant unison that had 
frozen my blood when I knelt in the same 
posture but a few nights before, " Reve- 
rend fatlier, do not suffer yourself to be 
imposed on by this prostituted humilia- 
tion,— the time for mercy is past. You 
gave him his moments of deliberation, — 
he refused to avail himself of them. You 
come now not to listen to pleadings, but 
to inflict justice." At these words, that 
cUinounced every thiiig horrible, I went ou 
my knees from one to th.e other, as they 
B 2 



34 MELMOTH : 

all stood in a grim and executioner-like 
row. I said to each with tears, " Brother 
Clement, — Brother Justin,~why do you 
try to irritate the ^Superior against me ? 
Why do you precipitate a sentence which, 
whether just or not, must be severe, since 
you are to be the executioners ? AVhat 
have I done to offend jou ? I interceded 
for you when you were guilty of any slight 
deviation — Is this my return ?" " This is 
wasting time," said the monks. " Hold,'* 
said the Superior ; " give him leave to 
speak. Will you avail yourself of the last 
moment of indulgence I can ever afford 
you, to renounce your horrible resolution 
of recallino; vour vows?" Those words 
renewed all my energies. I stood upright 
before them all. I said, in a loud dis- 
tinct voice, ** Never — I stand at the bar of 
God." " AVretch ! you have renounced 
God." '' Well, then, my father, I have 
only to hope that God will not renounce 
me. I have appealed to a bar also, over 
which you have no power." " But we 



A TALE. 35 

have power here, and that you shall feel." 
He made a signal, and the four monks ap- 
proached. I uttered one short cry of fear, 
but submitted the next moment. I felt 
convinced it was to be my last. 1 was as- 
tonished, when, instead of fastening the 
cords round my neck, they bound my arms 
with them. They then took off my habit, 
and covered me with the sackcloth. I made 
no resistance ; but shall I confess to you, 
Sir, I felt some disappointment. I was 
prepared for death, but something worse 
than death appeared threatened in these 
preparations. When we are driven to the 
precipice of mortality, we spring forward 
with resolution, and often defeat the tri- 
umph of our murderers, by merging it m our 
own. But when w^e are led to it step by step, 
held often over it, and then withdrawn, ^ve 
lose our resolution along w^ith our patience ; 
and feel, that the last blow would be mercy, 
compared with its long-suspended, slowly 
descending, wavering, mutilating, hesitat- 
ing stroke. I was prepared for every thing 



36 MELMOTH : 

but what followed. Bound with this rope 
as fast as a felon, or a galley-slave, and co- 
vered only with the sackcloth, they drag- 
ged me along the gallery. I uttered no 
cry, made no resistance. They descended 
the stairs that led to the church. I fol- 
lowed, or rather was dragged after them. 
They crossed the aisle ; there was a dark 
passage near it which I had never observed 
before. We entered it. A low door at 
the end presented a frightful perspective. 
At sight of it 1 cried aloud, " You will not 
immure me ? You will not plunge me in 
that horrible dungeon, to be withered by 
damps, and devoured by reptiles ? No, 
you will not,— remember you are answer- 
able for my life." At these words, they 
surrounded me ; then, for the first time, I 
struggled, — 1 called for help ;— -this was the 
moment they waited for ; they wanted 
soQie repugnance on my part. The signal 
was instantly given to a lay-brother, who 
waited in tiie passage, — the bell was rung, 
— tliat terrible bell, that requires every 



A TALE. 37 

member of a convent to plunge into 
his cell, as something extraordinary is 
going on in the house. At the first 
toll 1 lost all hope. I felt as if not a liv- 
ins beinff was in existence but those who 
surrounded me, and who appeared, in the 
livid light of one taper burning faintly in 
that dismal passage, like spectres hurrying 
a condemned soul to his doom. They 
hurried me down the steps to this door, 
which was considerably below the level of 
the passage. It was a long time before 
they could open it ; many keys were tried ; 
perhaps they might have felt some agita- 
tion at the thoughts of the violence they 
were going to commit. But this delay 
increased my terrors beyond expression ; 1 
imagined this terrible vault had never been 
inclosed before ; that I was to be the first 
victim inhumed within it ; and that their 
determination was, I should never quit it 
alive. As these thoughts occurred, in un- 
utterable agony I cried aloud, tliough I 
felt I was beyond all human hearing ; but 



3^ MELMOTH : 

my cries were drowned in the jarring of the 
heavy door, as it yielded to the efforts of the 
monks, who, uniting their strength, pushed 
it with extended arms, grating all the way 
against the floor of stone. The monks 
hurried me in, while the Superior stood at 
the entrance with the light, appearing to 
shudder at the view it disclosed. I had 
time to view all the furniture of what I 
thought my last abode. It was of stone; the 
roof formed an arch ; a block of stone sup- 
ported a crucifix, and a death's head, with 
a loaf and a pitcher of water. There was a 
mat on the floor, to lie on ; another rolled 
up at the end of it formed a pillow. They 
flung me on it, and prepared to depart. I 
no longer struggled, for I knew escape was 
in vain, but I supplicated them at least to 
leave me a light ; and I petitioned for this 
with as much earnestness as I could have 
done for my liberty. Thus it is that mi- 
sery always breaks down the mind into 
petty details. We have not strength to 
comprehend the whole of our calamity. 



A TALE. S9 

We feel not the mountain which is heaped 
on us, but the nearest grains press on and 
grind us. I said, " In Christian mercy 
leave me a light, if it be but to defend my- 
self against the reptiles that must swarm 
here." And already I saw this was true, 
for some of extraordinary size, disturbed 
by the phsenomenon of the light, came 
crawling down the walls. All this time 
the monks were straining their strength 
to close the heavy door ; they did not utter 
a word. " I adjure you to leave me light, 
if it is hut to gaze on that skull ; fear not 
the exercise of sight can be any indulgence 
in this place ; but still let me have a light ; 
think that when I w^ish to pray, I mustjiel 
my way to that crucifix." As I spoke, the 
door was with difficulty closed and locked, 
and I heard their departing steps. You 
will hardly believe, Sir, that I slept pro- 
foundly ; yet I did ; but I would rather 
never sleep again, than awake so horribly. 
I awoke in the darkness of clay. I was to 
behold the light no more ; nor to watch 



40 MELMOTH: 

those divisions of time, which, by measur- 
ing our portions of suffering, appear to 
diminish them. When the clock strikes, 
we know an hour of wretchedness is past, 
never to return. INIy only time-keeper 
was the approach of the monk, who every 
day renewed my allowance of bread and 
water ; and had he been the object I loved 
most on earth, the sound of his steps could 
not have made more delicious music. 
These geras by which we compute the 
hours of darkness and inanity are incon- 
ceivable to any but those who are situa- 
ted as I w^as. You have heard, Sir, no 
doubt, that the eye which, on its being 
first immersed into darkness, appears de- 
prived of the power of vision for ever, ac- 
quires, imperceptibly, a power of accom- 
modating itself to its darkened sphere, and 
even of distinguishing objects by a kind of 
conventional light. The mind certainly 
possesses the same power, otherwise, how 
could I have had the power to reflect, to 
summon some resolution, and even to in- 
dulge some hope, in this frightful abode? 



A TALE. 41 

Thus it is, when all the Avorld seems sworn 
to hostility against us, we turn friends to 
ourselves with all the obstinacy of despair ; 
— and idiile all the world is flattering and 
deifying us, zve are the perpetual victims 
of lassitude and self-reproach. 

" The prisoner whose hours are visited by 
a dream of emancipation, is less a prey to 
ennui than the sovereign on a throne, be- 
girt with adulation, voluptuousness, and 
satiety. I reflected that all my papers 
were safe, — that my cause was prosecuting 
with vigour, — that, owing to my brother's 
zeal, I had the ablest advocate in Madrid, 
— that they dared not murder me, and 
were answerable with the whole credit of 
the house for my re- appearance whenever 
the courts demanded it, — that the very 
rank of my family was a powerful protec- 
tion, though none of them but my gene- 
rous fiery Juan was probably favourable 
to me ; — that if I was permitted to receive 
and read tiie advocate's first memoir, even 
through the hands of the Superior, it was 



42 MELMOTH : 

absurd to imagine that I could be denied 
intercourse with him in a more advanced 
and important stage of the business. These 
were the suggestions of my hope, and 
they were plausible enough. What were 
the suggestions of my despair, I shudder 
even at this moment to reflect on. The 
most terrible of all was, that I might be 
murdered conventually before it was pos- 
sible that my liberation could be accom- 
plished. 

" Such, Sir, were my reflections; you 
may ask, what were my occupations ? My 
situation supplied me with those, and, re- 
volting as they were, they were still occu- 
pations, I had my devotions to perform ; 
religion was my only resource in solitude 
and darkness, and while I prayed only for 
liberty and peace, I felt I was not at least 
insulting God by the prayers of hypocrisy, 
which I would have been compelled to ut- 
ter in the choir. There I was obliged to 
join in a sacrifice that was odious to me, 
and offensive to him ; — in my dungeon I 



A TALE. 43 

oltered up the sacrifice of my heart, and 
felt it was not unacceptable. During the 
glimpse of light afforded me by the ap- 
proach of the monk who brought me 
bread and water, I arranged the crucifix 
so as that I could feel it when I awoke. 
This w^as very often, and not knowing 
whether it was day or night, 1 uttered my 
prayers at random. 1 knew not whether 
it was matins or vespers ; there was nei- 
ther morning or evening for me, but it 
was like a talisman to me to touch the cru- 
cifix, and I said as I felt for it, " My God 
is with me in the darkness of my dungeon ; 
he is a God who has suffered, and can pity 
me. My extrem.est point of wTetchedness 
can be nothing to what this symbol of di- 
vine humiliation for the sins of man, has 
undergone for mine I" — and I kissed the 
sacred image (with lips wandering from 
the darkness) with more emotion than I 
had ever felt when I saw it illuminated by 
the blaze of tapers, amid the elevation of 
the Host, the tossing of the perfumed 



-^4 MELMOTH : 

censers, the gorgeous habits of the priestb', 
and the breathless prostration of the faith- 
ful. I had other occupations less dignified, 
but quite as necessary. The reptiles, who 
filled the hole into which I had been 
thrust, gave me opportunity for a kind of 
constant, miserable, ridiculous hostility. 
My mat had been placed in the very seat 
of warfare ; — I shifted it, — still they pur- 
sued me ; — I placed it against the wall, — 
the cold crawling of their bloated limbs 
often awoke me from my sleep, and still 
oftener made me shudder when awake. I 
struck at them ; — I tried to terrify them 
by my voice, to arm myself against them 
by the help of my mat; but above all, my. 
anxiety was ceaseless to defend my bread 
from their loathsome incursions, and my 
pitcher of water from their dropping into 
it. I adopted a thousand precautions, tri- 
vial as they w^ere inefficacious, but still 
there was occupation. I do assure you. 
Sir, I had more to do in my dungeon than 
in my celL To be fighting with reptiles 



A TALK. 45 

in the dark appears the most horrible 
struggle that can be assigned to man ; but 
tvhat is it compared to his combat with 
those reptiles which his own heart hourly 
engenders in a cell, and of which, if his 
heart be the mother, solitude is the father. 
I had another employment, — I cannot call 
it occupation. I had calculated w^ith my- 
self, that sixty minutes made an hour, 
and sixty seconds a minute. I began to 
think I could keep time as accurately as 
any clock in a convent, and measure the 
hours of my confinement or — my release. 
So I sat and counted sixty ; a doubt al- 
ways occurred to me, that I teas coiinting 
them faster than the clock. Then I wish- 
ed to be the clock, that I might have no 
feeling, no motive for htirrying on the ap- 
proach of time. Then I reckoned slower. 
Sleep sometimes overtook me in this exer-. 
cise, (perhaps I adopted it from that hope) ; 
but when I awoke, 1 applied to it again 
instantly. Thus I oscillated, reckoned, and 
measured time on my mat, while time 



46 MELMOTH t 

withheld its delicious diary of rising and 
setting suns, — of the dews of dawn and 
of twilight, — of the glow of morning and 
the shades of the evening. When my 
reckoning was broken by my sleep, (and 
I knew not whether I slept by day or by 
night), I tried to eke it out by my inces- 
sant repetition of minutes and seconds, 
and I succeeded; for I always consoled 
myself, that whatever hour it was, sixty 
minutes must go to an hour. Had I led 
this life much longer, I might have been 
converted into the idiot, who, as I have 
read, from the habit of watching a clock, 
imitated its mechanism so well, that when 
it was down, he sounded the hour as faith- 
fully as ear could desire. Such was my 
life. On the fourth day, (as I reckoned 
by the visits of the monk), he placed my 
bread and water on the block of stone as 
usual, but hesitated for some time before 
he departed. In fact, he felt a repugnance 
at delivering an intimation of hope; it 
was not consonant either to his profession. 



A TALE. 47 

or the office which, in the wantonness of 
monastic maUgnity, he had accepted as 
penance. You shudder at this, Sir, but 
it is nevertheless true ; this man thought 
he was doing service to God, by witness- 
ing the misery of a being incarcerated 
amid famine, darkness, and reptiles. He 
recoiled when his penance terminated. 
Alas ! how false is that religion which 
makes our aggravating the sufferings of 
others our mediator with that God who 
willeth all men to be saved. But this is a 
question to be solved in convents. This 
man hesitated long, struggled with the 
ferocity of his nature, and at last departed 
and bolted the door, that he might indulge 
it a few moments longer. Perhaps in 
those moments he prayed to God, and eja- 
culated a petition, that this protraction of 
my sufferings might be accepted as a me- 
lioration of his own. I dare say he was 
very sincere ; but if men were taught to 
look to the one great Sacrifice, would they 
be so ready to believe that their own, or 



48 MELMOTH : 

those of others, could ever be accepted as 
a commutation for it ? You are surprised, 
Sir, at these sentiments from a Catholic ; 
but another part of my story will disclose 
the cause of my uttering them. At length 
this man could delay his commission no 
longer. He was obliged to tell me that 
the Superior was moved by my sufferings, 
that God had touched his heart in my be- 
half, and that he jiermitted me to quit my 
dungeon. The words were scarce out of 
his mouth, before I rose, and rushed out 
with a shout that electrified him. Emo- 
tion is very unusual in convents, and the 
expression of joy a phenomenon. I had 
gained the passage before he recovered 
his surprise ; and the convent walls, which 
I had considered as those of a prison, now 
appeared the area of emancipation. Had 
its doors been thrown open to me tliat 
moment, I don't think 1 could have felt a 
more^ exquisite sensibility of liberty. I 
fell on my knees in the passage to thank 
God. I thanked him for the light, for the 



A TALE. 49 

air, for the restored power of respiration. 
As I was uttering these effusions, (cer- 
tainly not the least sincere that were ever 
poured forth within those walls), suddenly 
I became sick, — my head swam round, — I 
had feasted on the light to excess. I fell to 
the ground, and remembernothingformany 
hours afterwards. When 1 recovered my 
senses, I was in my cell, which appeared just 
as I had left it ; it was day-light, however ; 
and 1 am persuaded that circumstance con- 
tributed more to my restoration, than the 
food and cordials with which I was now 
liberally supplied. All that day I heard 
nothing, and had time to meditate on the 
motives of the indulgence with which I 
had been treated. I conceived that an 
order might have been issued to the Supe- 
rior to produce me, or, at all events, that 
he could not prevent those interviews be- 
tween the advocate and me, which the 
former might insist on as necessary while 
my cause was carrying on. Towards 
evening some monks entered my cell; 

VOL. II. o 



50 MELMOTH : 

they talked of indifferent matters, — affect- 
ed to consider my absence as the result of 
indisposition, and I did not undeceive 
them. They mentioned, as if incidental- 
ly, that my father and mother, overwhelm- 
ed with grief at the scandal I had brought 
on religion by appealing against my vows, 
had quitted JNladrid. At this intelligence 
I felt much more emotion than I showed. 
I asked them how long I had been ill ? 
They answered. Four days. This con- 
firmed my suspicions with regard to the 
cause of my liberation, for the advocate's 
letter had mentioned, that on the fifth day 
he would require an interview with me on 
the subject of my appeal. They then de- 
parted ; but I was soon to receive another 
visitor. After vespers, (from which I was 
excused),, the Superior entered my cell 
alone. He approached my bed. I at- 
tempted to rise, but he desired me to 
compose myself, and sat down near me 
with a calm but penetrating look. He 
said, " You have now found we have it in 



A TALE, 51 

our power to punish." — " I never doubted 
it." — " Before you tempt that power to an 
extremity, which, I warn you, you will 
not be able to endure, I come to demand 
of you to resign this desperate appeal 
against your vows, which can terminate 
only in dishonouring God, and disappoint- 
ing yourself."—" My father, without en- 
tering into details, which the steps taken 
on both sides have rendered wholly unne- 
cessary, I can only reply, that I will sup- 
port my appeal with every power Provi- 
dence puts within my reach, and that my 
punishment has only confirmed my reso- 
lution " — " And this is your final deter- 
mination ?" — " It is, and I implore you to 
spare me all further importunity, — it will 
be useless." He was silent for a long time ; 
at length he said, " And you will insist 
on your right to an interview with the 
advocate to-morrow ?" — " I shall claim it." 
— " It will not be necessary, however, to 
mention to him your late punishment." 
These words struck me. I comprehended 






521 MELMOTH : 

the meaning which he wished to conceal 
in them, and I answered, " It may not be 
necessary, but it will probably be expe- 
dient." — " How ? — would you violate the 
secrets of the house, while you are yet 
within its walls ?" — " Pardon me, my fa- 
ther, for saying, that you must be con- 
scious of having exceeded your duty, to 
be so anxious for its concealment. It is 
not, then, the secrets of your discipline, 
but the violation of it, I shall have to dis- 
close." — He was silent, and I added, " If 
you have abused your power, though I 
have been the sufferer, it is you who are 
guilty." — The Superior rose, and quitted 
my cell in silence. The next morning I 
attended matins. Service went on as 
usual, but at its conclusion, when the 
community were about to rise from their 
knees, the Superior, striking the desk 
violently with his hand, commanded them 
all to remain in the same posture. He 
added, in a thundering voice, " The in- 
tercession of this whole community with 



A TALE. 53 

God is supplicated for a monk who, aban- 
doned by the Spirit of God, is about to 
commit an act dishonourable to Him, dis- 
graceful to the church, and infallibly de- 
structive of his own salvation." At these 
terrible sounds the monks, all shuddering, 
sunk on their knees again. I was kneel- 
ing among them, when the Superior, call- 
ing me by my name, said aloud, " Rise, 
wretch ! rise, and pollute not our in- 
cense vnth your unhallowed breath !" I 
rose, trembling and confounded, and 
shrunk to my cell, where I remained 
till I was summoned by a monk to the 
parlour, to meet the advocate, who wait- 
ed for me there. This interview was 
rendered quite ineffective by the pre- 
sence of the monk, who was desir- 
ed by the Superior to witness our confe- 
rence, and whom the advocate could not 
order away. When we entered into de- 
tails, he interrupted us with declarations, 
that his duty would not permit such a vio- 
lation of the rules of the parlour. When 



54 HELMOTH : 

I asserted a fact, he contradicted it, gave 
me the lie repeatedly, and finally disturb- 
ed the purpose of our conference so com- 
pletely, that in mere self-defence, I spoke 
of the subject of my punishment, which 
he could not deny, and to which my livid 
looks bore a testimony invincible. The 
moment I spoke on this subject the monk 
became silent, (he was treasuring every 
word for the Superior), and the advocate 
redoubled his attention. He took minutes 
of every thing I said, and appeared to lay 
more stress on the matter than I had ima- 
o;ined, or indeed wished for. When the 
conference was over, I retired again to my 
cell. The advocate's visits were repeated 
for some days, till he had obtained the in- 
formation requisite for carrying on my 
suit ; and during this time, my treatment 
in the convent was such as to give me no 
cause of complaint ; and this doubtless 
was the motive of their forbearance. But 
the moment those visits ceased, the war- 
fare of persecution commenced. They 



A TALE. 55 

considered me as one with whom no mea- 
sures were to be kept, and they treated 
me accordingly. I am convinced it was 
their intention that 1 should not survive 
the event of my appeal ; at least it is cer- 
tain they left nothing unaccomplished that 
could verify that intention. This began, 
as I mentioned, on the day of the advo- 
cate's last visit. The bell rung for refec- 
tion ; — I w^as going to take my place as 
usual, when the Superior said, " Hold, — 
place a mat for him in the midst of the 
hall." This was done, and I was required 
to sit down on it, and supplied with bread 
and water. I eat a little, which I moist- 
ened with my tears. I foresaw what I 
had to undergo, and did not attempt to 
expostulate. When grace was about to 
be said, I was desired to stand without the 
door, lest my presence should frustrate the 
benediction they implored. 

" I retired, and when the bell rung for 
vespers, 1 presented myself among the rest 
at the door of the church. I was surprised 



56 MELMOTH : 

to find it shut, and they all assembled. 
' When the bell ceased, the Superior appeared, 
the door was opened, and the monks hurried 
in. I was following, when the Superior re- 
pelled me, exclaiming, ** You, wretch, you! 
Remain where you are." I obeyed ; and 
the whole community entered the church, 
while I remained at the door. This spe- 
cies of excommunication produced its full 
effect of terror on me. As the monks 
slowly came out, and cast on me looks of 
silent horror, I thought myself the most 
abject being on earth ; I could have hid 
myself under the pavement till the event 
of my appeal was over. 

** The next morning, when I w^ent to ma- 
tins, the same scene was renewed, with the 
horrible addition of audible reproaches, and 
almost imprecations, denounced against 
me, as they entered and returned. I knelt 
at the door. I did not answer a word. I 
returned not " railing for railing," and lift- 
ed up my heart with a trembling hope, 
that this offering might be as acceptable to 



A TALE. 57 

God as the sonorous chaunt of the choir, 
which I still felt it was miserable to be ex* 
eluded from joining. 

" In the course of the day, every sluice 
of monastic malignity and vengeance was 
thrown open. I appeared at the door of the 
refectory. I did not dare to enter. Alas ! 
Sir, how are monks employed in the hour 
of refection ? It is an hour, when, while 
they swallow their meal, they banquet on 
the little scandal of the convent. They 
ask, " Who was late at prayers ? Who is 
to undergo penance ?" This serves them 
for conversation ; and the details of their 
miserable life supply no other subject for 
that mixture of exhaustless malignity and 
curiosity, which are the inseparable twins 
of monastic birth. As I stood at the door 
of the refectory, a lay-brother, to whom 
the Superior nodded, bid me retire. I went 
to my cell, waited for several hours, and 
just when the bell for vespers had rung, 
was supplied with food, which famine it- 
self w^ovild have shrunk from. I tried to 
C 2 



58 MELMOTH : 

swallow it, but could not, and hurried 
away, as the bell tolled, to attend vespers ; 
for I wished to have no cause of complaint 
against my neglect of duties. I hasten- 
ed down. The door was again shut ; ser- 
vice began ; and again I was compelled to 
retire without partaking of it. The next 
day I was excluded from matins; the 
same degrading scene was acted over when 
I appeared at the door of the refectory. 
Food was sent to my cell, that a dog would 
have rejected ; and the door was shut when 
I attempted to enter the church. A thou- 
sand circumstances of persecution, too con- 
temptible, too minute, either for recollection 
or repetition, but infinitely harassing to the 
sufferer, were heaped on me every day. 
Imagine, Sir, a community of upwards of 
sixty persons, all sworn to each other to 
make the life of one individual insupport- 
able ; joined in a common resolution to in- 
sult, harass, torment, and persecute him ; 
and then imagine how that individual 
can support such a life. I began to 



A TALE. 59 

dread the preservation of my reason— of 
my existence, which, miserable as it was, 
still fed on the hope of my appeal. I will 
sketch one day of my life for you. Ea? 
uno disce ovines. I went down to matins, 
and knelt at the door ; I did not dare ta 
enter. When I retired to my cell, I found 
the crucifix taken away. I was about to 
go to the Superior's apartment to complain 
of this outrage ; in the passage I happened 
to meet a monk and two boarders. They 
all shrunk close to the walls ; they drew 
in their garments, as if trembling to en- 
counter the pollution of my touch. I said 
mildly, " There is no danger ; the passage 
is wide enough.*' The monk replied, 
" Apage Satana. My children," address- 
ing the boarders, " repeat with me, apage 
Satana ; avoid the approach of that demon, 
who insults the habit he desecrates." They 
did so ; and to render the exorcism com- 
plete, they spit in my fa<.e as they passed. 
I wiped it off, and thought how little of 
the spirit of Jesus was to be found in the 



60 MELMOTII : 

house of his nominal brethren. I proceed- 
ed to the apartment of the Superior, and 
knocked timidly at the door. I heard the 
words', " Enter in peace;" and I prayed that 
it might be in peace. As I opened the 
door, I saw several monks assembled with 
the Superior. The latter uttered an ex- 
clamation of horror when he saw me, and 
threw his robe over his eyes ; the monks 
understood the signal ; the door was clos- 
ed, and I was excluded. That day I wait- 
ed several hours in my cell before any food 
was brought me. There is no state of 
feeling that exempts us from the wants of 
nature. I had no food for many days re- 
quisite for the claims of adolescence, which 
were then rapidly manifesting themselves 
in my tall, but attenuated frame. 1 de- 
scended to the kitchen to ask for my share 
of food. The cook crossed himself as I 
appeared at the door ; for even at the door 
of the kitchen I faultered at the threshold. 
He had been taught to consider me as a 
demon incarnate, and shuddered, while he 



A TALE. 61 

asked, " What do you want ?"— " Food,'* I 
replied ; " food ;— that is all."—" Well, you 
shall have it — but come no further — there 
is food." And he flung me the offal of 
the kitchen on the earth ; and I was so 
hungry, that I devoured it eagerly. The 
next day I was not so lucky ; the cook had 
learned the secret of the convent, (that of 
tormenting those whom they no longer 
have hopes of commanding), and mixed the 
fragments he threw to me, with ashes, hair, 
and dust. I could hardly pick out a mor- 
sel that, famished as I was, was eatable. 
They allowed me no water in my cell ; I 
was not permitted to partake of it at re- 
fection ; and, in the agonies of thirst, ag- 
gravated by my constant solicitude of 
mind, I was compelled to kneel at the 
brink of the well, (as I had no vessel to 
drink out of), and take up the water in 
my hand, or lap it like a dog. If I de- 
scended to the garden for a moment, they 
took the advantage of my absence to en- 
ter my cell, and remove or destroy every 



62 MELMOTH : 

article of furniture. I have told you that 
they took away my crucifix. I had still 
continued to kneel and repeat my prayers 
before the table on which it stood. That 
was taken away, — table, chair, missal, ro- 
sary, every thing, disappeared gradually ; 
and my cell presented nothing but four bare 
walls, with a bed, on which they had ren- 
dered it impossible for me to taste repose. 
Perhaps they dreaded 1 might, however, 
and they hit on an expedient, which, if it 
had succeeded, might have deprived me of 
reason as well as repose. 

" I awoke one night, and saw my cell in 
flames ; I started up in horror, but shrunk 
back on perceiving myself surrounded by 
demons, who, clothed in fire, were breath- 
ing forth clouds of it around me. Des- 
perate with horror, I rushed against the 
wall, and found what I touched was cold. 
My recollection returned, and 1 compre- 
hended, that these were hideous figures 
scrawled in phosphorus, to terrify me. I 
then returned to my bed, and as the day- 



A TALE. 6S 

light approached, observed these figures 
gradually decline. In the morning, I took 
a desperate resolution of forcing my way 
to the Superior, and speaking to him. I 
felt my reason might be destroyed amid 
the horrors they were surrounding me 
with. 

It was noon before I could work myself 
up to execute this resolution. 1 knocked 
at his cell, and when the door was opened, 
he exhibited the same horror as at my for- 
mer intrusion, but I was not to be repelled. 
" My father, 1 require you to hear me, nor 
will I quit this spot till you do so." — 
" Speak."—" They famish me, — I am not 
allowed food to support nature." — " Do 
you deserve it ?"—" Whether I do or not, 
neither the laws of God or man have yet 
condemned me to die of hunger ; and if 
you do, you commit murder." — " Have 
you any thing else to complain of?" — 
" Every thing ; I am not allowed to enter 
the church, — 1 am forbid to pray, — they 
have stripped my cell of crucifix, rosary, 



04 MELMOTH : 

and the vessel for holy water. It is im- 
possible for me to perform my devotions 
even alone." — " Your devotions !" — " My 
father, though I am not a monk, may I 
not still be a Christian ?" — " In renouncing 
your vows, you have abjured your claim 
to either character."—" But 1 am still a hu- 
man being, and as such — But I appeal not 
to your humanity, I call on your authority 
for protection. Last night, my cell was 
covered with representations of fiends. 
I awoke in the midst of flames and spec- 
tres." — " So you will at the last day !" — 
" My punishment will then be enough, it 
need not commence already."—" These are 
the phantoms of your conscience." — " My 
" father, if you will deign to examine my 
cell, you will find the traces of phosphorus 
on the walls." — " / examine your cell ? 
/enter it?" — "Am I then to expect no 
redress? Interpose your authority for the 
sake of the house over which you preside. 
Kemember that, when my appeal becomes 
pubUc, all these circumstances will become 



A TALE. 65 

SO too, and you are to judge what degree 
of credit they will attach to the commu- 
nity." ** Retire !" I did so, and found 
my application attended to, at least with re- 
gard to food, but my cell remained in the 
same dismantled state, and I continued 
under ttie same desolating interdiction from 
all communion, religious or social. I as- 
sure you, with truth, that so horrible was 
this amputation from life to me, that I 
have walked hours in the cloister and the 
passages, to place myself in the way of the 
monks, who, I knew, as they passed, would 
bestow on me some malediction or re- 
proachful epithet. Even this was better 
than the withering silence w^hich sur- 
rounded me. I began almost to receive it 
as a customary salutation, and always re- 
turned it with a benediction. In a fort- 
night my appeal was to be decided on ; 
this was a circumstance I was kept in ig- 
norance of, but the Superior had received 
a notification of it, and this precipitated his 
resolution to deprive me of the benefit of 



66 MELMOTH : 

its eventual success, by one of the most 
horrible schemes that ever entered the hu- 
man (I retract the expression) the monastic 
heart. I received an indistinct intimation 
of it the very night after my application 
to the Superior ; but had I been ap- 
prised, from the first, of the whold extent 
and bearings of their purpose, what re- 
sources could I have employed against 
it ? 

" That evening I had gone into the gar- 
den ; my heart felt unusually oppressed. 
Its thick troubled beatings, seemed like 
the vibrations of a time-piece, as it mea- 
sures our approach to some hour of sor- 
row. 

" It was twilight; the garden was 
empty; and kneeling on the ground, in 
the open air, (the only oratory they had 
left me), I attempted to pray. The at- 
tempt was in vain ;— I ceased to articulate 
sounds that had no meaning ;— and, over- 
come by a heaviness of mind and body 
inexpressible, I fell on the ground, and re- 



A TALE. 67 

TTiained extended on my face, torpid, but 
not senseless. Two figures passed, with- 
out perceiving me ; they were in earnest 
conversation. One of them said, " More 
vigorous measures must be adopted. You 
are to blame to delay them so long. You 
will be answerable for the disgrace of the 
whole community, if you persist in this 
foolish lenity." — " But his resolution re- 
mains unbroken," said the Superior, (for 
it was he). — " It will not be proof against 
the measure I have proposed."—" He is 
in your hands then ; but remember I will 
not be accountable for — " They w^ere by 
this time out of hearing. I was less ter- 
rified than you will believe, by what I had 
heard. Those who have suffered much, 
are always ready to exclaim, with the un- 
fortunate Agag, " Surely the bitterness of 
death is past." They know not, that that 
is the very moment when the sword is 
unsheathed to hew them in pieces. That 
night, I had not been long asleep, when I 
was awoke by a singular noise in my cell ; 



68 MELMOTH : 

I started up, and listened. I thought I 
heard some one hurry away barefooted. 
I knew I had no lock to my door, and 
could not prevent the intrusion of any one 
into my cell who pleased to visit it ; but 
still I believed the discipline of the con- 
vent too strict to allow of this. I compos- 
ed myself again, but was hardly asleep, 
when I was again awoke by something 
that touched me. I started up again ; a 
soft voice near me said in whispers, " Com- 
pose yourself; I am your friend." — " My 
friend ? Have I one ? — but why visit me 
at this hour ?" — " It is the only hour at 
which I am permitted to visit you."—*' But 
who are you, then ?" — " One whom these 
walls can never exclude. One to whom, 
if you devote yourself, you may expect 
services beyond the power of man." — There 
was something frightful in these words. 
I cried out, " Is it the enemy of souls that 
is tempting me?" As I uttered these 
words, a monk rushed in from the pas- 
sage, (where he had been evidently 



A TALE. 69 

waiting, for his dress was on). He ex- 
claimed, " What is the matter? You 
have alarmed me by your cries, — you pro- 
nounced the name of the infernal spirit, — 
what have you seen ? what is it you fear ?" 
I recovered myself, and said, " I have seen 
or heard nothing extraordinary. I have 
had frightful dreams, that is all. Ah ! 
Brother St Joseph, no wonder, after pass- 
ing such days, my nights should be dis- 
turbed." 

" The monk retired, and the next day 
passed as usual ; but at night the same 
whispering sounds awoke me again. The 
preceding night these sounds had only 
startled me ; they now alarmed me. In 
the darkness of night, and the solitude of 
my cell, this repeated visitation overcame 
my spirits. I began almost to admit the 
idea that I was exposed to the assaults of 
the enemy of man. I repeated a prayer, 
but the whisper, which seemed close to 
my ear, still continued. It said, " Lis- 
ten, — listen to me, and be happy. Re- 



70 MELMOTH : 

nounce your vows, place yourself under 
my protection, and you shall have no 
eause to complain of the exchange. Rise 
from your bed, trample on the crucifix 
which you will find at the foot of it, spit 
on the picture of the Virgin that lies be- 
side it, and " At these words I 

could not suppress a cry of horror. The 
voice ceased in a moment, and the same 
monk, who occupied the cell next to mine, 
rushed in with the same exclamations as 
on the preceding night ; and, as he enter- 
ed my cell, the light in his hand shewed a 
crucifix, and a picture of the blessed Vir- 
gin, placed at the foot of my bed. I had 
sprung up when the monk entered my 
cell ; I saw them, and recognized them to 
be the very crucifix and picture of the 
Virgin which had been taken from my 
cell. All the hypocritical outcries of the 
monk, at the disturbance I had again 
caused him, could not efface the impres- 
sion which this slight circumstance made 
on me. I believed, and not without rea- 



A TALE, f 1 

son, they had been left there by the hands 
of some human tempter. I started, awake 
to this horrible imposition, and required 
the monk to leave my cell. He demand- 
ed, with a frightful paleness in his looks, 
"vvhy I had again disturbed him ? said it 
was impossible to obtain repose while such 
noises were occurring in my cell ; and, 
finally, stumbling over the crucifix and 
picture, demanded how they came there. 
I answered, '* You know best." — " How, 
then, do you accuse me of a compact with 
the infernal demon ? By what means could 
these have been brought to your cell ?" — 
'•' By the very hands that removed them," 
I answered ; and these words appeared to 
produce an effect on him for a moment; 
but he retired, declaring, that if the night- 
ly disturbance in my cell continued, he 
must represent it to the Superior. I an- 
swered, the disturbance did not proceed 
from me, — but I trembled for the follow- 
ing night. 

" I had reason to tremble. That night, 



tJ MELMOTH : 

before I lay down, I repeated prayer after 
prayer, the terrors of my excommunica- 
tion pressing heavy on my soul. I also 
repeated the prayers against possession or 
temptation by the evil spirit. These I was 
compelled to utter from memory, for I 
have told you that they had not left a book 
in my cell. In repeating these prayers, 
which were very long, and somewhat ver- 
bose, I at last fell asleep. That sleep was 
not to continue long. I was again ad- 
dressed by the voice that whispered close 
to my bed. The moment I heard it, I 
rose without fear. I crept around my cell 
with my hands extended, and my feet 
bare. I could feel nothing but the empty 
walls, — not a single object, tangible or vi- 
sible, could I encounter. I lay down a- 
gain, and had hardly begun the prayer 
with which I tried to fortify myself, when 
the same sounds were repeated close to 
my ear, without the possibility either of 
my discovering from whence they proceed- 
ed, or preventing their reaching me. Thus 



A TALE. 7S 

I was completely deprived of sleep ; and if 
I dozed for a moment, the same terrible 
sounds were re-echoed in my dreams. I 
became feverish from want of rest. The 
night was passed in watching for these 
sounds, or Hstening to them, and the day 
in wild conjectures or fearful anticipa- 
tions. I felt a mixture of terror and im- 
patience inconceivable at the approach 
of night. I had a consciousness of impos- 
ture the whole time, but this gave me no 
consolation, for there is a point to which 
human malice and mischief may be carried, 
that w^ould baffle those of a demon. Every 
night the persecution w^as renewed, and 
every night it became more terrible. At 
times the voice would suggest to me the 
most unutterable impurities, — at another, 
blasphemies that w^ould make a demon 
shudder. Then it would applaud me in a 
tone of derision, and assure me of the 
final success of my appeal, then change tQ 
the most appalling menaces. The wretch- 
ed sleep 1 obtained, during the intervals 

VOL. II. D 



74 MELMOTH i 

of this visitation, was any thing but re- 
freshing. I would awake in a cold per- 
spiration, catching at the bed-furniture, 
and repeating in an inarticulate voice, the 
last sounds that had rung in my closing 
ears. I would start up and see the bed 
surrounded by monks, who assured me 
they had been disturbed by my cries,— 
that they had hurried in terror to my cell. 
Then they would cast looks of fear and 
consternation on each other and on me ; 
say, " Something extraordinary is the mat- 
ter, — something presses on your mind that 
you will not disburden it of" They im- 
plored me, in the most awful names, and 
for the interests of my salvation, to dis- 
close the cause of these extraordinary visi- 
tations. At these words, however agitat- 
ed before, I always became calm. I said, 
" Nothing is the matter, — why do you in- 
trude into my cell?" They shook their 
heads, and affected to retire slowly and re- 
luctantly, as if from pity of my dreadful 
situation, while 1 repeated, " Ah, Brother 



A TALE. 75 

Justin, ah Brother Clement, I see yoti, 1 
understand you, — remember there is a God 
in heaven." 

" One night I lay for a considerable 
time without hearing any sound. I fell a- 
sleep, but Avas soon awoke by an extraor- 
dinary light. I sat up in my bed, and be- 
held displayed before me the mother of 
God, in all the glorious and irradiated in- 
carnation of beatitude. She hovered, ra- 
ther than stood, in an atmosphere of light 
at the foot of my bed, and held a crucifix 
in her hand, while she appeared to invite 
me, with a benign action, to kiss the five 
mysterious wounds*. For a moment I 
almost believed in the actual presence of 
this glorious visitor, but just then the voice 
was heard louder than ever, " Spurn them, 
— spit on them, — you are mine, and I claim 



* Vide Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History for the 
truth of this part of the narrative. I have suppress- 
ed circumstances in the original too horrible for mo- 
dem ears. 



76 MELMOTH r 

this homage from my vassal." At these 
words the figure disappeared instantly, 
and the voice was renewing its whispers, 
but they were repeated to an insensible 
ear, for I fell into a swoon. I could easily 
distinguish between this state and sleep, 
by the deadly sickness, the cold sweats, 
and the horrid sense of evanition, that 
preceded it, and by the gasping, sobbing, 
choaking efforts that attended my recovery. 
In the mean time the whole community 
carried on and even aggravated the terrible 
delusion, which, while it was my torment 
to detect, it was my greater to be the vic- 
tim of. When art assumes the omnipo- 
tence of reality, when we feel we suffer as 
much from an illusion as from truth, our 
sufferings lose all dignity and all consola- 
tion. We turn demons against ourselves, 
and laugh at what we are writhing under. 
All day long I was exposed to the stare of 
horror, the shudder of suspicion, and, 
worst of all, the hastily -a verted glance of hy- 
pocritical commiseration, that dropt its pity- 



A TALE. 77 

ing ray on me for a moment, and was then 
instantly raised to heaven, as if to implore 
forgiveness for the involuntary crime of 
compassionating one whom God had re- 
nounced. When I encountered any of 
them in the garden, they would strike in- 
to another walk, and cross themselves in 
my sight. If I met them in the passages 
of the convent, they drew their garments 
close, turned their faces to the wall, and 
told their beads as I went by. If I ven- 
tured to dip my hands in the holy water 
that stood at the door of the church, it 
was thrown out before my face. Certain 
extraordinary precautions were adopted by 
the whole community against the power 
of the evil one. Forms of exorcism were 
distributed, and additional prayers were 
used in the service of matins and vespers. 
A report was industriously diffiised, that 
Satan was permitted to visit a favoured 
and devoted servant of his in the convent, 
and that all the brethren might expect the 
redoubled malice of his assaults. The effect 



78 MELMOTH : 

of this on the young boarders was inde- 
scribable. They flew with the speed of 
lightning from me, whenever they saw 
me. If accident forced us to be near each 
other for a moment, they were armed with 
holy water, which they flung at me in 
pailfuls ; and when that failed, what cries, 
— what convulsions of terror ! They knelt, 
— they screamed, — they shut their eyes, — 
they cried, " Satan have mercy on me, — 
do not fix your infernal talons on me, — 
take your victim," and they mentioned 
my name. The terror that I inspired I at 
last began to feel. I began to believe my- 
self — I know not what, whatever they 
thought me. This is a dreadful state of 
mind, but one impossible to avoid. In 
some circumstances, where the whole 
world is against us, we begin to take its 
part against ourselves, to avoid the wither- 
ing sensation of being alone on our own 
side. Such was my appearance, too, my 
flushed and haggard look, my torn dress, 
my unequal gait, my constant internal 



A TALE. 79 

muttering, and my complete isolation from 
the habits of the house, that it was no 
wonder I should justify, by my exterior, 
all of horrible and awful that might be 
supposed passing in my mind. Such an 
impression I must have made on the 
minds of the younger members. They 
had been taught to hate me, but their ha- 
tred was now combined with fear, and 
such a union is the most terrible amid all 
the complications of human passion. De- 
solate as my cell was, I retired to it early, as 
I was excluded from the exercises of the 
community. The bell for vespers would 
ring, I would hear the steps of those who 
were hastening to join in the service of 
God, and tedious as that service had once 
appeared to me, I w^ould now have given 
worlds to be permitted to join in it, as a 
defence against that horrible midnight 
mass of Satan*, that I was awaiting 

"* This expression is not exaggerated. In the 
dreams of sorcery, or of imposture, the evil spirit 



80 MELMOTH : 

to be summoned to. 1 knelt however 
in my cell, and repeated what prayers 
I could recollect, while every toll of the 
bell struck on my heart, and the chaunt of 
the choir from below sounded like a repul- 
sive echo to an answer which my fears al- 
ready anticipated from heaven. 

" One evening that I still continued to 
pray, and audibly, as the monks passed 
my cell they said, " Do you presume to 
pray ? Die, desperate wretch, — die and be 
damned. Precipitate yourself into the in- 
fernal gulph at once, no longer desecrate 
these walls by your presence." At these 
words I only redoubled my prayers ; but 
this gave greater offence, for churchmen 
cannot bear to hear prayers uttered in a 
form different from their own. The cry 
of a solitary individual to God, sounds like 
profanation in their ears. They ask. Why 

was supposed to perform a mass in derision ; and in 
Beaumont and Fletcher there is mention of " howl- 
ing a black Santis," i. e. Satan's mass. 



A TALE. 81 

do they not employ our form ? How dare 
they hope to be heard ? Alas ! is it forms 
then that God regards ? or is it not rather 
the prayer of the heart which alone reaches 
him, and prospers in its petition ? As they 
called out, passing my cell, '* Perish, im- 
pious wretch, perish, — God will not hear 
you," I answered them on my knees with 
blessings, — which of us had the spirit of 
prayer? That night was one of trial I 
could no longer support. My frame was 
exhausted, my mind excited, and, owing 
to our frail nature, this battle of the senses 
and soul is never long carried on without 
the worst side remaining conqueror. I 
was no sooner laid down than the voice 
began to whisper. I began to pray, but 
my head swam round, my eyes flashed 
fire, — fire almost tangible, my cell appear- 
ed in flames. Recollect my frame worn 
out with famine, my mind worn out with 
persecution. I struggled with what I was 
conscious was delirium, — but this con- 
sciousness aggravated its horror. It is bet- 

D 2 



82 MELMOTH : 

ter to be in ad at once, than to believe that 
all the world is sworn to think and make 
you be so, in spite of your own conscious- 
ness of your sanity. The whispers this 
night were so horrible, so full of ineffable 
abominations, of — 1 cannot think of them, 
—that they maddened my very ear. My 
senses seemed deranged along with my in- 
tellect. I will give you an instance, it is 

but a slight one, of the horrors which " 

Here the Spaniard whispered Melmoth *. 
The hearer shuddered, and the Spaniard 
went on in an agitated tone. 

*•' I could bear it no longer. I sprung 
from my bed, I ran through the gallery 
like a maniac, knocking at the doors of 
the cells, and exclaiming, " Brother such 



* We do not venture to guess at the horrors of 
this whisper, but every one conversant with eccle- 
siastical history knows, that Tetzel offered indulgen- 
ces in Germany, even on the condition that the sin- 
ner had been guilty of the impossible crime of vio- 
latinjsj the mother of God 



A TALE. S3 

a one, pray for me, — pray for me, I be- 
seech you." I roused the whole convent. 
Then I flew down to the church ; it was 
open, and I rushed in. I ran up the aisle, 
I precipitated myself before the altar, I 
embraced the images, I clung to the cruci- 
fix with loud and reiterated supplications. 
The monks, awakened by my outcries, or 
perhaps on the watch for them, descended 
in a body to the church, but, perceiving I 
was there, they would not enter, — they re- 
mained at the doors, with lights in theii* 
hands, gazing on me. It was a singular 
contrast between me, hurrying round the 
church almost in the dark, (for there were 
but a few lamps burning dimly), and the 
groupe at the door, whose expression of 
horror was strongly marked by the light, 
which appeared to have deserted me to 
concentrate itself among them. The most- 
impartial person on earth miglit have sup- 
posed me deranged, or possessed, or both, 
from the state in which they saw me. 
Heaven knows, too, what construction 



84 MELMOTH : 

might have been put on my wild actions, 
which the surrounding darkness exagge- 
rated and distorted, or on the prayers 
which I uttered, as I included in them the 
horrors of the temptation against which I 
implored protection. Exhausted at length, 
I fell to the ground, and remained there, 
without the power of moving, but able to 
hear and observe every thing that passed. 
I heard them debate whether they should 
leave me there or not, till the Superior 
commanded them to remove that abomi- 
nation from the sanctuary ; and such was 
the terror of me into which they had act- 
ed themselves, that he had to repeat his 
orders before he could procure obedience 
to them. They approached me at last, with 
the same caution that they would an infect- 
ed corse, and dragged me out by the habit, 
leaving me on the paved floor before the 
door of the church. They then retired, 
and in this state I actually fell asleep, and 
continued so till I was awoke by the bell for 
matins. I recollected myself, and attempt- 



A TALE. 85 

ed to rise ; but my having slept on a damp 
floor, when in a fever from terror and ex- 
citement, had so cramped my limbs, that 
I could not accomplish this without the 
most exquisite pain. As the community 
passed in to matins, I could not suppress 
a few cries of pain. They must have seen 
what was the matter, but not one of them 
offered me assistance, nor did I dare to im- 
plore it. By slow and painful efforts, I 
at last reached my cell ; but, shuddering 
at the sight of the bed, I threw myself on 
the floor for repose. 

" I was aware that some notice must be 
taken of a circumstance so extraordinary — 
that such a subversion of the order and 
tranquillity of a convent, would force an 
inquiry, even if the object was less remark- 
able. But I had a sad foreboding, (for 
suffering makes us full of presages), that 
this inquiry, however conducted, would 
terminate unfavourably to me. I was the 
Jonah of the vessel — let the storm blow 
from what point it would, 1 felt the lot 



86 melmoth: 

was to fall on me. About noon, I was 
summoned to the apartment of the Supe- 
rior. I went, but not as at former times, 
with a mixture of supplication and remon- 
strance on my lips, — with hope and fear 
in my heart, — in a fever of excitement or 
of terror, — I went sullen, squalid, listless, 
reckless; my physical strength, borne 
down by fatigue and want of sleep; my 
mental, by persecution, incessant and in- 
supportable. I went no longer shrinking 
from, and deprecating their worst, but de- 
fying, almost desiring it, in the terrible 
and indefinite curiosity of despair. The 
apartment was full of monks ; the Supe- 
rior stood among them, while they formed 
a semicircle at a respectful distance from 
him. I must have presented a miserable 
contrast to these men arrayed against me 
in their pride of power, — their long and 
not ungraceful habits, giving their figures 
an air of solemnity, perhaps more imposing 
than splendour — while I stood opposed to 
them, ragged, meagre, livid, and obdurate. 



A TALE. 87 

the very personification of an evil spirit 
summoned before the angels of judgment. 
The Superior addressed me in a long dis- 
course, in which he but slightly touched 
on the scandal given by the attempt to re- 
peal my vows. He also suppressed any 
allusion to the circumstance which was 
known to every one in the convent but 
myself, that my appeal w^ould be decided 
on in a few days. But he adverted in 
terms that (in spite of my consciousness 
that they were hollow) made me shudder, 
to the horror and consternation diffused 
through the convent by my late tremen- 
dous visitation, as he called it. Satan hath 
desired to have you, he said, because you 
have put yourself within his power, by 
your impious reclamation of your vows. 
You are the Judas among the brethren ; 
a branded Cain amid a primitive family ; 
a scape-goat that struggles to burst from 
the hands of the congregation into the 
wilderness. The horrors that your pre- 
sence is hourly heaping on us here, are 



88 MELMOTH : 

not only intolerable to the discipline of a 
religious house, but to the peace of civi- 
lized society. There is not a monk who 
can sleep within three cells of you. You 
disturb them by the most horrible cries — 
you exclaim that the infernal spirit is per- 
petually beside your bed — that he is whis- 
pering in your ears. You fly from cell to 
cell, supplicating the prayers of the breth- 
ren. Your shrieks disturb the holy sleep 
of the community — that sleep which they 
snatch only in the intervals of devotion. 
AW order is broken, all discipline subverted, 
while you remain among us. The iniagi- 
nations of the younger members are at 
once polluted and inflamed, by the idea of 
the infernal and impure orgies which the 
demon celebrates in your cell; and of 
which we know not whether your cries, 
(which all can hear), announce triumph in, 
or remorse for. You rush at midnight into 
the church, deface the images, revile the 
crucifix, spurn at the altar; and when the 
whole community is forced, by this unpa- 



A TALE. 89 

ralleled atrocity of blasphemy, to drag you 
from the spot you are desecrating, you dis- 
tiirb, by your cries, those who are passing 
to the service of God. In a word, your 
howls, your distortions, your demoniac 
language, habits, and gestures, have but 
too well justified the suspicion enter- 
tained when you first entered the con- 
vent. You were abominable from your 
very birth, — you were the offspring of 
sin — you are conscious of it. Amid the 
livid paleness, that horrible unnatural 
white that discolours your very lips, I 
see a tinge like crimson burning on 
your cheek at the mention of it. The 
demon who was presiding at your natal 
hour — the demon of impurity and anti- 
monasticism — pursues you in the very 
w^alls of a convent. The Almighty, in my 
voice, bids you begone;— depart, and trou- 
ble us no more. — Stop," he added, as he 
saw I was obeying his directions literally, 
" hold, the interests of religion, and of the 
community, have required that I should 



gV* 51ELM0TH : 

take particular notice of the extraordinary 
circumstances that have haunted your un- 
hallowed presence within these walls. In 
a short time you may expect a visit from 
the Bishop — prepare yourself for it as you 
may." I considered these as the final 
words addressed to me, and was about to 
retire, when I was recalled. I was desired 
to utter some words, which every one was 
eager to put into my mouth, of expostula- 
tion, of remonstrance, of supplication. I 
resisted them all as steadily as if I had 
known (which I did not) that the Bishop 
had himself instituted the examination into 
the deranged state of the convent; and 
that instead of the Superior inviting the 
Bishop to examine into the cause of the 
disturbance in his convent, (the very last 
step he would have taken), the Bishop, (a 
man whose character will shortly be deve- 
loped), had been apprized of the scandal 
of the convent, and had determined to 
take the matter into his own hands. 
Sunk in solitude and persecution, I knew 



A TALE. 91 

not that all JNIadrid was on fire, — that the 
Bishop had determined to be no longer a 
passive hearer of the extraordinary scenes 
reported to pass in the convent, — that, in 
a word, my exorcism and my appeal were 
quivering in alternate scales, and that the 
Superior himself doubted which way the 
scale might incline. All this I was igno- 
rant of, for no one dared to tell it to me. 
I therefore was about to retire without 
uttering a word in answer to the many 
whispered speeches to humble myself to 
the Superior, to implore his intercession 
with the Bishop to suspend this disgrace- 
ful examination that threatened us all. I 
broke from them as they surrounded me ; 
and standing calm and sullen at the door, 
I threw a retorting look at them, and said, 
" God forgive you all, and grant you such 
an acquittal at his judgment-seat, as I he- 
sitate not to claim at that of the Bishop- 
visitant." These words, though uttered 
by a ragged demoniac, (as they thought 
me), made them tremble. Truth is rarely 



92l :WELMOTH : 

heard in convents, and therefore its lan- 
guage is equally emphatical and porten- 
tous, 

" The monks crossed themselves, and, 
as I left the apartment, repeated, " But 
how then,— what if we prevented this 
mischief?"—" By what means?"—" By 
any that the interests of religion may 
suggest, — the character of the convent is 
at stake. The Bishop is a man of a strict 
and scrutinizing character, — he will keep 
his eyes open to the truth, — he will in- 
quire into facts, — what will become of us ? 

Were it not better that " " What?" 

— " You comprehend us." — " And if I 
dared to comprehend you, the time is 
too short.''—" We have heard of the death 

of maniacs being very sudden, of " 

« What do you dare to hint at ?"— " No- 
thing, we only spoke of what every one 
knows, that a profound sleep is often a re- 
storative to lunatics. He is a lunatic, as 
all the convent are ready to swear, — a 
wretch possessed by the infernal spirit, 



A TALE. ^S 

whom he invocates every night in his cell, 
— he disturbs the whole convent by his 
outcries." 

The Superior all this time walked impa- 
tiently up and down his apartment. He 
entangled his fingers in his rosary, — he 
threw on the monks angry looks from 
time to time ; at last he said, " I am my- 
self disturbed by his cries, — his wander- 
ings, — his undoubted commerce with the 
enemy of souls. I need rest, — I require 
a profound sleep to repair my exhausted 
spirits, — idiat would you prescribe ?" Se- 
veral pressed forward, not understanding 
the hint, and eagerly recommended the 
common opiates — Mithridate, &c. &c. An 
old monk whispered in his ear, " Lauda- 
num, — it will procure a deep and sound 
sleep. Try it, my father, if you want 
rest ; but to make the experiment sure, 
were it not best to try it first on another ?" 
The Superior nodded, and the party were 
about to disperse, when the Superior 
caught the old monk by his habit, and 



ii MELMOTH : 

whispered, " But no murder !"— -" Oh no ! 
only profound sleep. — What matter when 
he wakes ? It must be to suffering in this 
life or the next. We are not guilty in 
the business. What signifies a few mo- 
ments sooner or later V The Superior 
was of a timid and passionate character. 
He still kept hold of the monk's habit ; — 
he whispered, " But it must not be 
known." — " But who can know it ?" At 
this moment the clock struck, and an old 
ascetic monk, who occupied a cell adjacent 
to the Superior's, and who had accustom- 
ed himself to the exclamation, " God 
knoweth all things," whenever the clock 
struck, repeated it aloud. The Superior 
quitted his hold of the monk's habit, — the 
monk crawled to his cell God-struck, if I 
may use the expression, — the laudanum 
was not administered that night, — the 
voice did not return, — I slept the entire 
night, and the whole convent was deliver- 
ed from the harassings of the infernal 
spirit. Alas! none haunted it, but that 



A TALE. 94 

spirit which the natural malignity of soli* 
tude raises within the circle of every heart, 
and forces us, from the terrible economy 
of misery, to feed on the vitals of others, 
that we may spare our own. 

" This conversation was repeated to me 
afterwards by a monk who was on his dy- 
ing bed. He had witnessed it, and I have 
no reason to doubt his sincerity. In fact, 
1 always considered it as rather a palliation 
than an aggravation of their cruelty to me. 
They had made me suffer worse than 
many deaths, — the single suffering would 
have been instantaneous, — the single act 
would have been mercy. The next day 
the visit of the Bishop was expected. 
There was an indescribable kind of terri- 
fied preparation among the community. 
This house was the first in Madrid, and 
the singular circumstance of the son of one 
of the highest families in Spain having en- 
tered it in early youth, — having protest- 
ed against his vows in a few months, — 
having been accused of being in a compact 



dft MELMOTH : 

with the infernal spirit a few weeks after, 
— the hope of a scene of exorcism, — the 
douht of the success of my appeal, — the 
probable interference of the Inquisition, — 
the possible festival of an auto da fe, — had 
set the imagination of all Madrid on fire; 
and never did an audience long more for 
the drawing up of the curtain at a popular 
opera, than the religious and irreligious of 
Madrid did for the developement of the 
scene which was acting at the convent of 
the Ex-Jesuits. 

" In Catholic countries, Sir, religion is 
the national drama ; the priests are the 
principal performers, the populace the au- 
dience ; and whether the piece concludes 
with a " l5on Giovanni" plunging in 
flames, or the beatification of a saint, the 
applause and the enjoyment is the same. 

" I feared my destiny was to be the 
former. I knew nothing of the Bishop, 
and hoped nothing from his visit ; but my 
hopes began to rise in proportion to the 
visible fears of the society. 1 argued. 



A TALE.* §f^ 

with the natural malignity of wretched- 
ness, " If they tremhle, I may exult. 
When suffenncj is thus weighed against 
suffering, the hand is never steady ; we 
are always disposed to make the balance 
incline a little on our own side. The 
Bishop came early, and passed some hours 
with the Superior in his own apartment. 
During this interval, there was a stillness 
in the house that was strongly contrasted 
with its previous agitation. I stood alone 
in my cell, — stood, for I had no seat left 
me. I said to myself, " This event bodes 
neither good or evil to me. I am not 
guilty of what they accuse me of They 
never can prove it, — an accomplice with 
Satan ! — the victim of diabolical delusion I 
— Alas! my only crime is my involuntary 
subjection to the delusions they have prac- 
tised on me. This man, this Bishop, can- 
not give me freedom, but he may at least 
do me justice." All this time the com- 
munity were in a fever — the character of 
the house was at stake — my situation was 

VOL. IL E 



9$ MELMOTH : 

notorious. They had laboured to repre- 
sent me as a possessed being beyond their 
walls, and to inake me appear as one with- 
in them. The hour of trial approached. 
For the honour of human nature, — from 
the dread of violating decency, — from the 
dread of apparently violating truth, I will 
not attempt to relate the means they had 
recourse to the morning of the Bishop's 
visitation, to qualify me to perform the 
part of a possessed, insane, and blasphe- 
mous wretch. The four monks I have be- 
fore mentioned, were the principal execu- 
tioners, (I must call them so). — Under 
pretence that there was no part of my per- 
son which was not under the influence of 
the demon, * # » 

* * -* * 

" This was not enough. I was deluged 
almost to suffocation with aspersions of 

holy water. Then followed, &c. * 

* # * * 

" The result was, that I remained half- 
naked, half-drowned, gasping, choaking, 



A TALE. 99 

and delirious with rage, shame, and fear, 
when I was summoned to attend the 
Bishop, who, surrounded by the Superior 
and the community, awaited me in the 
church. This was the moment they had 
fixed on — I yielded myself to them. 1 
said, stretching out my arms, " Yes, drag 
me naked, mad — religion and nature alike 
violated in my abused figure — before your 
Bishop. If he speaks truth, — if he feels 
conscience, — woe be to you, hypocritical, 
tyrannical wretches. You have half-driven 
me mad ! — half-murdered me, by the un- 
natural cruelties you have exercised 
on me ! — and in this state you drag me 
before the Bishop ! Be it so, I must foUovr 
you." As I uttered these words, they 
bound my arms and legs with ropes, car- 
ried me down, and placed me at the door 
of the church, standing close to me. The 
Bishop was at the altar, the Superior near 
him ; the community filled the choir. 
They flung me down Uke a heap of car- 
rion, and retreated as if they fled frona the 



100 MEL MOTH: 

pollution of my touch. This sight struck 
the Bishop : He said, in a loud voice, 
*^ Rise, unhappy, and come forward." I 
answered, in a voice whose tones appeared 
to thrill him, " Bid them unbind me, and I 
will obey you." The Bishop turned a cold 
and yet indignant look on the Superior, 
who immediately approached and whisper- 
ed him. This whispering consultation was 
carried on for some time; but, though 
lying on the ground, I could perceive the 
Bishop shook his head at every whisper of 
the Superior; and the end of the busi- 
ness was an order to unbind me. I did 
not fare much the better for this order, for 
the four monks were still close to me. 
They held my arms as they led me up 
the steps to the altar. 1 was then, for 
the first time, placed opposite to the 
Bishop. He was a man, the effect of 
whose physiognomy was as indelible as 
that of his character. — The one left its 
impress on the senses, as strongly as the 
other did on the soul. He was tall, ma- 



A TALE. 101 

jestic, and hoary; not a feeling agitated 
his frame — not a passion had left its trace 
on his features. He was a marble statue 
of Episcopacy, chiselled out by the hand 
of Catholicism, — a figure magnificent and 
motionless. His cold black eyes did not 
seem to see you, when they were turn- 
ed on you. His voice, ^vhen it reached 
you, did not address you, but your soul. 
Such was his exterior: — for the rest, his 
character was unimpeachable, his discipline 
exemplary, his life that of an Anchorite 
hewed out in stone. But he was partially 
suspected of what is called liberality in 
opinions, (that is, of an inclination to Pro- 
testantism), and the sanctity of his charac- 
ter went bail in vain for this imputed he- 
terodoxy, which the Bishop could hardly 
redeem by his rigid cognizance of every 
conventwal abuse in his district, among 
whicli my convent happened to be. Such 
was the man before w horn I stood. xVt 
the command to unloose me, the Superior 
shewed much agitation ; but the command 



10|2 MELMOTH : 

was positive, and I was released. I was 
then between the four monks, who held 
me, and I felt that my appearance must 
have justified the impression he had re- 
ceived. I was ragged, famished, livid, and 
on fire, with the horrible treatment 1 had 
just received. I hoped, however, that my 
submission to whatever was to be perform- 
ed, might, in some degree, redeem the opi- 
nion of the Bishop. He went wdth evident 
reluctance through the forms of exorcism, 
which were delivered in Latin, while all 
the time, the monks crossed themselves, 
and the Acolytes were not sparing of holy 
water and of incense. Whenever the terms 
" diabole te adjuro" occurred, the monks 
who held me twisted my arms, so that I 
appeared to make contortions, and uttered 
cries of pain. This, at first, seemed to dis- 
turb the Bishop; but when the form of 
exorcism was over, he commanded me to 
approach the altar alone. I attempted to 
do so; but the four monks surrounding 
me, made it appear an act of great diffi- 



A TALE. 103 

culty. He said, " Stand apart — let him 
alone." They were compelled to obey. I 
advanced alone, trembling. 1 knelt. The 
Bishop, placing his stole on my head, de- 
manded, " Did I believe in God, and the 
holy Catholic church ?" Instead of an- 
swering, I shrieked, flung off the stole, and 
trampled in agony on the steps of the al- 
tar. The Bishop retreated, while the Su- 
perior and the rest advanced. 1 collected 
courage as 1 saw them approach ; and, 
without uttering a word, pointed to the 
pieces of broken glass which had been 
thrown on tlfe steps where I stood, and 
which had pierced me through my torn 
sandals. The Bishop instantly ordered a 
monk to sweep them away with the sleeve 
of his tunic. The order was obeyed in a 
moment, and the next I stood before him 
without fear or pain. He continued to 
ask, " Why do you not pray in the 
church?"—" Because its doors are shut 
against me." — "How? what is this? A 
memorial is in my hands urging many 



104 MELMOTH : 

complaints against you, and this among 
the first, that you do not pray in the 
church." — " I have told you the doors 
of the church are shut against me. — 
Alas ! I could no more open them, than 
I could open the hearts of the commu- 
nity — every thing is shut against me 
here." He turned to the Superior, who 
answered, '* The doors of the church 
are always shut to the enemies of God." 
The Bishop said, with his usual stern 
calmness, " I am asking a plain question 
— evasive and circuitous answers will not 
do. Have the doors of thei church been 
shut against this wretched being? — have 
3'^ou denied him the privilege of addressing 
G^d?" — " I did so, because I thought and 
believed — " " I ask not what you thought 
or believed ; I ask a plain answer to a mat- 
ter-of-fact question. Did you, or did you 
not, deny him access to thehouseof God?" — 
" I had reason to believe that — " " 1 warn 
you, these answers may compel me to make 
you exchange situations in one moment 



A TALE. 105 

with the object you accuse. Did you, or 
did you not, shut tiie doors of the church 
against him ? — answer yes or no." The 
Superior, trembling with fear and rage, 
said, " 1 did; and 1 was justified in doing 
so." — " That is for another tribunal to 
judge. But it seems you plead guilty to 
the fact of which you accuse him " The 
Superior was dumb. The Bishop then 
examining his paper, addressed me again, 
" How is it that the monks cannot sleep 
in their cells from the disturbance you 
cause?" — " 1 know not — you must ask 
them." — " Does not the evil spirit visit 
you nightly ? Are not your blasphemies, 
your execrable impurities, disgorged even 
in the ears of those who have the misfor- 
tune to be placed near you ? Are you 
not the terror and the torment of the 
whole community ?" I answered, " I am 
what they have made me. 1 do not deny 
there are extraordinary noises in my cell, 
but they can best account for them. 1 am 
assailed by whispers close to my bed-side : 
E 2 



106 MELMOTH : 

It seems these whispers reach the ears of 
the brethren, for they burst into my cell, 
and take advantage of the terror with 
which I am overwhelmed, to put the most 
incredible constructions on it." — " Are 
there no cries, then, heard in your cell at 
night?" — " Yes, cries of terror — cries ut- 
tered not by one who is celebrating infernal 
orgies, but dreading them."—" But the 
blasphemies, the imprecations, the impu- 
rities, which proceed from your lips?" — 
" Sometimes, in irrepressible terror, I have 
repeated the sounds that were suggested 
to my ears ; but it was always with an ex- 
clamation of horror and aversion, that 
proved these sounds were not uttered but 
echoed by me, — as a man may take up a 
reptile in his hand, and gaze on its hi- 
deousness a moment, before he flings it 
from him. I take the whole community 
to witness the truth of this. The cries I 
uttered, the expressions I used, were evi- 
dently those of hostility to the infernal 
suggestions which had been breathed into 



A TALE. 107 

my ears. Ask the whole community — 
they must testify, thai when they broke 
into my cell, they found me alone, trem- 
bling, convulsed. That I was the victim 
of those disturbances, they affected to 
complain of; and though I never was able 
to guess the means by which this persecu- 
tion was effected, I am not rash in ascrib- 
ing it to the hands that covered the walls 
of my cell with representations of demons, 
the traces of which still remain." — " You 
are also accused of having burst into the 
church at midnight, defaced the images, 
trampled on the crucifix, and performed 
all the acts of a demon violating the sanc- 
tuary." At this accusation, so unjust and 
cruel, I was agitated beyond controul. I 
exclaimed, " I flew to the church for pro- 
tection in a paroxysm of terror, which their 
machinations had filled me with ! I flew 
there at night, because it was shut against 
me during the day, as you \m\e discovered! 
1 prostrated myself before the cross, instead 
of trampling on it ! I embraced the ima- 



108 MELMOTH : 

ges of the blessed saints, instead of violat- 
ing them ! And 1 doubt whether prayers 
more sincere were ever offered within these 
walls, than those I uttered that night a- 
mid helplessness, terror, and persecutions 1" 
— " Did you n )t obstruct and deter the 
community next morning by your cries, as 
they attempted to enter the church ?"— ." I 
was paralyzed from the effects of lying all 
night on the stone pavement, where they 
had flung me. 1 attempted to rise and 
crawl away at their approach, and a few 
cries of pain were extorted from me by my 
efforts to do so— efforts rendered more 
painful by their refusing to offer me the 
slightest assistance. In a word, the whole 
is a fabrication. I flew to the church to 
implore for mercy, and they represent it 
as the outrages of an apostate spirit. 
Might not the same arbitrary and absurd 
construction be put on the daily visits of 
multitudes of afflicted souls, who weep 
and groan audibly as 1 did ? If I attempt- 
ed to overturn the crucifix, to deface the 



A TALE. 109 

images, would not the marks of this vio- 
lence remain ? Would they not have been 
preserved with care, to substantiate the ac- 
cusation against me ? Is there a trace of 
them ? — there is not, there cannot be, be- 
cause they never existed." The Bishop 
paused. An appeal to his feahngs would 
have been vain, but this appeal to facts 
had its full effect. After some time, he 
said, " You can have no objection, then, 
to render before the whole community the 
same homage to the representations of the 
Redeemer and the holy saints, that you 
say it was your purpose to render them 
that night ?"— *' None." A cruciHx was 
brought me, which I kissed with reverence 
and unction, and prayed, while the tears 
streamed from my eyes, an interest in the 
infinite merits of the sacrifice it represent- 
ed. The Bishop then said, ** Make a 
deed of faith, of love, of hope." 1 did so ; 
and though they were extempore, my ex- 
pressions, I could perceive, made the dig- 
nified ecclesiastics who attended on the 



110 MELMOTH : 

Bishop, cast on each other looks in which 
were mingled compassion, interest, and ad- 
miration. The Bishop said, " Where did 
you learn those prayers ?"— " My heart is 
my only teacher — I have no other — I am 
allowed no book." — " How ! — recollect 
what you say." — " I repeat I have none. 
They have taken away my breviary, my 
crucifix ; — they have stript my cell of all 
its furniture. I kneel on the floor — I pray 
from the heart. If you deign to visit my 
cell, you will find I have told you the 
truth." At these words, the Bishop cast 
a terrible look on the Superior. He re- 
covered himself, however, immediately, 
for he was a man unaccustomed to any 
emotion, and felt it at once a suspension 
of his habits, and an infringement of his 
rank. In a cold voice he bid me retire ; 
then, as I was obeying him, he recalled 
me, — my appearance for the first time 
seemed to strike him. He was a man so 
absorbed in the contemplation of that 
waveless and frozen tide of duty in which 



A TALE. Ill 

his mind was anchored, \vithout fluctua- 
tion, progress, or improvement, that phy- 
sical objects must be presented before him 
a long time before they made the least im- 
pression on him, — his senses were almost 
ossified. Thus he had come to examine 
a supposed demoniac; but he had made 
up his mind that there must be injustice 
and imposture in the case, and he acted in 
the matter with a spirit, decision, and in- 
tegrity, that did him iionour. 

" But, all the time, the horror and mi- 
sery of my appearance, which would have 
made the first impression on a man whose 
feelings were at all external, made the 
last. They struck him as I slowly and 
painfully crawled from the steps of the al- 
tar, and the impression was forcible in pro- 
portion to its slowness. He called me 
back and inquired, as if he saw me for 
the first time, " How is it your habit is so 
scandalously ragged ?" At these words I 
thought 1 could disclose a scene that would 
have added to the Superior's huiiiiliaiion, 



112 MELMOTH: 

but I only said, " It is the consequence of 
the ill treatment 1 have experienced/* 
Several other questions of the same kind, 
relating to my appearance, which was de- 
plorable enough, followed, and at last I 
was forced to make a full discovery. The 
Bishop was incensed at the detail more 
than was credible. Rigid minds, when 
they yield themselves to emotion, do it 
with a vehemence inconceivable, for to 
them every thing is a duty, and passion 
(when it occurs) among the rest. Perhaps 
the novelty of emotion, too, may be a de- 
lightful surprise to them. 

" More than all this was the case now 
with the good Bishop, who was as pure as 
he was rigid, and shrunk with horror, dis- 
gust, and indignation, at the detail I 
was compelled to give, which the Supe- 
rior trembled at my uttering, and which 
the community dared not to contradict. 
He resumed his cold manner ; for to him 
feeling was an effort, and rigour a ha- 
bit, and he ordered me again to retire. I 



A TALE. 113 

obeyed, and went to my cell. The walls 
were as bare as 1 had described them, but, 
even contrasted with all the splendour and 
array of the scene in the church, they 
seemed emblazoned with my triumph. 
A dazzhng vision passed before me for a 
moment, then all subsided; and, in the so- 
litude of my cell, I knelt and implored 
the Almighty to touch the Bishop's heart, 
and impress on him the moderation and 
simplicity with which 1 had spoken. As 
I was thus employed, I heard steps in the 
passage. They ceased for a moment, and 
I was silent. It appeared the persons 
overheard me, and paused ; and these few 
words, uttered in solitude, made, I found, 
a deep impression on them. A few mo- 
ments after the Bishop, with some digni- 
fied attendants, followed by the Superior, 
entered my cell. The former all stopped, 
horror-struck at its appearance. 

" I have told you. Sir, that my cell now 
consisted of four hare walls and a bed ; — 
it was a scandalous, degrading sight. I 



114 MELMOTH : 

was kneeling in the middle of the floor, 
God knows, without the least idea of pro- 
ducing an effect. The Bishop gazed a- 
round him for some time, while the eccle- 
siastics who attended him testified their 
horror by looks and attitudes that needed 
no interpretation. The Bishop, after a 
pause, turned to the Superior, " Well, 
what do you say to this ?" The Superior 
hesitated, and at last said, " I v/as igno- 
rant of this." — " That is false," said the 
Bishop ; " and even if it was true, it would 
be your crimination, not your apology. 
Your duty binds you to visit the cells 
every day ; how could you be ignorant of 
the shameful state of this cell, v\^ithout ne- 
glecting your own duties ?" He took seve- 
ral turns about the cell, followed by the 
ecclesiastics, shrugging their shoulders, 
and throwing on each other looks of dis- 
gust. The Superior stood disQiayed. They 
went out, and I could hear the Bishop 
say, in the passage, " All this disorder 
must be rectified before I quit the house." 



A TALE. 115 

And to the Superior, '' You are unworthy 
of the situation you hold, — you ought to 
be deposed." And he added in severer 
tones, " Catholics, monks, Christians, this 
is shocking, — horrible ! tremble for the con- 
sequences of my next visit, if the same 
disorders exist, — I promise you it shall be 
repeated soon." He then returned, and 
standing at the door of my cell, said to 
the Superior, " Take care that all the a- 
buses committed in this ceil are rectified 
before to-morrow morning." The Supe- 
rior signified his submission to this order 
in silence. 

" That evening I went to sleep on a 
bare mattress, between four dry walls. I 
slept profoundly, from exhaustion and fa- 
tigue. I awoke in the morning far be- 
yond the time for matins, and found my- 
self surrounded by all the comforts that 
can be bestowed on a cell. As if magic 
had been employed during my sleep, cru- 
cifix, breviary, desk, table, every thing 
was replaced. I sprung from bed, and ac^ 



116 MEL3I0TH: 

tually gazed in extasy around my cell. As 
the day advanced, and the hour for refec- 
tion approached, my extasy abated, and 
my terrors increased ; — it is not easy to 
pass from extreme humiliation and ntter 
abhorrence, to your former state in the so- 
ciety of which you are a member. When 
the bell rung I went down. I stood at 
the door for a moment, — then, with an 
impulse, like despair, 1 entered, and took 
my usual place. No opposition was made, 
— not a word was said. The community 
separated after dinner. 1 watched for the 
toll of the beil for vespers, — 1 imagined 
that would be decisive. The bell tolled at 
last, — the monks assembled. 1 joined them 
without opposition, — I took my place in 
the choir, — my triumph was complete, and 
I trembled at it. i\las ! in what moment 
of success do we not feel a sensation of 
terror ? Our destiny always acts the part 
of the ancient slave to us, who was re- 
quired every morning to remind the mo- 
narch that he was a man; and it seldom 



A TALE. 117 

neglects to fulfil its own predictions be- 
fore the evening. Two days passed away, 
— the storm that had so long agitated us, 
seemed to have sunk into a sudden calm. 
I resumed my former piace, — i perforned 
the customary duties, — no one congratu- 
lated or reviled me. '1 hey all seemed to 
consider me as one beginning monastic life 
de 710V0. I passed two days of perfect 
tranquillity, and I take God to witness, I 
enjoyed this triumph with moderation. 1 
never reverted to my former situation, — I 
never reproached those who had been a- 
gents in it, — I never uftered a syllable on 
the subject of the visitation, which had 
made me and the whole convent change 
places in the space of a few hours, and the 
oppressed take the part (if he pleased) of 
the oppressor. I bore my success with 
temperance, for I was supported by the 
hope of liberation. The Superior's triumph 
was soon to coine. 

" On the 'bird morning I was summon- 
ed to the parlour, where a mesocnger put 



118 MELMOTH : 

into my hands a packet, containing (as I 
well understood) the result of my appeal. 
This, according to the rules of the con- 
vent, I was compelled to put first into the 
hands of the Superior to read, before I 
was permitted to read it myself I took 
the packet, and slowly walked to the Su- 
perior's apartment. As I held it in my 
hand, I considered it, felt every corner, 
weighed it over and over again in my 
hand, tried to catch an omen from its very 
shape. Then a withering thought crossed 
me, that, if its intelligence was auspicious, 
the messenger woidd have put it into my 
hands with an air of triumph, that in spite 
of convent etiquette, I might break open 
the seals which inclosed the sentence of 
my liberation. We are very apt to take 
our presages from our destination, and 
mine being that of a monk, no won- 
der its auguries were black, — and were ve- 
rified. 

" I approached the Suierior's cell with 
the packet. I knocked, was desired to 



A TALE. 119 

enter, and, my eyes cast down, could only 
distinguish the hems of Uiany habits, 
whose wearers were all assembled in the 
Superior's apartment. I offered the packet 
with reverence. The Superior cast a care- 
less eye over it, and then flung it on the 
floor. One of the monks approached to 
take it up. The Superior exclaimed, 
" Hold, let him take it up." I did so, 
and retired to my cell, making first a pro- 
found reverence to the Superior. I then 
went to my cell, where 1 sat down with 
the fatal packet in my hands. I was a- 
bout to open it, when a voice from within 
me seemed to say, — It is useless, you must 
know the contents already. It was some 
Lours before I perused it, — it contained 
the account of the failure of my appeal. 
It seemed, from the detail, that the advo- 
cate had exerted his abilities, zeal, and 
eloquence to the utmost; and that, at one 
time, the court had been near deciding in 
favour of my claims, but the precedent 
was reckoned too dangerous. The advo- 



120 MELMOTH : 

cate on the other side had remarked, 
•* If this succeeds, we shall have all the 
monks in Spain appealing against their 
vows." Could a stronger argument have 
been used in favour of my cause? An im- 
pulse so universal must surely originate in 
nature, justice, and truth," 

On reverting to the disastrous issue of 
his appeal, the unfortunate Spaniard was 
so much overcome, that it was some days 
before he could resume his narrative. 



CHAPTER VII. 



Pandere res alta terra et caligine raersas. 

ril shew your Grace the strangest sightj— 
Body o' me, what is it. Butts ? — 

Henry the Eighth. 



^* vJf the desolation of mind into which 
the rejection of my appeal plunged me, I 
can give no account, for I retain no distin- 
guishing image. All colours disappear in 
the night, and despair has no diary, — 
monotony is her essence and her curse. 
Hours have I walked in the garden, with- 
out retaining a single impression but that 
of the sounds of my footsteps ; — thought, 

VOL. II. F 



122 MELMOTH : 

feeling, passion, and all that employs 
them, — life and futurity, extinct and swal- 
lowed up. I was already like an inhabi- 
tant of the land where " all things are for- 
gotten." I hovered on the regions of men- 
tal twilight, where the " light is as dark- 
ness." The clouds were gathering that 
portended the approach of utter night, — 
they were scattered by a sudden and ex- 
traordinary light. 

" The garden was my constant resort, — 
a kind of instinct supplying the place of 
that choice I had no longer energy enough 
to make, directed me there to avoid the 
presence of the monks. One evening I 
saw a change in its appearance. The foun- 
tain was out of repair. The spring that 
supplied it was beyond the walls of the 
convent, and the workmen, in prosecut- 
ing the repairs, had found it necessary to 
excavate a passage under the garden- wall, 
that communicated with an open space in 
the city. This passage, however, was 
closely watched during the day while the 



A TALK. 123 

workmen were employed, and well secur- 
ed at night by a door erected for the pur- 
pose, ^\hich was chained, barred, and bolt- 
ed, the moment the workmen quitted the 
passage. It was, however, left open during 
the day ; and this tantalizing image of e- 
scape and freedom, amid the withering 
certainty of eternal imprisonment, gave a 
kind of awakened sting to the pains that 
were becoming obtuse. I entered the pas- 
sage, and drew as close as possible to the 
door that shut me out from life. My seat 
was one of the stones that were scattered 
about, my head rested on my hand, and 
my eyes were sadly fixed on the tree and 
the well, the scene of that false miracle. 
I knew not how long I sat thus. I was 
aroused by a slight noise near me, and per- 
ceived a paper, which some one was 
thrusting under the door, where a slight 
inequality in the ground rendered the at- 
tempt just practicable. I stooped and at- 
tempted to seize it. It was withdrawn ; 
but a moment after a voice, whose tones 



124 MELMOTH : 

my agitation did not permit me to distin- 
guish, whispered, " Alonzo." — " Yes,— 
yes," I ^swered eagerly. The paper was 
instantly thrust into my hands, and I 
heard a sound of steps retreating rapidly. 
I lost not a moment in reading the few 
words it contained. " Be here to-morrow 
evening at the same hour. 1 have suffer- 
ed much on your account, — destroy this." 
It was the hand of my brother Juan, that 
hand so well remembered from our late event- 
ful correspondence, — that hand whose traces 
I never beheld without feeling correspond- 
ing characters of hope and confidence re- 
traced in my soul, as lines before invisible 
appear on exposure to the heat that seems 
to vivify them. I am surprised that be- 
tween this and the following eyening my 
agitation did not betray me to the com- 
munity. But perhaps it is only agitation 
arising from frivolous causes, that vents it- 
self in external indications, — 1 was absorb- 
ed in mine. It is certain, at least, that 
my mind was all that day vacillating like 



A TALE. ' 125 

a clock that struck every minute the alter- 
nate sounds, ** Theix is hope^ — thei^e is no 
hopeP The day, — the eternal day, was at 
last over. Evening came on ; how I watch- 
ed the advancing shades ! At vespers, 
with what dehght did 1 trace the gradual 
mellowing of the gold and purple tinges 
that gleamed through the great eastern 
window, and calculated that their western 
dechne, though slower, must come at last! 
— It came. Never was a more propitious 
evening. It was calm and dark — the gar- 
den deserted, not a form to be seen, not a 
step to be heard in the walks. — I hurried on. 
Suddenly I thought I heard the sound of 
something pursuing me. I paused, — it 
was but the beating of my own. heart, 
audible in the deep stillness of that event- 
ful moment. I pressed my hand on my 
breast, as a mother v;ould on an infant 
whom she tried to pacify ;— it did not cease 
to throb, however. 1 entered the passage. 
I approached the door, of which hope and 
despair seemed to stand the alternate por- 



126 MELMOTH : 

tresses. The words still rung in my ears, 
^' Be here to-morrow evening at the same 
hour." 1 stooped, and saw, with eyes 
that devoured the sight, a piece of paper 
appear under the door. I seized and bu- 
ried it in my habit. I trembled with such 
ecstacy, that I thought I never should be 
able to carry it undiscovered to my cell. 
1 succeeded, however ; and the contents-, 
when I read them, justified my emotion. 
To my unspeakable uneasiness, great part 
of it was illegible, from being crushed a- 
mid the stones and damp clay contiguous 
to the door, and from the first page I could 
hardly extract that he had been kept in 
the country almost a prisoner, through the 
influence of the Director; that one day, 
while shooting with only one attendant, 
the hope of liberation suddenly filled him 
with the idea of terrifying this man into 
submission. Presenting his loaded fowl- 
ing piece at the terrified wretch, he threat- 
ened him with instant death, if he made the 
least opposition. The man suffered himself 



A TALE. 127 

to be bound to a tree ; and the next page^ 
though much defaced, gave me to under- 
stand he had reached ^Madrid in safety, and 
heard for the first time the event of my 
ill-fated appeal. The effect of this intelli- 
gence on the impetuous, sanguine, and 
affectionate Juan, could be easily traced 
in the broken and irregular lines in which 
he vainly attempted to describe it. The 
letter then proceeded. " I am now in Ma- 
drid, pledged body and soul never to quit 
it till you are liberated. If you possess 
resolution, this is not impossible,— the doors 
even of convents are not inaccessible to a 
silver key. My first object, that of obtain- 
ing a communication with you, appeared as 
impracticable as your escape, yet it has been 
accomplished. I understood that repairs 
were going on in the garden, and stationed 
myself at the door evening after evening, 
whispering your name, but it was not till 
the sixth that you were there." 

" In another part he detailed his plans 
more fully. " Money and secrecy are the 



128 IIELMOTH: 

primary objects,— the latter I can insure 
by the disguises I wear, but the former I 
scarce know how to obtain. My escape 
was so sudden, that I was wholly unpro- 
vided, and have been obliged to dispose of 
my watch and rings since I reached Ma- 
drid, to purchase disguises and procure 
subsistence. I could command what sums 
I pleased by disclosing my name, but this 
would be fatal. The report of my being 
in Madrid would immediately reach my 
fether's- ears. My resource must be a Jew; 
and when 1 have obtained money, I have 
little doubt of effecting your liberation. I 
have already heard of a person in the con- 
vent under very extraordinary circum- 
stances, who would probably not be disin- 
clined to * * * 
* * « * 

" Here a long interval occurred in the 
letter, which appeared to be written at 
different times. The next lines that I 
could trace, expressed all the light-hearted- 



A TALE, 129, 

ness of this most fiery, volatile, and, gene- 
rous of created beings. * * 

* * # * 

" Be not under the least uneasiness a- 
bout me, it is impossible that I should be 
discovered. At school I was remarkable 
for a dramatic talent, a power of persona- 
tion almost incredible, and which I now 
find of infinite service. Sometimes I strut 
as a Majo^\ with enormous Avhiskers. 
Sometimes I assume the accent of a Bis- 
cayan, and, like the husband of Donna 
Rodriguez, " am as good a gentleman as 
the king, because 1 came from the moun- 
tains." But my favourite disguise is that 
of a mendicant or a fortune-teller, — the 
former procures me access to the convent, 
the other money and intelligence. Thus I 
am paid, while I appear to be the buyer. 
When the wanderings and stratagems of 
the day are over, you would smile to see 
the lofl and pallet to which the heir of 

* Something between a bully and a rake, 
r 2 



130 MELMOTH : 

Mon^ada retires. This masquerade amuses 
me more than the spectators. A conscious- 
ness of our superiority is often more de- 
lightful when confined to our own breasts, 
than when expressed by others. Besides, 
I feel as if the squalid bed, the tottering 
seat, the cobwebbed rafters, the rancid oil, 
and all the other agremens of my new abode, 
were a kind of atonement for the wrongs 
I have done you, Alonzo. My spirits 
sometimes sink under privations so new 
to me, but still a kind of playful and wild 
energy, pecuhar to my character, supports 
me. I shudder at my situation when I 
retire at night, and place, for the first time 
xvith my own hands, the lamp on the mi- 
serable hearth ; but I laugh when, in the 
morning, I attire myself in fantastic rags, 
discolour my face, and modulate my ac- 
cent, so that the people in the house, 
(where I tenant a garret), when they meet 
me on the stairs, do not know the being 
they saw the preceding evening. I change 
my abode and costume every day. Feel 



A TALE. 131 

no fears for me, but come eveiy evening 
to the door in the passage, for every even- 
ing I shall have fresh intelligence for you. 
My industry is indefatigable, my zeal un- 
quenchable, my heart and soul are on fire 
in the cause. Again I pledge myself, soul 
and body, never to quit this spot till you 
are free, — depend on me, Alonzo^ 

" I will spare you. Sir, the detail of the 
feelings, — feelings ! Oh my God, pardon 
me the prostration of heart with which I 
kissed those lines, with which I could have 
consecrated the hand that traced them, and 
which are worthy only to be devoted to 
the image of the great Sacrifice. Yet a 
being so young, so generous, so devoted, 
with a heart at once so wild and warm, 
sacrificing all that rank, and youth, and 
pleasure could offer, — submitting to the 
vilest disguises, undergoing the most de- 
plorable privations, struggling with what 
must have been most intolerable to a proud 
voluptuous boy, (and I knew he was all 
this), hiding his revoltings under a gaiety 



13^ MELMOTH : 

that was assumed, and a magnanimity 

that was real — and all this for me ! Oh 

what I felt ! * * 

* * * * 

" The next evening I was at the door ; 
no papei' appeared, though I sat watching 
for it till the declining light made it im- 
possible for me to discover it, had it been 
there. The next I was more fortunate ; it 
appeared. The same disguised voice whis- 
pered " Alonzo," in tones that were the 
sweetest music that ever reached my ears« 
This billet contained but a very few lines, 
(so 1 found no difficulty in swallowing it 
immediately after perusal). It said, " I 
have found a Jew, at last, who will ad- 
vance me a large sum. He pretends not 
to know me, though I am satisfied he 
does. — But his usurious interest and ille- 
gal practices are my full security. I shall 
be master of the means of liberating you 
in a few days; and I have been fortunate 
enough to discover how those means may 
be applied. There is a wretch " 



A TALE. 133 

" Here the billet ended ; and for four 
following evenings the state of the repairs 
excited so much curiosity in the convent, 
(where it is so easy to excite curiosity), 
that I dared not to remain in the passage, 
without the fear of exciting suspicion. All 
this time I suffered not only the agony of 
suspended hope, but the dread of this 
accidental communication being finally 
closed; for 1 knew the workmen could 
not have more than a few days to em- 
ploy on their task. This I conveyed 
the intelligence of to my brother in the 
same way in which I received his billets. 
Then 1 reproached myself for hurrying 
him. 1 reflected on the difficulties of his 
concealment — of his dealing with Jews— 
of his bribing the servants of the convent. 
I thought of all he had undertaken, and 
all he had undergone. Then I dreaded 
that all might be in vain. 1 would not 
live over those four days again to be sove- 
reign of the earth. I will give you one 
slight proof of what I must have feit, when 



1S4 MELMOTH : 

I heard the workmen say, " It will be fi- 
nished soon." I used to rise at an hour 
before matins, displace the stones, trample 
on the mortar, which I mingled with the 
clay, so as to render it totally useless ; and 
finally, re-act Penelope's web with such 
success, that the workmen believed the 
devil himself was obstructing their ope- 
rations, and latterly never came to their 
task unless armed with a vessel of holy 
water, which they dashed about with in- 
finite sanctimony and profusion. On the 
fifth evening I caught the following lines 
beneath the door. " All is settled — I have 
fixed the Jew on Jewish terms. He affects 
to be ignorant of my real rank, and certain 
(future) wealth, but he knows it all, and 
dare not, for his own sake, betray me. 
The Inquisition, to which I could expose 
him in a moment, is my best security — I 
must add, my only. There is a wretch in 
your convent, who took sanctuary from 
parricide, and consented to become a 
monk, to escape the vengeance of heaven 



A TALE. 135 

in this life at least. I have heard, that this 
monster cut his own father's throat, as he 
sat at supper, to obtain a small sum which 
he had lost at gambling. His partner, 
who was a loser also, had, it seems, made 
a vow to an image of the Virgin, that was 
in the neighbourhood of the wretched 
house where they gamed, to present two 
wax tapers before it in the event of his suc- 
cess. He lost ; and, in the fury of a game- 
ster, as he repassed the image, he struck 
and spit at it. This was very shocking — 
but what was it to the crime of him who 
is now an inmate of your convent ? The 
one defaced an image, the other murdered 
his father : Yet the former expired under 
tortures the most horrible, and the other, 
after some vain efforts to elude justice, 
took sanctuary^ and is now a lay-brother 
in your convent. On the crimes of this 
wretch I build all my hopes. His soul 
must be saturated with avarice, sensuaUty, 
and desperation. There is nothing he will 
hesitate at if he be bribed ; — for money he 



136 . MELMOTH: 

will undertake your liberation — ^for money 
he will undertake to strangle you in your 
cell. He envies Judas the thirty pieces of 
silver for which the Redeemer of mankind 
was sold. His soul might be purchased 
at half-price. Such is the instrument with 
which I must work. — It is horrible, but 
necessary. I have read, that from the most 
venomous reptiles and plants, have been 
extracted the most sanative medicines. I 
will squeeze the juice, and trample on the 
weed. 

" Alonzo, tremble not at these words. 
Let not your habits prevail over your cha- 
racter. Entrust your liberation to me, and 
the instruments 1 am compelled to work 
with ; and doubt not, that the hand which 
traces these lines, will soon be clasping that 
of a brother in freedom." 

" I read these lines over and over again ^ 
in the solitude of my cell, when the ex- 
citement of watching for, secreting, and 
perusing it for the Jirst time, were over, 
and many doubts and fears began to gather 



A TAI.E. 137 

round me like twilight clouds. In pro- 
portion as Juan's confidence increased, 
mine appeared to diminish. There was a 
terrifying contrast between the fearlessness, 
independence, and enterprise of his situa- 
tion, c nd the loneliness, timidity, and dan- 
ger of mine. While the hope of escape, 
through his courage and address, still 
burnt Hke an inextinguishable light in the 
depth of my heart, I still dreaded entrust- 
ing my destiny to a youth so impetuous, 
though so affectionate ; one who had fled 
from his parents' mansion, was living by- 
subterfuge and imposture in Madrid, and 
had engaged, as his coadjutor, a wretch 
whom nature must revolt from. Upon 
whom and w^hat did my hopes of libera- 
tion rest ? On the affectionate energies of 
a wild, enterprising, and unaided being, 
and the co-operation of a demon, w^ho 
might snatch at a bribe, and tlien shake it 
in triumph in his ears, >as the seal of our 
mutual and eternal despair, while he iiung 
the key of liberation into an abyss wliere 



138 MELMOTH: 

no light could penetrate, and from which 
no arm could redeem it. 

" Under these impressions, I deliberat- 
ed, I prayed, I wept in the agony of doubt. 
At last I wrote a few lines to Juan, in 
which I honestly stated my doubts and 
apprehensions. I stated first my doubts 
of the possibility of my escape. I said, 
" Can it be imagined that a being whom 
all Madrid, whom all Spain, is on the 
w^atch for, can elude their detection ? Re- 
flect, dear Juan, that I am staked against 
a community, a priesthood, a nation. The 
escape of a monk is almost impossible, — 
but his concealment afterwards is down- 
right impossible. Every bell in every con- 
vent in Spain would ring out imtouched in 
pursuit of the fugitive. The military, civil, 
and ecclesiastical powers, w^ould all be on 
the " qui vive." Hunted, panting, and 
despairing, 1 might fly from place to place 
— no place affording me shelter. The in- 
censed powers of the church — the fierce 
and vigorous gripe of the law — the execra- 



A TALE. 139 

tion and hatred of society — the suspicions of 
the lowest order among whom I must lurk, 
to shun and curse their penetration ; think 
of encountering all this, while the fiery cross 
of the Inquisition blazes in the van, follow- 
ed by the whole pack, shouting, cheering, 
hallooing on to the prey. Oh Juan ! if you 
knew the terrors under which I live — un- 
der which I would rather die than encoun- 
ter them again, even on the condition of 
liberation ! Liberation ! Great God ! what 
chance of liberation for a monk in Spain ? 
There is not a cottage where I could rest 
one night in security — there is not a ca- 
vern whose echoes would not resound to 
the cry of my apostacy. If I was hid in 
the bowels of the earth, they would dis- 
cover me, and tear me from its entrails. 
My beloved Juan, when I consider the 
omnipotence of the ecclesiastical power in 
Spain, may I not address it in the lan- 
guage applied to Omnipotence itself: " If 
I climb up to heaven, thou art there ; — if 
I go down to hell, thou art there also ; — if 



140 MELMOTH : 

I take the wings of the morning, and flee 
unto the uttermost parts of the sea, even 
there — " And suppose my liberation was 
accomplished — suppose the convent plung- 
ed in a profound torpor, and the unsleep- 
ing eye of the Inquisition winked at my 
apostacy — where am I to reside? how am 
I to procure subsistence ? The luxurious 
indolence of my early years unfit me for 
active employment. The horrible conflict 
of apathy the deepest, with hostility the 
most deadly, in monastic life, disqualifies 
me for society. Throw the doors of every 
convent in Spain open, and for what will 
their inmates be fit? For nothing that 
will either embellish or improve it. What 
could I do to serve myself? — what could 
I do that would not betray me ? I should 
be a persecuted, breathless fugitive, — a 
branded Cain, Alas ! — perhaps expiring 
in flames, I might see Ahel not my victim, 
but that of the Inquisition." 

** When I had written these lines, with 
an impulse for which all can account but 



A TALE. 141 

the writer, I tore them to atoms, burnt 
them dehberately by the assistance of the 
lamp in my ce , and went to watch again 
at the door in the passage — the door of 
hope. In passing through the gallery, I 
encountered, for a moment, a person of a 
most forbidding aspect. I drew on one 
side — for I had made it a point not to mix, 
in the shghtest degree, with the communi- 
ty, beyond what the discipHne of the house 
compelled me to. As he passed, however, 
he touched my habit, and gave a most sig- 
nificant look. I immediately comprehend- 
ed this was the person Juan alluded to in 
his letter. And in a few moments after, 
on descending to the garden, I found a 
note that confirmed my conjectures. It 
contained these words : " I have procured 
the money — I have secured our agent. 
He is an incarnate devil, but his resolution 
and intrepidity are unquestionable. Walk 
in ihe cloister to-morrow evening — some 
one will touch your habit — grasp his left 
wrist, that will be the signal. If he he- 



14S IIELMOTH : 

sitates, whisper to him — " Juan,*' he will 
answer — " Alonzo." That is your man, 
consult with him. Every step that I have 
taken will be communicated to you by 
him." 

** After reading these lines, I appear- 
ed to myself like a piece of mechanism 
wound up to perform certain functions, in 
which its co-operation was irresistible. 
The precipitate vigour of Juan's move- 
ments seemed to impel mine without my 
own concurrence ; and as the shortness of 
the time left me no opportunity for deli- 
beration, it left me also none for choice. 
I was like a clock whose hands are pushed 
forward, and I struck the hours I was im- 
pelled to strike. When a powerful agency 
is thus exercised on us, — when another 
undertakes to think, feel, and act for us, we 
are dehghted to transfer to him, not only 
our physical, but our moral responsibility. 
We say, with selfish cowardice, and self- 
flattering passiveness, " Be it so — you have 
decided for me," — without reflecting that at 



I 



A TALE. 143 

the bar of God there is no bail. So I 
walked the next evening in the cloister. 
I composed my habit, — my looks ; any one 
would have imagined me plunged in pro- 
found meditation, — and so I was, but not 
on the subjects with which they conceived 
I was occupied. As I walked, some one 
touched my habit. I started, and, to my 
consternation, one of the monks asked my 
pardon for the sleeve of his tunic having 
touched mine. Two minutes after another 
touched my habit. I felt the difference, — 
there was an intelhgential and communi- 
cative force in his grasp. He seized it as 
one who did not fear to be known, and 
who had no need to apologise. How is it 
that crime thus seizes us in hfe with a 
fearless grasp, while the touch of conscience 
trembles on the verge of our garment. 
One would almost parody the words of 
the well known ItaHan proverb, and say 
that guilt is masculine, and innocence fe- 
minine. I grasped his UTist with a trem- 
bling hand; and whispered—" Juan," in the 



144 melmoth: 

kime breath. He answered — " Alonzo/ 
and passed me onward in a moment. I 
had then a few moments leisure to reflect 
on a destiny thus singularly entrusted to a 
being whose affections honoured humanity, 
and a being whose crimes disgraced it. I 
was suspended like Mahomet's tomb be- 
tween heaven and earth. I felt an anti^ 
pathy indescribable to hold any communi- 
cation with a monster who had tried to hide 
the stains of parricide, by casting over their 
bloody and ineffaceable traces the shroud of 
monasticism. I felt also an inexpressible 
terror of Juan's passions and precipitancy ; 
and I felt ultimately that I was in the 
power of all 1 dreaded most, and must 
submit to the operation of that power for 
my liberation. 

" I was in the cloisters the following 
evening. I cannot say I walked with a 
step so equal, but I am sure I did with a 
step much more artificially regular. For 
the second time the same person touched 
my habit, and whispered the name of 



A TALE. 145 

Juan. After this I could no longer 
hesitate. I said, in passing, " I am in 
your power." A hoarse repulsive voice 
answered, " No, I am in yours." I mur- 
mured, " "Well, then, I understand you, 
we belong to each other." — " Yes. Wo 
must not speak here, but a fortunate op- 
portunity presents itself for our communi- 
cation. To-morrow will be the eve of the 
feast of Pentecost ; the vigil is kept by the 
whole community, who go two and two 
every hour to the altar, pass their hour in 
prayer, and then are succeeded by two 
more, and this continues all night. Such is 
the aversion with which you have inspired 
the community, that they have one and all 
refused to accompany you during your 
hour, which is to be from two till three. 
You will therefore be alone, and during 
your hour I will come and visit you, — we 
shall be midisturbed and unsuspected." 
At these words he quitted me. The 
next night was the eve of Pentecost, the 

VOL. IL G 



146 IMELMOTH : 

monks went two and two all night to the 
altar, — at two o'clock my turn arrived. 
They rapped at my cell, and I descended 
to the church alone." 



CHAPTER VIII. 

Ye monks and nuns throughout the land^ 
Who go to church at night in pairs. 

Never take bell-ropes in your hands. 
To raise you up again from prayers, 

COLMAN. 



** A AM not superstitious, but, as I enter- 
ed the church, I felt a chill of body and 
soul inexpressible. 1 approached the altar, 
and attempted to kneel,— an invisible hand 
repelled me. A voice seemed to address 
me from the recesses of the altar, and de- 
mand what brought me there ? I reflected 
that those who had just quitted that spot 
had been absorbed in prayer, that those 



148 MELMOTH : 

who were to succeed me would be engag- 
ed in the same profound homage, while I 
sought the church with a purpose of im- 
posture and deception, and abused the 
hour allotted to the divine worship in con- 
triving the means to escape from it. I 
felt I was a deceiver, shrouding my fraud 
in the very veils of the temple. I trem- 
bled at my purpose and at myself I 
knelt, however, though I did not dare to 
pray. The steps of the altar felt unusual- 
ly cold, — I shuddered at the silence I was 
compelled to observe. Alas ! how can we 
expect that object to succeed, which we 
dare not entrust to God. Prayer, Sir, 
when we are deeply engaged in it, not 
only makes us eloquent, but communicates 
a kind of answering eloquence to the ob- 
jects around us. At former times, while I 
poured out my heart before God, I felt as 
if the lamps burnt brighter, and the images 
smiled, — the silent midnight air was filled 
with forms and voices, and every breeze 
that sighed by the casement bore to my ear 



A TALE. 149 

the harpings of a thousand angels. Now 
all was stilled, — the lamps, the images, the 
altar, the roof, seemed to behold me in 
silence. They surrounded me like wit- 
nesses, whose presence alone is enough to 
condemn you, without their uttering a 
word. I dared not look up, — I dared not 
speak, — I dared not pray, lest it would un- 
fold a thought I could not supplicate a 
blessing on ; and this kind of keeping a 
secret, which God must know, is at once 
so vain and impious. 

" I had not remained long in this state 
of agitation, when I heard a step approach, 
— it was that of him I expected. " Rise," 
said he, for I was on my knees ; " rise, — 
we have no time to lose. You have but 
an hour to remain in the church, and I 
have much to tell you in that hour." I 
rose. " To-morrow night is fixed for your 
escape." — " To-morrow niglit, — merciful 
God !"— " Yes ; in desperate steps there is 
always more danger from delay than from 
precipitation. A thousand eyes and ear3 



150 MELMOTH : 

are on the watch already,— a single sinister 
or ambiguous movement would render it 
impossible to escape their vigilance. There 
may be some danger in hastening matters 
thus, but it is unavoidable. To-morrow 
nrght, after midnight, descend to the 
church, it is probable no one will then be 
here. If any one should, (engaged in re- 
collection or in penance), retire to avoid 
suspicion. Return as soon as the church 
is empty, — I Vvill be here. Do you o\> 
serve that door ?" and he pointed to a low 
door which I had often observed before, 
but never remembered to have seen open- 
ed ; "I have obtained the key of that 
door, — no matter by what means. It for- 
merly led to the vaults of the convent, 
but, for some extraordinary reasons, which 
I have not time to relate, another passage 
has been opened, and the former has not 
been employed or frequented for many 
years. From thence branches another 
passage, which, I have heard, opens by a 
trap-door into the garden." — " Heard," I 



A TALE. 151 

repeated ; " Good God ! is it on report, 
then, you depend in a matter so momen- 
tous ? If you are not certain that such a 
passage exists, and that you will be able to 
trace its windings, may we not be wander- 
ing amid them all night ? Or perhaps " 

" Interrupt me no more with those faint 
objections; I have no time to listen to 
fears w^hich I can neither sympathise with 
or obviate. When we get through the 
trap-door into the garden, (if ever we do), 
another danger awaits us." He paused, I 
thought, like a man who is watching the 
effect of the terrors he excites, not from 
malignity but vanity, merely to magnify 
his own courage in encountering them. I 
was silent ; and, as he heard neither flat- 
tery nor fear, he went on. " Two fierce 
dogs are let loose in the garden every night, 
— but they must be taken care of. The 
wall is sixteen feet high, — but your brother 
has provided a ladder of ropes, which he 
will fling over, and by which you may 
descend on the other side in safety."-^ 



152 MELMOTH : 

" Safety ! but then Juan will be in dan- 
ger " — " Interrupt me no more, — the dan- 
ger within the w^alls is the least you have 
to dread, beyond them, where can you 
seek for refuge or secrecy ? Your brother's 
money will enable you possibly to escape 
from Madrid. He will bribe high, and 
every inch of your way must be paved with 
his gold. But, after that, so many dan- 
gers present themselves, that the enter- 
prise and the danger seem but just be- 
gun. How will you cross the Pyrennees ? 

How " and he passed his hand over his 

forehead, with the air of a man engaged in 
an effort beyond his powers, and sorely 
perplexed about the means to effect it. 
This expression, so full of sincerity, struck 
me forcibly. It operated as a balance a- 
gainst all my former prepossessions. But 
still the more confidence I felt in him, the 
more I was impressed by his fears. I re- 
peated after him, " How is it possible for 
me to escape ultimately ? I may, by your 
assistance, traverse those intricate passages. 



A TALE. 153 

whose cold clews I feel already distilling on 
me. I may emerge into light, ascend and 
descend the wall, but, after that, how am 
I to escape ? — how am I even to live ? All 
Spain is but one great monastery, — I must 
be a prisoner every step that 1 take." — 
" Your brother must look to that," said he 
abruptly; " I have done w^hat I have un- 
dertaken." I then pressed him with seve- 
ral questions relating to the details of my 
escape. His answer was monotonous, un- 
satisfactory, and evasive, to a degree that 
again filled me first with suspicion, and 
then with terror. I asked, " But how 
liave you obtained possession of the keys ?" 
— " It is not your business to inquire." It 
was singular tliat he returned the same an- 
swer to every question I put to him, 
relative to his becoming possessed of 
the means to facilitate my escape, so that 
I was compelled to desist unsatisfied, and 
revert to what he had told me. — " But, 
tlien, that terrible passage near the vaults, 
— the chance, the fear that we may never 
G 2 



154 MELMOTH : 

emerge to light ! Think of wandering a- 
mid sepulchral ruins, of stumbling over 
the bones of the dead, of encountering 
what I cannot describe, — the horror of be- 
ing among those who are neither the living 
or the dead ; — those dark and shadowless 
things that sport themselves with the re- 
liques of the dead, and feast and love amid 
corruption, — ^ghastly, mocking, and terri- 
fic. Must we pass near the vaults?"—^ 
" What matter ? perhaps I have more rea- 
son to dread them than you. Do you ex- 
pect the spirit of your father to start from 
the earth to blast you ?" At these words, 
which he uttered in a tone intended to in- 
spire me with confidence, I shuddered with 
horror. They were uttered by a parricide, 
boasting of his crime in a church at mid- 
night, amid saints, whose images were si- 
lent, but seemed to tremble. For relief I 
reverted to the unscaleable wall, and the 
difficulty of managing the ladder of ropes 
without detection. The same answer was 
on his lips, — " Leave that to me, — all that 



A TALE. 155 

is settled." While he answered thus, he 
always turned his face away, and broke his 
words into monosyllables. At last I felt 
that the case was desperate, — that 1 must 
trust every thing to him. 2b him ! Oh, 
my God ! what 1 fielt when I said this to 
myself! The conviction thrilled on my 
soul, — I am in his power. And yet, 
even under the impression, I could not 
help recurring to the impracticable diffi- 
culties that appeared to obstruct my escape. 
He then lost patience, — reproached me 
with timidity and ingTatitude ; and, while 
resuming his naturally ferocious and me- 
nacing tone, I actually felt more confidence 
in him than when he had attempted to 
disguise it. Half-remonstrance, half-in- 
vective as it was, what he said displayed 
so much ability, intrepidity, and art, that 
1 began to feel a kind of doubtful security. 
I conceived, at least, that if any being on 
earth could effect my liberation, this was 
the man. He had no conception of fear, 
— ^no idea of conscience. When he hinted 



156 MELMOTH : 

at his having murdered his father, it was 
done to impress me with an idea of his 
hardihood. I saw this from his expression, 
for I had involuntarily looked up at him. 
His eye had neither the hollowness of re- 
morse, or the wandering of fear, — it glared 
on me bold, challenging, and prominent. 
He had but one idea annexed to the word 
danger, — that of strong excitement. He 
undertook a perilous attempt as a game- 
ster would sit down to encounter an anta- 
gonist worthy of him ; and, if life and 
death were the stake, he only felt as if he 
were playing at a higher rate, and the in- 
creased demands on his courage and talent 
actually supplied him with the means of 
meeting them. Our conference was now 
nearly at an end, when it occurred to me 
that this man was exposing himself to a 
degree of danger which it was almost in- 
credible he should brave on my account ; 
and this mystery, at least, I was resolved 
to penetrate. I said, " But how will you 
provide for yoi^r own safety ? What will 



A TALE. 157 

become of you when my escape is dis- 
covered ? Would not the most dreadful 
punishments attend even the suspicion of 
your having been an agent in it, and what 
must be the result when that suspicion is 
exchanged for the most undeniable cer- 
tainty ?" It is impossible for me to describe 
the change his expression underwent while 
I uttered these words. He looked at me 
for some time without speaking, with an 
indefinable mixture of sarcasm, contempt, 
doubt, and curiosity in his countenance, 
and then attempted to laugh, but the 
muscles of his face were too stubborn and 
harsh to admit of this modulation. To 
features like his, frowns were a habit, and 
smiles a convulsion. He could produce 
nothing but a rictus Sardonicus, the ter- 
rors of which there is no describinor. It is 
very frightful to behold crime in its merri- 
ment, — its smile must be purchased by 
many groans. My blood ran cold as I 
looked at him. I waited for the sound of 
his voice as a kind of relief At length he 



158 MELMOTH : 

said, "Do you imagine me such an ideot 
as to promote your escape at the risk of 
imprisonment for life, — perhaps of immure- 
ment, — perhaps of the Inquisition?" and 
again he laughed. " No, we must escape 
together. Could you suppose I would 
have so much anxiety about an event, in 
which I had no part but that of an assist- 
ant? It was of my own danger I was 
thinking, — it was of my own safety I was 
doubtful. Our situation has happened to 
unite very opposite characters in the same 
adventure, but it is an union inevitable 
and inseparable. Your destiny is now 
bound to mine by a tie which no human 
force can break, — we part no more for ever. 
The secret that each is in possession of, 
must be watched by the other. Our lives 
are in each other's hands, and a moment 
of absence might be that of treachery. 
We must pass life in each watching every 
breath the other draws, every glance the 
other gives, — in dreading sleep as an in- 
voluntary betrayer, and watching the 



A TALE. 159 

broken murmurs of each other's restless 
dreams. We may hate each other, tor- 
ment each other,— worst of all, we may be 
\7eary of each other, (for hatred itself 
would be a relief, compared to the tedium 
of our inseparability), but separate we 
must never." At this picture of the li- 
berty for which I had risked so much, my 
very soul recoiled. I gazed on the formi- 
dable being with whom my existence was 
thus incorporated. He was now retiring, 
when he paused at some distance to repeat 
his last words, or perhaps to observe their 
effect. I was sitting on the altar, — it was 
late, — the lamps in the church burned very 
dimly, and, as he stood in the aisle, he was 
placed in such a position, with regard to 
that which hung from the roof, that the 
light fell only on his face and one hand, 
which he extended towards me. The rest 
of his figure, enveloped in darkness, gave 
to this bodyless and spectre head an effect 
truly appalling. The ferocity of his fea- 
tures, too, was softened into a heavy and 



160 MELMOTH : 

death-like gloom, as he repeated, ^ We 
part never, — I must be near you for ever," 
and the deep tones of his voice rolled like 
subterranean thunder round the church. 
A long pause followed. He continued to 
stand in the same posture, nor had I power 
to change mine. The clock struck three, 
its sound reminded me that my hour had 
expired. We separated, each taking diffe- 
rent directions ; and the two monks who 
succeeded me luckily came a few minutes 
late, (both of them yawning most fearfully), 
so our departure was unobserved. 

" The day that followed I have no more 
power of describing, than of analysing a 
dream to its component parts of sanity, 
delirium, defeated memory, and triumph- 
ant imagination. The sultan in the east- 
ern tale, who plunged his head in a bason 
of water, and, before he raised it again, 
passed through adventures the most vicissi- 
tudinous and incredible — was a monarch, 
a slave, a husband, a widower, a father, 
childless, — in five minutes, never under- 



A TALE. ^^ 161 

went the changes of mind that I did dur- 
ing that memorable day. I was a prisoner, 
-^fi-ee,— a happy being, surrounded by 
smiling infants,—^ victim of the Inquisi- 
tion, writhing amid flames and execrations. 
I was a maniac, oscillating between hope 
and despair. I seemed to myself all that 
day to be pulling the rope of a bell, whose 
alternate knell was heaven— hell, and this 
rung in my ears with all the dreary and 
ceaseless monotony of the bell of the con- 
vent. Night came at last. I might al- 
most say day came, for that day had been 
my night. Every thing was propitious to 
me,— the convent was all hushed. I put 
my head several times out of my cell, to 
be assured of this, — all vcas hushed. There 
was not a step in the corridor, — not a 
voice, not a whisper to be heard under a 
roof containing so many souls. I stole from 
my cell, I descended to the church. This 
was not unusual for those whose con- 
sciences or nerves were disturbed, during^ 



168 MELMOTH : 

the sleepless gloom of a conventual night. 
As I advanced to the door of the church, 
where the lamps were always kept burn- 
ing, I heard a human voice. I retreated 
in terror; — then I ventured to give a 
glance. An old monk was at prayers be- 
fore one of the images of the saints, and 
the object of his prayers was to be reliev- 
ed, not from the anguish of conscience, or 
the annihilation of monasticism, but from 
the pains of a toothache, for which he had 
been desired to apply his gums to the 
image of a saint quite notorious for her 
efficacy in such cases*. The poor, old, 
tortured wretch, prayed with all the fer- 
vency of agony, and then rubbed his gums 
over and over again on the cold marble, 
whidi increased his complaint, his suffer- 
ing, and his devotion. I watched, listen- 
ed, — there was something at once ludicrous 
and frightful in my situation. I felt inclined 

* Vide Moore's View of France and Italy. 



A TALE. 163 

to laugh at my own distress, while it was 
rising almost to agony every moment. I 
dreaded, too, the approach of another in- 
truder, and feeling my fear about to be 
realized by the approach of some one, I 
turned round, and, to my inexpressible re* 
lief, saw my companion. 1 made him 
comprehend, by a sign, how I was pre- 
vented from entering the church ; he an- 
swered me in the same way, and retreated 
a few steps, but not without shewing me 
a bunch of huge keys under his habit. 
This revived my spirits, and I waited for 
another half-hour in a state of mental ex- 
cruciation, which, were it inflicted on the 
bitterest enemy I have on earth, I think I 
would have cried, " Hold, — hold, spare 
him." The clock struck two, — I writhed 
and stamped with my feet, as loud as I 
dared, on the floor of the passage. 1 was 
not at all tranquillized by the visible im- 
patience of my companion, who started, 
from time to time, from his hiding-place 
behind a pillar of the cloister, flung on me 



164 MELMOTH : 

a glance no, a glare — of wild and rest- 
less inquiry, (which I answered with one 
of despondency), and retired, grinding 
curses between liis teeth, whose horrible 
grating I could hear distinctly in the in- 
tervals of my long-withheld breath. At 
last I took a desperate step. I walked in- 
to the church, and, going straight up to 
the altar, prostrated myself on the steps. 
The old monk observed me. He believed 
that I had come there with the same pur- 
pose, if not with the same feelings, as 
himself; and he approached me, to an- 
nounce his intention of joining in my as- 
pirations, and intreating an interest in 
them, as the pain had now reached from 
the lower jaw to the upper. There is 
something that one can hardly describe in 
this union of the lowest with the highest 
interests of life. I w^as a prisoner, panting 
for emancipation, and staking my exist- 
ence on the step I w^as compelled to take, 
— my whole interest for time, and perhaps 
for eternity, hung on a moment ; and be« 



A TALE. 165 

side me knelt a being whose destiny was 
decided already, who could be nothing but 
a monk for the few years of his worthless 
existence, and who was supplicating a 
short remission from a temporary pain, 
that I would have endured my \^hole 
life for an hour's liberty. As he drew near 
me, and supplicated an interest in my 
prayers, I shrunk away. I felt a diffe- 
rence in the object of our addresses to 
God, that I dared not search my heart for 
the motive of. I knew not, at the mo- 
ment, which of us Mas right, — he, whose 
prayer did no dishonour to the place, — or I, 
who was to struggle against a disorganized 
and unnatural state of life, whose vows I 
was about to violate. I knelt with him, 
however, and prayed for the removal of 
his pain with a sincerity that cannot be 
questioned, as the success of my peti- 
tions might be the means of procuring 
his absence. As I knelt, I trembled at 
my o\vn hypocrisy. I was profaning the 
altar of God,— I was mocking the suf- 



166 MELMOTH : 

ferings of the being I supplicated for,— 1 
was the worst of all hypocrites, a hypocrite 
on my knees, and at the altar. Yet, wai 
I not compelled to be so ? If I was a hy- 
pocrite, who had made me one ? If I pro- 
faned the altar, who had dragged me there, 
to insult it by vows my soul belied and 
reversed faster than my lips could utter 
them ? But this was no time for self-exa- 
mination. I knelt, prayed, and trembled, 
till the poor sufferer, weary of his ineffec- 
tual and unanswered supplications, rose,and 
began to crawl away. For a few minutes 
I shivered in horrible anxiety, lest some 
other intruder might approach, but the 
quick decisive step that trod the aisle re- 
stored my confidence in a moment,— it was 
my companion. He stood beside me. He 
uttered a few curses, which sounded very 
shocking in my ears, more from the force 
of habit, and influence of the place, than 
from the meaning attached to them, and 
then hurried on to the door, A large 
bunch of keys was in his hand, and I fol- 



A TALE. 167 

lowed instinctively this pledge of my libe- 
ration. 

i " The door was very low-— we descend- 
ed to it by four steps. Be applied his key, 
muffling it in the sleeve of his habit to 
suppress the sound. At every application 
he recoiled, gnashed his teeth, stamped— 
then applied both hands. The lock did 
not give way — I clasped my hands in 
agony — I tossed them over my head. 
" Fetch a light," he said in a whisper; 
** take a lamp from before one of those 
figures." The levity with which he spoke 
of the holy images appalled me, and the act 
appeared to me nothing short of sacrilege ; 
yet I went and took a lamp, which, with 
a shuddering hand, I held to him as he 
again tried the key. During this second at- 
tempt, we communicated in whispers those 
fears that left us scarce breath even for 
whispers. " Was not that a noise r" — " No, 
it was the echo of this jarring, stubborn 
lock. Is there no one coming ?"• — " Not 
one." — " Look out into the passage." — 



168 ' MELMOTH : 

« Then I cannot hold the light to you.' — 
" No matter — any thing but detection."-— 
" Any thing for escape," I retorted with a 
courage that made him start, as I set down 
the lamp, and joined my strength to his to 
turn the key. It grated, resisted; the 
lock seemed invincible. Again we tried, 
with cranched teeth, indrawn breath, and 
fingers stripped almost to the bone,— -in 
vain. — Again — in vain. — Whether the na- 
tural ferocity of his temper bore disappoint- 
ment worse than mine, or that, like many 
men of undoubted courage, he was impa- 
tient of a slight degree of physical pain, in 
a struggle where he would have risked and 
lost life without a murmur, — or how it 
was, I know not,— but he sunk down on 
the steps leading to the door, wiped away 
the big drops of toil and terror from his 
forehead with the sleeve of his habit, and 
cast on me a look that was at once the 
pledge of sincerity and of despair. The 
clock struck three. The sound rung in 
my ears like the trumpet of the day of 



A TALE. 169 

doom — the trumpet that xzY/ sound. He 
clasped his hands with a fierce and convul- 
sive agony, that might have pictured the 
last struggles of the impenitent malefactor, 
— that agony ^A'ithout remorse, that suffer- 
ing without requital or consolation, that, 
if I may say so, arrays crime in the daz- 
zling robe of magnanimity, and makes 
us admire the fallen spirit, with whom 
we dare not sympath ze. " We are un- 
done," he cried ; " you are undone. At 
the hour of three another monk is to enter 
on his hour of recollection." And he add- 
ed, in a lower tone of horror inexpressible, 
*' I hear his steps in the passage." At the 
moment he uttered these words, the key, 
that I had never ceased to struggle with, 
turned in the lock. The door opened, the 
passage lay free to us. My companion re- 
covered himself at the sight, and in the 
next moment we w^ere both in the pas- 
sage. Our first care w^as to remove the 
key, and lock the door on the inside ; and 

VOL. IL II 



170 MELMOTH : 

during this, we had the satisfaction to dis- 
cover, that there was no one in the church, 
no one approaching it. Our fears had de- 
ceived us ; we retired from the door, look- 
ed at each other with a kind of breathless, 
half- revived confidence, and began our pro- 
gress through the vault in silence and in 
safety. In safety ! my God ! I yet trem^ 
ble at the thought of that subterranean 
journey, amid the vaults of a convent, with 
a parricide for my companion. But what 
is there that danger will not familiarize us 
with ? Had I been told such a story of 
another, I would have denounced him as 
the most reckless and desperate being on 
earth — yet / was the man. I had secured 
the lamp, (whose light appeared to re- 
proach me with sacrilege at every gleam it 
shed on our progress), and followed my 
companion in silence. Romances have 
made your country. Sir, familiar with tales 
of subterranean passages, and supernatural 
horrors. All these, painted by the most 



A TALE. 171 

eloquent pen, must fall short of the breath- 
less horror felt by a being engaged in an 
enterprise beyond his powers, experience, 
or calculation, driven to trust his life and 
liberation to hands that reeked with a fa- 
ther's blood. It was in vain that I tried 
to make up my mind, — that I said to my- 
self, " This is to last but for a short time,'* 
— that I struggled to force on myself the 
conviction that it was necessary to have 
such associates in desperate enterprises ; — \i 
was all in vain. I trembled at my situa- 
tion, — at myself, and that is a terror we 
can never overcome. I stumbled over 
the stones, — I was chilled with horror 
at every step. A blue mist gathered be- 
fore my eyes, — it furred the edges of the 
lamp with a dim and hazy light. My 
imagination began to operate, and when I 
heard the curses with which my compa- 
nion reproached my involuntary delay, I 
began almost to fear that I was following 
the steps of a demon, who had lured me 



172 MELMOTH ; 

there for purposes beyond the reach of 
imagination to picture. Tales of super- 
stition crowded on me like images of 
terror on those who are in the dark. 
I had heard of infernal beings who de- 
luded monks with the hopes of libera- 
tion, seduced them into the vaults of the 
convent, and then proposed conditions 
which it is almost as horrible to relate as 
to undergo the performance of I thought 
of being forced to witness the unnatu- 
ral revels of a diabolical feast, — of see- 
ing the rotting flesh distributed, — of drink- 
ing the dead corrupted blood, — of hearing 
the anthems of fiends howled in insult, on 
that awful verge where life and eternity 
mingle, — of hearing the hallelujahs of the 
choir, echoed even through the vaults, 
where demons were yelling the black mass 
of their infernal Sabbath.— I thought of 
all that the interminable passages, the livid 
liglit, and the diabolical companion, might 
suggest. 



A TALE. 173 

" Our wanderings in the passage seem- 
ed to be endless. My companion turned 
to right, to left, — advanced, retreated, 
paused,— (the pause was dreadful) I— Then 
advanced again, tried another direction, 
where the passage was so low that I was 
obliged to crawl on my hands and knees 
to follow him, and even in this posture 
my head struck against the ragged roof. 
When we had proceeded for a consider- 
able time, (at least so it appeared to me, 
for minutes are hours in the noctuary of 
terror, — terror has no diary), this pas- 
sage becam.e so narrow and so low, that 
I could proceed no farther, and wondered 
how my companion coukl have advanced 
beyond me. I called to him, but received 
no answer ; and, in the darkness of the 
passage, or rather hole, it was impossible 
to see ten inches before me. I had the 
lamp, too, to watch, wliich I had held 
with a careful trembling hand, but which 
began to burn dim in the condensed anci 



174 MELMOTH : 

narrov/ atmosphere. A gush of terror rose 
in my throat. Surrounded as I was by- 
damps and dews, my whole body felt in a 
fever. I called again, but no voice an- 
swered. In situations of peril, the imagi- 
nation is unhappily fertile, and I could nof 
help recollecting and applying a story I 
had once read of some travellers who at- 
tempted to explore the vaults of the Egyp- 
tian pyramids. One of them, who was 
advancing, as I vas, on his hands and 
knees, stuck in the passage, and, whether 
from terror, or from the natural conse- 
quences of his situation, swelled so that it 
was impossible for him to retreat, advance, 
or allow a passage for his companions. 
The party were on their return, and find- 
ing their passage stopped by this irremove- 
able obstruction, their lights trembling on 
the verge of extinction, and their guide 
terrified beyond the power of direction or 
Tidvice, proposed, in the selfishness to which 
the feeling of vital danger reduces all, to 



A TALE. 175 

cut off the limbs of the wretched being 
who obstructed their passage. He heard 
this proposal, and, contracting himself with 
agony at the sound, was reduced, by that 
-strong muscular spasm, to his usual di- 
mensions, dragged out, and afforded room 
for the party to advance. He was suffo- 
cated, however, in the effort, and left be- 
hind a corse. All this detail, that takes 
many w^ords to tell, rushed on my soul in 
a moment ; — on my soul ? — no, on my 
body. I was all physical feeling, — all 
intense corporeal agony, and God only 
knows, and man only can feel, how that 
agony can absorb and annihilate all other 
feeling within us, — how we could, in such 
a moment, feed on a parent, to gnaw out 
our passage into life and liberty, as sufferers 
in a wreck have been known to gnaw their 
own flesh, for the support of that exist- 
ence which the unnatural morsel was di- 
minishing at every agonizing bite. 

" I tried to crawl backwards,— I sue- 



176 MELMOTII : 

ceedecl. I believe the story I recollected 
had an effect on me, I felt a contraction of 
muscles corresponding to what I had read of. 
1 felt myself almost liberated by the sensa- 
tion, and the next moment I was actually so; 
— I had got out of the passage I knew not 
how. I must have made one of those ex- 
traordinary exertions, whose energy is per- 
haps not only increased by, but dependent 
on, our unconsciousness of them. How- 
ever it was, I was extricated, and stood 
breathless and exhausted, with the dying 
lamp in my hand, staring around me, and 
seeing nothing but the black and dripping 
walls, and the low arches of the vault, 
that seemed to lower over me like the 
frown of an eternal hostility,— a frown 
that forbids hope or escape. The lamp 
was rapidly extinguishing in my hand, — 
I gazed on it with a fixed eye. I knew 
that my life, and, what was dearer than my 
life, my liberation, depended on my watch- 
ing its last glimpse, yet I gazed on it with 



A TALE. 177 

the eye of an ideot,— a stupified stare. 
The lamp glimmered more faintly,— its 
dying gleams awoke nie to recollection. 
I roused myself, — I looked around. A 
strong flash discovered an object near me. 
I shuddered, — I uttered cries, though I was 
unconscious of doing so, for a voice said to 
me, — " Hush, be silent ; I left you only to 
reconnoitre the passages. I have made out 
the way to the trap-door, — be silent, and all 
is well." I advanced trembling, my com- 
panion appeared trembling too. He w^his- 
pered, " Is the lamp so nearly extinguish- 
ed ?" — " You see." — " Try to keep it in 
for a few moments." — " I will ; but, if I 
cannot, what then?" — " Then we must 
perish," he added, with an execration that 
I thoutrht would have brought dow^n the 
vaults over our heads. It is certain. Sir, 
however, that desperate sentiments are best 
suited to desperate emergencies, and this 
WTetch's blasphemies gave me a kind of 
horrible confidence in his courage. On he 
n 2 



178 MELMOTH : 

went, muttering curses before me ; and I 
followed, watching the last light of the 
lamp with agony increased by my fear of 
further provoking my horrible guide. I 
have before mentioned how our feel- 
ings, even in the most fearful exigencies, 
dwindle into petty and wretched details. 
With all my care, however, the lamp de- 
clined, — quivered, — flashed a pale light, 
like the smile of despair on me, and was 
extinguished. I shall never forget the 
look my guide threw on me by its sinking 
light. I had watched it like the last beat- 
ings of an expiring heart, like the shiver- 
ings of a spirit about to part for eternity. 
1 saw it extinguished, and believed my- 
self already among those for " whom the 
blackness of darkness is reserved for ever." 
" It was at this moment that a faint 
sound reached our frozen ears ; — it was the 
chaunt of matins, performed by candle- 
light at this season of the year, which was 
begun in the chapel now far above us. 



A TALE. 179 

This voice of heaven thrilled us, — we 
seemed the pioneers of darkness, on the 
veiy frontiers of hell. This superb insult 
of celestial triumph, that amid the strains 
of hope spoke despair to us, announced a 
God to those who were stopping their ears 
against the sound of his name, had an effect 
indescribably awful. 1 fell to the ground, 
whether from stumbling from the dark- 
ness, or shrinking from emotion, I know 
not. I was roused by the rough arm, and 
rougher voice of my companion. Amid 
execrations that froze my blood, he told 
me this was no time for failino[ or for fear. 
I asked him, trembling, what I was to do ? 
He answered, " Follow me, and feel your 
way in darkness." Dreadful sounds ! — 
Those who tell us the xi)hole of our cala- 
mity always appear mahgnant, for our 
hearts, or our imaginations, always flatter 
us that it is not so great as reality proves 
it to be. Truth is told us by any mouth 
sooner than our own. 



180^ MELMOTH : 

" In darkness, total darkness, and ou 
my hands and knees, for I could no longer 
stand, I followed him. This motion soon 
affected my head ; I grew giddy first, then 
stupified. I paused. He growled a curse, 
and 1 instinctively quickened my move- 
ments, like a dog who hears the voice of a 
chiding master. My habit was now in 
rags from my struggles, my knees and 
hands stript of skin. I had received 
several severe bruises on my head, from 
striking against the jagged and unhewn 
stones which formed the irregular sides and 
roof of this eternal passage. And, above 
all, the unnatural atmosphere, combined 
with the intensity of my emotion, had 
produced a thirst, the agony of which 1 
can compare to nothing but that of a 
burning coal dropt into my throat, which 
I seemed to suck for moisture, but which 
left only drops of fire on my tongue. 
Such v.as ray state, when I called out to my 
companion that I could proceed no farther. 



A TALE. 181 

" Stay there and rot, then," was the answer ; 
and perhaps the most soothing words of 
encouragement could not have produced 
so strong an effect on me. This confi- 
dence of despair, this bravado against dan- 
ger, that menaced the power in his very- 
citadel, gave me a temporary courage, 
— but what is courage amid darkness and 
doubt? From the faultering steps, the 
suffocated breath, the muttered curses, I 
guessed what was going on. I was right. 
The final— hopeless stop followed instant- 
ly, announced by the last wild sob, the 
cranching of despairing teeth, the clasp- 
ing, or rather clap, of the locked hands, in 
the terrible extacy of utter agony. I was 
kneeling behind hitn at that moment, and 
I echoed every cry and gesture with a vio- 
lence that started my guide. He silenced 
me with curses. Then he attempted to 
pray ; but his prayers sounded so like 
curses, ai'.d his curses were so like prayers 
to the evil one, that, choaking with hor- 



182 MELMOTH : 

ror, I implored him to cease. He did 
cease, and for nearly half an hour neither 
of us uttered a word. We lay beside each 
other like two panting dogs that I have 
read of, who lay down to die close to the 
animal they pursued, whose fur they fanned 
with their dying breath, while unable to 
mouthe her. 

" Such appeared emancipation to us^—so 
near, and yet so hopeless. We lay thus, not 
daring to speak to each other, for who 
could speak but of despair, and which of us 
dared to aggravate the despair of the other. 
This kind of fear which we know already 
felt by others, and which we dread to ag- 
gravate by uttering, even to those who 
know it, is perhaps the most horrible sen- 
sation ever experienced. The very thirst 
of my body seemed to vanish in this fiery 
thirst of the soul for communication, 
where all communication was unutterable, 
impossible, hopeless. Perhaps the con- 
demned spirits will feel thus at their final 



A TALE. 183 

sentence, when they know all that is to 
be suffered, and dare not disclose to each 
other that horrible truth which is no longer 
a secret, but which the profound silence of 
their despair would seem to make one. 
The secret of silence is the only secret. 
Words are a blasphemy against that taci- 
turn and invisible God, whose presence 
enshrouds us in our last extremity. These 
moments that appeared to me endless, 
were soon to cease. INIy companion sprung 
up, — he uttered a cry of joy. I imagin- 
ed him deranged, — he was not. He ex- 
claimed, " Light, light, — the light of hea- 
ven ; we are near the trap-door, I see the 
light through it." Amid all the horrors 
of our situation, he had kept his eye con- 
stantly turned upwards, for he knew that, 
if we were near it, the smallest glimmer- 
ing of light would be visible in the in- 
tense darkness that enveloped us. He 
was right. I started up,— I saw it too. 
With locked hands, with dropt and word- 

« 



184 MELMOTH : 

less lips, with dilated and thirsting eyes, 
we gazed upwards. A thin line of grey- 
light appeared above our heads. It broad- 
ened, it grew brighter, — it was the light 
of heaven, and its breezes too came flut- 
tering to us through the chinks of the 
trap-door that opened into the garden." 



CHAPTER IX. 



" X HOUGH life and liberty seemed so 
near, our situation was still very critical. 
The morning light that aided our escape, 
might open many an eye to mark it. 
There was not a moment to be lost. My 
companion proposed to ascend first, and I 
did not venture to oppose him. I was too 
much in his power to resist ; and in early 
youth superiority of depravity always- 
seems like a superiority of power. We 
reverence, with a prostituted idolatry, those 



186 MELMOTH : 

who have passed through the degrees of 
vice before us. This man was criminal, 
and crime gave him a kind of heroic im- 
munity in my eyes. Premature know- 
ledge in Hfe is always to be purchased by 
guilt. He knew more than I did, — he 
was my all in this desperate attempt. I 
dreaded him as a demon, yet I invoked 
him as a god. 

" In the end I submitted to his propo- 
sal. I was very tall, but he was much 
stronger than I. He rose on my shoul- 
ders, I trembled under his weight, but 
he succeeded in raising the trap-door, 
— the full light of day broke on us 
both. In a moment he dropt his hold 
of the door, — he fell to the ground with a 
force that struck me down. He exclaim- 
ed, " The workmen are there, they have 
come about the repairs, we are lost if we 
are discovered. They are there, the gar- 
den is full of them already, they will be 
there the whole day. That cursed lamp, 



A TALE. 187 

it has undone us ! Had it but kept in for a 
few moments, we might have been in the 
garden, might have crossed the wall, might 

have been at liberty, and now " He 

fell to the ground convulsed with rage and 
disappointment, as he spoke. To me 
there was nothing so terrible in this intel- 
ligence. That we were disappointed for a 
time w^as evident, but we had been reliev- 
ed from the most horrible of all fears, that 
of w^andering in famine and darkness till 
we perished, — we had found the way to 
the trap-door. I had unfailing confidence 
in Juan's patience and zeal. I was sure 
that if he was watching for us on that 
night, he would watch for many a succes- 
sive night. Finally, I felt we had but 
twenty-four hours or less to wait, and 
what was that to the eternity of hours that 
must otherwise be wasted in a convent. I 
suggested all this to my companion as 1 
closed the trap-door ; but 1 found in his 
complaints, imprecations, and tossing rest- 



188 MELMOTH : 

lessness of impatience and despair, the 
difference between man and man in the 
hour of trial. He possessed active, and 
I passive fortitude. Give him some- 
thing to do, and he would do it at the 
risk of limb, and life, and soul, — he never 
murmured. Give me something to suffer, 
to undergo, to submit, and I became at 
once the hei^o of submission. While this 
man, with all his physical strength, and 
all his mental hardihood, was tossing on 
the earth with the imbecillity of an infant, 
in a paroxysm of unappeasable passion, I 
was his consoler, adviser, and supporter. 
At last he suffered himself to hear reason ; 
he agreed that we must remain twenty- 
four hours more in the passage, on which 
he bestowed a whole litany of curses. So 
we determined to stand in stillness and 
darkness till night ; but such is the rest- 
lessness of the human heart, that this ar- 
rangement, which a few hours before we 
would have embraced as the offer of a be- 



A TALE. 189 

nignant angel for our emancipation, began 
to display, as we were compelled to exa- 
mine its aspect more closely, certain fea- 
tures that were repulsive almost to hide- 
ousness. We were exhausted nearly to 
death. Our physical exertions had been, 
for the last few hours, almost incredible ; 
in fact, I am convinced that nothing but 
the consciousness that we were engaged in 
a struggle for life or death, could have en- 
abled us to support it, and now that the 
struggle was over, we began to feel our 
weakness. Our mental sufferings had not 
been less, — we had been excruciated body 
and soul alike. Could our mental strug- 
gles have operated like our bodily ones, 
we would have been seen to weep drops 
of blood, as we felt we were doing at 
every step of our progress. ReccUect too. 
Sir, the unnatural atmosphere we had 
breathed so long, amid darkness and dan- 
ger, and which now began to show its 
anti-vital and pestilent effect, in producing 



190 melmoth: 

alternately on our bodies deluges of per- 
spiration, succeeded by a chill that seemed 
to freeze the very marrow. In this state 
of mental fever, and bodily exhaustion, 
we had now to wait many hours, in dark- 
ness, without food, till Heaven pleased to 
send us night. But how were those hours 
to be passed ? The preceding day had been 
one of strict abstinence, — we began al- 
ready to feel the gnawings of hunger, a 
hunger not to be appeased. We must 
fast till the moment of liberation, and we 
must fast amid stone walls, and damp seats 
on floors of stone, which diminished every 
moment the strength nexjessaiy to contend 
with their impenetrable hardness, — their 
withering chillness. 

" The last thought that occurred to 
me was, — with what a companion those 
hours must be passed. With a being 
whoni I abhorred from my very soul, 
while I felt that his presence was at once 
an irrepealable curse, and an invincible 



A TALE. 191 

necessity. So we stood, shivering under 
the trap-door, not daring to whisper our 
thoughts to each other, but feeling that 
despair of incommunication which is per- 
haps the severest curse that can be inflict- 
ed on those who are compelled to be to- 
gether, and compelled, by the same neces- 
sity that imposes their ungenial union, not 
even to communicate their fears to each 
other. We hear the throb of each others 
hearts, and yet dare not say, " My heart 
beats in unison with yours." 

" As we stood thus, the light became 
suddenly eclipsed. I knew not from what 
this arose, till I felt a shower, the most 
violent perhaps that ever Vv^as precipitated 
on the earth, make its way even through 
the trap-door, and drench me in five mi- 
nutes to the skin. I retreated from the 
spot, but not before I had received it in 
every pore of my body. You, Sir, who 
live in happy Ireland, blessed by God with 
an exemption from those vicissitudes of 



192 MELMOTH : 

the atmosphere, can have no idea of their 
violence in continental countries. This 
rain was followed by peals of thunder, that 
made me fear God was pursuing me into 
the abysses where I had shrunk to escape 
from his vengeance, and drew from my 
companion blasphemies more loud than 
thunder, as he felt himself drenched by 
the shower, that now, flooding the vault, 
rose almost to our ancles. At last he pro- 
posed our retiring to a place which he 
said he w^as acquainted with, and which 
would shelter us. He added, that it was 
but a few steps from where w^e stood, and 
that we could easily find our way back. 
I did not dare to oppose him, and follow- 
ed to a dark recess, only distinguished 
from the rest of the vault by the remains 
of what had once been a door. It was 
now light, and I could distinguish objects 
plainly. By the deep hollows framed for 
the shooting of the bolt, and the size of 
the iron hinges that still remained, though 



A TALE. 193 

covered with rust, I saw it must have been 
of no common strength, and probably in- 
tended to secure the entrance to a dun- 
geon, — there was no longer a door, yet I 
shuddered to enter it. As we did so, both 
of us, exhausted in body and mind, sunk 
on the hard floor. We did not say a word 
to each other, an inclination to sleep irre- 
sistibly overcame us; and whether that 
sleep was to be my last or not, I felt a pro- 
found indifference. Yet I was now on the 
verge of liberty, and though drenched, 
famishing, and comfortless, was, in any 
rational estimate, an object much more 
enviable than in the heart-withering safety 
of my cell. Alas ! it is too true that our 
souls always contract themselves on the ap- 
proach of a blessing, and seem as if their 
powers, exhausted in the effort to obtain 
it, had no longer energy to embrace the 
object. Thus we are always compelled to 
substitute the pleasure of the pursuit for 
that of the attainment, — to reverse the 

VOL. IL I 



194 MELMOTH: 

means for the end, or confound them, in 
order to extract any enjoyment from either, 
and at last fruition becomes only another 
name for lassitude. These reflections cer- 
tainly did not occur to me, when, worn 
out with toil, terror, and famine, I fell on 
the stone floor in a sleep that was not 
sleep, — it seemed the suspension both of 
my mortal and immortal nature. I ceased 
from animal and intellectual life at once. 
There are cases. Sir, where the thinking 
power appears to accompany us to the very 
verge of slumber, where we sleep full of 
delightful thoughts, and sleep only to re- 
view them in our dreams : But there are 
also cases when we feel that our sleep is a 
" sleep for ever," — when we resign the 
hope of immortality for the hope of a pro- 
found repose, — when we demand from the 
harassings of fate, " Rest, rest," and no 
more, — when the soul and body faint to- 
gether, and all we ask of God or man is 
to let us sleep. 



A TALE. 195 

" In such a state I fell to the ground ; 
and, at that moment, would have barter- 
ed all my hopes of liberation for twelve 
hours profound repose, as Esau sold his 
birth-right for a small but indispensible 
refreshment. I was not to enjoy even 
this repose long. My companion was 
sleeping too. Sleeping ! great God I what 
^vas his sleep ? — that in whose neighbour- 
hood no one could close an eye, or, worse, 
an ear. He talked as loudly and inces- 
santly as if he had been employed in all 
the active offices of life. I heard involun- 
tarily the secret of his dreams. 1 knew 
he had murdered his father, but I did not 
know that the vision of parricide haunted 
him in his broken visions. My sleep was 
first broken by sounds as horrible as any 1 
ever had heard at my bed-side in the con- 
vent. I heard sounds that disturbed me, 
but I was not yet fully awake. They in- 
creased, they redoubled, — the terrors of my 
habitual associations awoke me. I ima- 



196 MELMOTH : 

gined the Superior and the whole commu- 
nity pursuing us with hghted torches. I 
felt the blaze of the lights in contact with 
my very eye-balls. I shrieked. I said, 
" Spare my sight, do not blind me, do not 
drive me mad, and I will confess all." A 
deep voice near me muttered, " Confess." 
I started up fully awake, — it was only the 
voice of my sleeping companion. I stood 
on my feet, I viewed him as he lay. He 
heaved and wallowed on his bed of stone, 
as if it had been down. He seemed to 
have a frame of adamant. The jagged 
points of stone, the hardness of the floor, 
the ruts and rudenesses of his inhospitable 
bed, produced no effect on him. He could 
have slept, but his dreams were from with- 
in. 1 have heard, I have read, of the 
horrors attending the dying beds of the 
guilty. They often told us of such in the 
convent. One monk in particular, who 
was a priest, was fond of dwelling on a 
death-bed scene he had witnessed, and of 



A TALE. 197 

describing its horrors. He related that he 
liad urged a person, who was sitting calm- 
ly in his chair, though evidently dying, 
to intrust him with his confession. The dy- 
ing person answered, " I will, when those 
leave the room." The monk, conceiving 
that this referred to the relatives and friends, 
motioned them to retire. They did so, 
and again the monk renewed his demands 
on the conscience of the penitent. The 
room was now empty. The monk renewed 
his adjuration to the dying man to disclose 
the secrets of his conscience. The answer 
was the same, — " I will, when those are 
gone." — " Those P' — " Yes, those whom 
you cannot see, and cannot banish, — send 
them away, and I will tell you the truth." — 
" Tell it now, then ; there are none here 
but you and me." — " There are," answer- 
ed the dying man. " There are none that 
I can see," said the monk, gazing round 
the room. " But there are those that I do 
see," replied the dying wretch, " and that 



198 MELMOTH : 

see me ; that are watching, waiting for me, 
the moment the breath is out of my body. 
I see them, I feel them, — stand on my 
right side." The monk changed his posi- 
tion. " Now they are on the left." The 
monk shifted again. " Now they are on 
my right." The monk commanded the 
children and relatives of the dying wretch 
to enter the room, and surround the bed. 
They obeyed the command. " Now they 
are every where," exclaimed the sufferer, 
and expired *. 

" This terrible story came freshly to my 
recollection, accompanied by many others. 
I had heard much of the terrors that sur- 
rounded the dying bed of the guilty, but, 
from what I was compelled to hear, I al- 
most believe them to be less than the ter- 
rors of a guilty sleep. I have said my 
companion began at first with low mut- 
terings, but among them I could distin- 

* Fact^ — me ipso teste. 



A TALE. 199 

miis]) sounds that reminded me too soon 
of all I wished to forget, at least while we 
vrere together. He murmured, " An old 
man ? — yes, — well, the less blood in him. 
Grey hairs ? — no matter, my crimes have 
helped to turn them grey, — he ought to 
have rent them from the roots long ago. 
They are white, you say r — vv^ell, to-night 
they shall be dyed in biood, then they will 
be white no longer. Aye, — he will hold 
them up at the day of judgment, like a 
banner of condemnation against me. He 
will stand at the head of an army stronger 
than the army of martyrs, — the host of 
those whose murderers have been their 
own children. What matter whether they 
cut their parents hearts or their throats. 
I have cut one through and through, 
to the very core, — now for the other, it 
will give him le^:s pain, 1 feel that," — 
and he laughed, shuddered, and writhed 
on his stony bed. Trembling with horror 
ineffable, I tried to awake him.. I shook 



200 llELMOTH : 

his muscular arms, I rolled him on his 
back, on his face, — nothing could awake 
him. It seemed as if I was only rocking 
him on his cradle of stone. He went on, 
" Secure the purse, I know the draw^er of 
the cabinet where it lies, but secure him 
first. Well, then, you cannot, — you shud- 
der at his white hairs, at his calm sleep ! — 
ha ! ha ! that villains should be fools. Well, 
then, I must be the man, it is but a short 
struggle with him or me, — he may be 
damned, and I must. Hush, — how the 
stairs creak, they will not tell him it is 
his son's foot that is ascending ? — They dare 
not, the stones of the wall would give 
them the lie. Why did you not oil the 
hinges of the door ? — now for it. He 
sleeps intensely, — aye, how calm he looks ! 
— the calmer the fitter for heaven. Now% 
— now, my knee is on his breast, — where 
is the knife?— where is the knife ?— if he 
looks at me I am lost. The knife,— I am 
a coward ; the knife, — if he opens his eyes 



A TALE. 201 

I am gone ; the knife, ye cursed cravens, 
— who dare shrink when I have griped my 
father's throat ? There,— there,- there, — 
blood to the hilt,— the old man's blood ; 
look for the money, while I wipe the blade. 
I cannot wipe it, the grey hairs are min- 
gled with the blood,— those hairs brushed 
my lips the last time he kissed me. I was 
a child then. I w^ould not have taken a 
world to murder him then, now, — now, 
what am I ? Ha ! ha ! ha ! Let Judas shake 
his bag of silver against mine,— he betray- 
ed his Saviour, and I have murdered 
my father. Silver against silver, and 
soul against soul. I have got more for 
mine, — he was a fool to sell his for thirty. 
But for which of us wdll the last fire burn 
hotter ?— no matter, I am going to try.'" 
At these horrible expressions, repeated 
over and over, I called, I shrieked to my 
companion to awake. He did so, with a 
laugh almost as wild as the chattering 
of his dreams. " Well, what have you 



202 MELMOTH : 

heard? I murdered him, — you knew that 
long before. You trusted me in this curs- 
ed adventure, which will risk the life of 
both, and can you not bear to hear me 
speak to myself, though I am only telling 
what you knew before?' — " No, I cannot 
bear it," I answered, in an agony of hor- 
ror ; " not even to effect my escape, could 
I undertake to sustain another hour like 
the past, — the prospect of seclusion here 
for a whole day amid famine, damps, and 

darkness, listening to the ravings of a . 

Look not at me with that glare of mock- 
ery, 1 know it all, I shudder at your sight. 
N iihing but the iron link of necessity 
could have bound me to you even for a 
moment. I am bound to you,— I mTist 
bear it while it continues, but do not make 
those moments insupportable. My life 
and liberty are in your hands,— 1 must add 
my reason, too, in the circumstances in 
which we are plunged, — 1 cannot sustain 
your horrible eloquence of sleep. If I am 



A TALE. 203 

forced to listen to it again, you may bear 
me alive from these walls, but you will 
bear me away an ideot, stupified by ter- 
rors which my brain is unable to support. 
Do not sleep, I adjure you. Let me 
watch beside you during this wretched 
day, — this day which is to be measured by 
darkness and suffering, instead of light and 
enjoyment. I am willing to famish with 
hunger, to shudder with cold, to couch on 
these hard stones, but I cannot bear your 
dreams, — if you sleep, I must rouse you 
in defence of my reason. All physical 
strength is failing me fast, and I am be- 
come more jealous of the preservation of 
my intellect. Do not cast at me those 
looks of defiance, I am your inferior in 
strength, but despair makes us equal." As 
I s|)oke, my voice sounded like thunder 
in my own ears, my eyes flashed visibly to 
myself I felt the power that passion gives 
us, and I saw that my companion felt it 
too. I went on, in a tone that made my- 



5^4 MELMOTH : 

self start, " If you dare to sleep, I will 
wake you, — if you dose even, you shall 
not have a moment undisturbed, — you shall 
wake with me. For this long day we 
must starve and shiver together, I have 
wound myself up to it I can bear every 
thing, — every thing but the dreams of him 
w^hose sleep reveals to him the vision of a 
murdered parent. Wake, — rave, — blas- 
pheme, — but sleep you shall not !" 

*' The man stared at me for some time, 
almost incredulous of my being capable of 
such energy of passion and command. But 
when he had, by the help of his dilated 
eyes, and gaping mouth, appeared to satis- 
fy himself fully of the fact, his expression 
suddenly changed. He appeared to feel a 
community of nature with me for the first 
time. Any thing of ferocity appeared con- 
genial and balsamic to him; and, with 
oaths, that froze my blood, swore he liked 
me the better for my resolution. " I wili 
keep awake," he added, with a yawn that 



A TALE. 205 

distended like the jaws of an Ogre pre- 
paring for his cannibal feast. Then sud- 
denly relaxing, " But how shall we keep 
awake ? We have nothing to eat, nothing 
to drink, w^hat shall we do to keep awake ?" 
And incontinently he uttered a volley of 
curses. Then he began to sing. But 
what songs ? — full of such ribaldry and 
looseness, that, bred as I was first in do- 
mestic privacy, and then in the strictness 
of a convent, made me believe it was an 
incarnate demon that w^as howling beside 
me. I implored him to cease, but this 
man could pass so instantaneously from the 
extremes of atrocity to those of levity^ — 
from the ravings of guilt and horror in- 
effable, to songs that would insult a bro- 
thel, that I knew not what to make of 
him. This union of antiimdes, this unna- 
tural alliance of the extremes of guilt and 
light-mindedness, I had never met or ima- 
gined before. He started from the visions 
of a parricide, and sung songs that would 



206 MELMOTH : 

have made a harlot bkish. How ignorant 
of life I must have been, not to know that 
guilt and insensibility often join to te- 
nant and deface the same mansion, and that 
there is not a more strong and indissoluble 
alliance on earth, than that between the 
hand that dare do any thing, and the heart 
that can feel nothing. 

" It was in the midst of one of his most 
licentious songs, that my companion sud- 
denly paused. He gazed about him for 
some time; and faint and dismal as the 
light was by which we beheld each other, 
1 thought I could observe an extraordi- 
nary expression overshadow his counte- 
nance. 1 did not venture to notice it. 
" Do you know where we are ?" he whis- 
pered. " Too well; — in the vault of a 
convent, beyond the help or reach of man, 
— without food, without light, and almost 
without hope." — " Aye, so its last inhabi- 
tants might well say." — " Its last inhabi- 
tants ! — who were they ?" — " 1 can tell 



A TALE. 207 

you, if you can bear it." — " / cannot hear 
it,'' I cried, stopping iny ears, " I will not 
listen to it. I feel by the narrator it must 
be something horrid." — " It was indeed a 
horrid night," said he, unconsciously ad- 
verting to some circumstance in the nar- 
rative; and his voice sunk into mutter- 
ings, and he forbore to mention the sub- 
ject further. I retired as far from him as 
the limits of the vault admitted ; and, 
burying my head between my knees, tried 
to forbear to think. What a state of mind 
must that be, in which we are driven to 
wish we no lonojer had one ! — when we 
would willingly become " as the beasts 
that perish," to forget that privilege of hu- 
manity, which only seems an mi disputed 
title to superlative misery ! To sleep was 
impossible. Though sleep seems to be 
only a necessity of nature, it always re- 
quires an act of the mind to concur in it. 
And if I had been willing to rest, the 
gnawings of hunger, which now began to 



208 MELMOTH : 

be exchanged for the most deadly sickness, 
would have rendered it impossible. Amid 
this complication of physical and mental 
suffering, it is hardly credible, Sir, but it 
is not the less true, that my principal one 
arose from the inanity, the want of occu- 
pation, inevitably attached to my dreary 
situation. To inflict a suspension of the 
action on a being conscious of possessing the 
powers of action, and burning for their em- 
ployment, — to forbid all interchange of 
mutual ideas, or acquirement of new ones 
to an intellectual being, — to do this, is to 
invent a torture that might make Phalaris 
blush for his impotence of cruelty. 

" I had felt other sufferings almost in- 
tolerable, but I felt this impossible to sus- 
tain; and, will you believe it. Sir, after 
wrestUng with it during an hour (as I 
counted hours) of unimaginable misery, I 
rose, and supplicated my companion to re- 
late 'the circumstance he had alluded to, as 
connected with our dreadful abode. His 



A TALE. 209 

ferocious good nature took part with this 
request in a moment; and though I could 
see that his stron^; frame had suffered m.ore 
than my comparatively feeble one, from 
the struggles of the night and the priva- 
tions of the day, he prepared himself with 
a kind of grim alacrity for the effort. He 
was now in his element. He was enabled 
to daunt a feeble mind by the narration of 
horrors, and to amaze an ignorant one with 
a display of crimes ; — and he needed no 
more to make him commence. " I re- 
member," said he, " an extraordinary cir- 
cumstance connected with this vault. I 
wondered how I felt so familiar with this 
door, this arch, at first— I did not recol- 
lect immediately, so many strange thoughts 
have crossed my mind every day, that 
events which would make a life-lasting im- 
pression on others, pass like shadows be- 
fore me, while thoughts appear like sub- 
stances. Emotions a?^e my events — you 
know what brought me to this cursed con- 



210 MELMOTH : 

vent — well, don't shiver or look paler — 
you were pale before. However it was, I 
found myself in the convent, and I was 
obliged to subscribe to its discipline. A 
part of it was, that extraordinary criminals 
should undergo what they called extraor- 
ordinary penance ; that is, not only submit 
to every ignominy and rigour of conven- 
tual life, (which, fortunately for its peni- 
tents, is never wanting in such amusing re- 
sources), but act the part of executioner 
whenever any distinguished punishment 
was to be inflicted or witnessed. They 
did me the honour to believe me particu- 
larly qualified for this species of recreation, 
and perhaps they did not flatter me. I 
had all the humility of a saint on trial ; 
but still I had a kind of confidence in my 
talents of this description, provided they 
were put to a proper test ; and the monks 
had the goodness to assure me, that I never 
could long be without one in a convent. 
This was a very tempting picture of my 



A TALE. 211 

situation, but I found these worthy people 
had not in the least exaggerated. An in- 
stance occurred a few days after I had the 
happiness to become a member of this a- 
miable community, of whose merits you 
are doubtless sensible. I was desired to 
attach myself to a young monk of distin- 
guished family, who had lately taken the 
vows, and who performed his duties with 
that heartless punctuality that intimated 
to the community that his heart was else- 
where. I was soon put in possession of 
the business; from their ordering me toa^- 
tach myself to him, I instantly conceived I 
was bound to the most deadly hostility a- 
gainst him. The friendship of convents is 
always a treacherous league — we watch, 
suspect, and torment each other, for the 
love of God. This young monk's only 
crime was, that he was suspected of che- 
rishing an earthly passion. He was, in 
fact, as I have stated, the son of a distin- 
guished family, who (from the fear of his 



212 MELMOTH : 

contracting what is called a degrading 
marriage, i. e. of marrying a woman of in- 
ferior rank whom he loved, and who would 
have made him happy, as fools, that is, 
half mankind, estimate happiness) forced 
him to take the vows. He appeared at 
times broken-hearted, but at times there 
was a light of hope in his eye, that looked 
somewhat ominous in the eyes of the com- 
munity. It is certain, that hope not be- 
ing an indigenous plant in the parterre of a 
convent, must excite suspicion with regard 
both to its origin and its growth. 

" Some time after, a young novice en- 
tered the convent. From the moment he 
did so, a change the most striking took 
place in the young monk. He and the 
novice became inseparable companions — 
there was something suspicious in that. 
My eyes were on the watch in a moment. 
Eyes are particularly sharpened in discover- 
ing misery when they can hope to aggra- 
vate it. The attachment between the 



A TALE. 213 

young monk and the novice went on. 
They were for ever in the garden together 
— they inhaled the odours of the flowers — 
they cultivated the same cluster of carna- 
tions — they entwined themselves as they 
walked together— when they were in the 
choir, their voices were like mixed in- 
cense. Friendship is often carried to ex- 
cess in conventual life, but this friendship 
was too like love. For instance, the 
psalms sung in the choir sometimes 
breathe a certain language ; at these 
w^ords, the young monk and the novice 
would direct their voices to each other in 
sounds that could not be misunderstood. 
If the least correction was inflicted, one 
would intreat to undergo it for the other. 
If a day of relaxation was allowed, what- 
ever presents were sent to the cell of one, 
were sure to be found in the cell of the 
other. This was enough for me. I saw 
that secret of mysterious happiness, which 
is the greatest misery to those who never 



214 MELMOTH : 

can share it. My vigilance was redoubled, 
and it was rewarded by the discovery of a 
secret — a secret that I had to communicate 
and raise my consequence by. You can- 
not guess the importance attached to the 
discovery of a secret in a convent, (parti- 
cularly when the remission of our own of- 
fences depends on the discovery of those of 
others.) 

" One evening as the young monk and 
his darling novice were in the garden, the 
former plucked a peach, which he im- 
mediately offered to his favourite ; the lat- 
ter accepted it with a movement I thought 
rather awkward — it seemed like what I 
imagined would be 'the reverence of a fe* 
male. The young monk divided the peach 
with a knife ; in doing so, the knife grazed 
the finger of tl>e novice, and the monk, in 
agitation inexpressible, tore his habit to 
bind up the wound. I saw it all — my 
mind was made up on the business — I 
went to the Superior that very night. 



A TALE. 215 

The result may be conceived. They were 
watched, but cautiously at first. They 
were probably on their guard ; for, for some 
time it defied even my vigilance to make 
the slightest discovery. It is a situation in- 
comparably tantalizing, when suspicion is 
satisfied of her own suggestions, as of the 
truth of the gospel, but still wants the little 
fact to make them credible to others. One 
night that I had, by direction of the Supe- 
rior, taken my station in the gallery, (where 
I was contented to remain hour after hour, 
and night after night, amid solitude, dark- 
ness, and cold, for the chance of the power 
of retaliating on others the misery inflict- 
ed on myself)— One night, I thought I 
heard a step in the gallery — I have told 
you that I was in the dark — a light step 
passed me. I could hear the broken and 
palpitating respiration of the person. A 
few moments after, I heard a door open, 
and knew it to be the door of the young 
monk. I knew it ; for by long watching 



^IQ MELMOTH : 

in the dark, and accustoming myself to 
number the cells, by the groan from one, 
the prayer from another, the faint shriek 
of restless dreams from a third, my ear had 
become so finely graduated, that I could 
instantly distinguish the opening of that 
door, from which (to my sorrow) no sound 
had ever before issued. I was provided 
with a small chain, by w^hich I fastened 
the handle of the door to a contiguous one, 
in such a manner, that it was impossible to 
open either of them from the inside. I 
then hastened to the Superior, w4th a pride 
of which none but the successful tracer of 
a guilty secret in convents, can have any 
conception. I believe the Superior was 
himself agitated by the luxury of the same 
feelings, for he was awake and up in his 
apartment, attended hy fou?^ monks, whom 
you may remember." I shuddered at the 
remembrance. " I communicated my in- 
telligence with a voluble eagerness, not 
only un suited to the respect I owed these 
persons, but which must have rendered 



A TALE, 217 

"me almost unintelligible, yet they were 
good enough not only to overlook this 
violation of decorum, which would in any 
other case have been severely punished, 
but even to supply certain pauses in my 
narrative, with a condescension and facili- 
ty truly miraculous. I felt what it was to 
acquire importance in the eyes of a Supe- 
rior, and gloried in all the dignified depra- 
vity of an informer. We set out without 
losing a moment, — we arrived at the dooi? 
of the cell, and I pointed out with triumph 
the chain unremoved, though a slight vi- 
bration, perceptible at our approach, show- 
ed the wretches within were already ap- 
prised of their danger. I unfastened the 
door, — how they must have shuddered ! 
The Superior and his satellites burst into 
the cell, and / held the light. You 
tremble, — why ? I was guilty, and I wish- 
ed to witness guilt that palliated mine, at 
least in the opinion of the convent. I had 
only violated the laws of nature, but they 
had outraged the decorum of a convent, 

VOL. IL K 



218 MELMOTH : 

and, of course, in the creed of a con- 
vent, there was no proportion between 
our offences. Besides, I was anxious 
to witness misery that might perhaps 
equal or exceed my own, and this is a 
curiosity not easily satisfied. It is ac- 
tually possible to become amateurs in suf- 
fering, I have heard of men who have 
travelled into countries where horrible exe- 
cutions were to be daily witnessed, for the 
sake of that excitement which the sight of 
suffering never fails to give, from the 
spectacle of a tragedy, or an auto da fe, 
down to the writhings of the meanest rep- 
tile on whom you can inflict torture, and 
feel that torture is the result of your own 
power. It is a species of feeling of which 
we never can divest ourselves, — a triumph 
over those whose sufferings have placed them 
belov/ us, and no wonder, — suffering is al- 
ways an indication of weakness, — we glory 
in our impenetrability. / did, as we burst 
into the cell. The wretched husband and 
wife were locked in each others arm$. 



A TALE, 219 

You may imagine the scene that followed. 
Here I must do the Superior reluctant jus- 
tice. He was a man (of course from his 
conventual feelings) who had no more idea 
of the intercourse between the sexes, than 
between two beings of a different spe- 
cies. The scene that he beheld could 
not have revolted him more, than if he 
had seen the horrible loves of the ba- 
boons and the Hottentot w'omen, at the 
Cape of Good Hope ; or those still more 
loathsome unions between the serpents of 
South America and their human victims * 
when they can catch them, and twine 
round them in folds of unnatural and in- 
effable union. He really stood as much 
astonished and appalled, to see two human 
beings of different sexes, who dared to 
love each other in spite of monastic ties, 
as if he had witnessed the horrible con- 
junctions I have alluded to. Had he seen 
vipers engendering in that frightful knot 
which seems the pledge of m.ortal hostility, 

* Vide Charlevoix's History of Paraguay. 



220 MELMOTH : 

instead of love, he could not have testified 
more horror, — and I do him the justice to 
believe he felt all he testified. Whatever 
affectation he might employ on points of 
conventual austerity, there was none here. 
Love was a thing he always believed con- 
nected with sin, even though consecrated 
by the name of a sacrament, and called 
marriage, as it is in our church. But, love 
in a convent ! — Oh, there is no conceiving 
his rage ; still less is it possible to conceive 
the majestic and overwhelming extent of 
that rage, when strengthened by principle, 
and sanctified by religion. I enjoyed the 
scene beyond all power of description. I 
saw those wretches, who had triumphed 
over me, reduced to my level in a moment, 
^ — their passions all displayed, and the dis- 
play placing me a hero triumphant above 
all. 1 had crav^ded to the shelter of their 
walls, a v/retched degraded outcast, and 
what was my crime ? Well, — you shudder, 
I have done with that. 1 can only say 
want drove me to it. And here were be- 
jngs w^hom, a few months before, 1 would 



A TALE. 221 

have knelt to as to the images round the 
shrine, — to whom, in the moments of my 
desperate penitence, I would have chmg as 
to the " horns of the altar," all brought as 
low, and lower than myself " Sons of the 
morning," as I deemed them in the ago- 
nies of my humiliation, " how were they 
fallen !" I feasted on the degradation of tlie 
apostate monk and novice, — I enjoyed, to 
the core of my ulcerated heart, tlie passion 
of the Superior, — 1 felt that they were all 
men like myself. Angels, as I had thought 
them, they had all proved themselves mor- 
tal ; and, by watching their motions, and 
flattering their passions, and promoting 
their interest, or setting up my own in op- 
position to them all, while I made them 
believe it was only tlieirs I was intent on, 
1 might make shift to contrive as much 
misery to others, and to carve out as much 
occupation to myself, as if I were actually 
living in the world. Cutting my father's 
throat was a noble feat certainly, (I ask 
your pardon, I did not mean to extort 



522 MELlHOl^H : 

that groan from you), but here were hearts 
to be cut, — and to the core, every day, and 
all day long, so I never could want em- 
ployment." 

" Here he wiped his hard brow, drew 
his breath for a moment, and then said, 
" I do not quite like to go through the de- 
tails by which this wretched pair w-ere de- 
luded into the hope of effecting their 
escape from the convent. It is enough 
that I was the principal agent, — that the 
Superior connived at it, — that I led them 
through the very passages you have tra- 
versed to-night, they trembling and bless- 
ing me at every step, — that " " Stop,'* 

I cried ; " wretch ! you are tracing my 
course this night step by step." — " What ?" 
he retorted, with a ferocious laugh, " you 
think I am betraying you, then ; and if it 
were true, w^hat good would your suspi- 
cions do you,-^you are in my power ? My 
voice might summon half the convent to 
seize you this moment, — my arm might 
fasten you to that wall, till those dogs of 



A TALE. 223 

death, that wait but my whistle, plunged 
their fangs into your very vitals. I fancy 
you would not find their bite less keen, 
from their tusks being so long sharpened 
by an immersion in holy water." xVn- 
other laugh, that seemed to issue from 
the lungs of a demon, concluded this sen- 
tence. '• I know I am in your power," 
I answered ; " and were I to trust to that, 
or to your heart, I had better dash out 
my brains at once against these walls of 
rock, which I believe are not harder than 
the latter. But I know your interests to 
be some way or other connected with my 
escape, and therefore I trust you, — because 
I must. Though my blood, chilled as it 
is by famine and fatigue, seems frozen in 
every drop while I listen to you, yet lis- 
ten I must, and trust my life and libera- 
tion to you. I speak to you with the hor- 
rid confidence our situation has taught me, 
— I hate, — I dread you. If we were to 
meet in hfe, I Avould shrink from you with 
loathings of unspeakable abhorrence, but 



224 MELMOTH : 

here mutual misery has mixed the most 
repugnant substances in unnatural coali- 
tion. The force of that alchemy must 
cease at the moment of my escape from 
the convent and from you ; yet, for these 
miserable hours, my life is as much depen- 
dent on your exertions and presence, as 
my power of supporting them is on the con- 
tinuance of your horrible tale, — go on,then. 
Let us struggle through this dreadful day. 
Day ! a name unknown hei^e, where noon 
and night shake hands that never unlock. 
Let us struggle through it, " hateful and 
hating one another ;" and when it has pass- 
ed, let us curse and part." 

" As I uttered these words, Sir, I felt 
that terrible confidence of hostility which 
the worst beings are driven to in the worst 
of circumstances, and I question whether 
there is a more horrible situation than that 
in which we cling to each other's hate, in- 
stead of each other's love, — in which, at 
every step of our progress, we hold a dag- 
ger to our companion's breast, and say, " If 



A TALE. 225 

you faulter for a moment, this is in your 
lieart. I hate, — I fear, but I must bear 
with you." It was singular to me, though 
it would not be so to those who investi- 
gate human nature, that, in proportion 
as my situation inspired me with a ferocity 
quite unsuited to our comparative situa- 
tions, and which must have been the re- 
sult of the madness of despair and famine, 
my companion's respect for me appeared 
to increase. After a long pause, he asked, 
might he continue his story ? I could not 
speak, for, after the slightest exertion, the 
sickness of deadly hunger returned on me, 
and I could only signify, by a feeble mo- 
tion of my hand, that he might go on. 

*' They were conducted here," he conti- 
nued ; " I had suggested the plan, and the 
Superior consented to it. He would not 
be present, but his dumb nod was enough. 
I was the conductor of their (intended) 
escape ; they believed they were departmg 
with the connivance of the Superior. I led 
them through^those very passages that you 
K 2 



226 MELMOTH : 

and I have trod. I had a map of this sub- 
terranean region, but my blood ran cold as 
I traversed it ; and it was not at all in- 
clined to resume its usual temperament, as 
I felt what was to be the destination of my 
attendants. Once I turned the lamp, on 
pretence of trimming it, to catch a glimpse 
of the devoted wretches. They were em- 
bracing each other, — the light of joy trem- 
bled in their eyes. They were whispering 
to each other hopes of liberation and hap- 
piness, and blending my name in the in- 
terval they could spare from their prayers 
for each other. That sight extinguished 
the last remains of compunction with which 
my horrible task had inspired me. They 
dared to be happy in the sight of one 
who must be for ever miserable, — could 
there be a greater insult ? I resolved to 
punish it on the spot. This very apart- 
ment was near, — 1 knew it, and the map 
of their wanderings no longer trembled in 
my hand. I urged them to enter this re- 
cess, (the door was then entire), while I 



A TALE. 227 

went to examine the passage. They en- 
tered it, thanking me for my precaution, 
— they knew not they were never to quit 
it alive. But what were their lives for the 
agony their happiness cost me ? Tlie mo- 
ment they were inclosed, and clasping 
each other, (a sight that made me grind 
my teeth), I closed and locked the door. 
This movement gave them no immediate 
uneasiness, — they thought it a friendly 
precaution. The moment they were se- 
cured, I hastened to the Superior, who 
was on fire at the insult offered to the 
sanctity of his convent, and still more to 
the purity of his penetration, on which the 
worthy Superior piqued himself as much 
as if it had ever been possible for him to 
acquire the smallest share of it. He de- 
scended with me to the passage, — the 
monks followed with eyes on fire. In the 
agitation of their rage, it was with diffi- 
culty they could discover the door after I 
had repeatedly pointed it out to them. 
The Superior, with his own hands, drove 



228 MELMOTH : 

several nails, which the monks eagerly sup- 
plied, into the door, that effectually joined it 
to the staple, nevei' to he disjoined ; and 
every blow he gave, doubtless he felt as if it 
was a reminiscence to the accusing angel, to 
strike out a sin from the catalogue of his 
accusations. The work was soon done, — 
the work never to be undone. At the 
first sound of steps in the passage, and 
blows on the door, the victiuis uttered a 
shriek of terror. They imagined they 
were detected, and that an incensed party 
of monks were breaking open the door. 
These terrors were soon exchanged for 
others, — and worse, — as they heard the door 
nailed up, and listened to our departing 
steps. They uttered another shriek, but 
O how different was the accent of its de- 
spair !— they knew their doom. * 

It was my penance (no,— my delight) to 
watch at the door, under the pretence of 
precluding the possibility of their escape, 
(of which they knew there was no possi- 



A TALE. 229 

bility) ; but, in reality, not only to inflict 
on me the indignity of being the convent 
gaoler, but of teaching me that callosity 
of heart, and induration of nerve, and 
stubbornness of eye, and apathy of ear, 
that were best suited to my office. But 
they might have saved themselves the 
trouble, — I had them all before ever I en- 
tered the convent. Had I been the Supe- 
rior of the community, I should have un- 
dertaken the office of watching the door. 
You will call this cruelty, I call it curio- 
sity,— that curiosity that brings thousands 
to witness a tragedy, and makes the most 
dehcate female feast on groans and agonies. 
I had an advantage over them,—the groan, 
the agony I feasted on, were real. I took 
my station at the fZoor— that door which, 
like that of Dante's hell, might have borne 
the inscription, " Here is no hope," — with 
a face of mock penitence, and genuine — 
cordial delectation. I could hear every 
w^ord that transpired. For the first hours 
they tried to comfort each other, — they 



230 MELMOTH : 

suggested to each other hopes of libera- 
tion, — and as my shadow, crossing the 
threshold, darkened or restored the light, 
they said, " That is he ;" — then, when this 
occurred repeatedly, without any effect, 
they said, " Ts^o, — no, it is not he," and 
swallowed down the sick sob of despair, 
to hide it from each other. Towards night 
a monk came to take my place, and to of- 
fer me food. I would not have quitted 
my place for worlds ; but I talked to the 
monk in his own language, and told him 
I would make a merit with God of my sa- 
crifices, and was resolved to remain there 
all night, with the permission of the Supe- 
rior. The monk was glad of having a 
substitute on such easy terms, and I was 
glad of the food he left me, for I was hun- 
gry now, but I reserved the appetite of 
my soul for richer luxuries. 1 heard them 
talking within. While 1 was eating, I 
actually lived on the famine that was de- 
vouring them, but of which they did not 
dare to say a word to each other. They 



A TALE. 231 

debated, deliberated, and, as misery grows 
ingenious in its own defence, they at last 
assured each other that it was impossible 
the Superior had locked them in there to 
perish by hunger. At these words I could 
not help laughing. This laugh reached 
their ears, and they became silent in a mo- 
ment. All that night, however, 1 heard 
their gi'oans, — those groans of physical 
suffering, that laugh to scorn all the sen- 
timental sighs that are exhaled from the 
hearts of the most intoxicated lovers that 
ever breathed. I heard them all that 
night. I had read French romances, and 
all their unimaginable nonsense. Madame 
Sevigne herself says ^he would have been 
tired of her daughter in a long tete-a- 
tete journey, but clap me two lovers in- 
to a dungeon, without food, light, or 
hope, and I will be damned (that I am 
already, by the bye) if tiiey do not 
grow sick of each oth r within the first 
twelve hours. The second day hunger 
and darkness had their usual influence. 



232 MELMOTH.: 

They shrieked for liberation, and knocked 
loud and long at their dungeon door. 
They exclaimed they were ready to sub- 
mit to any punishment ; and the approach 
of the monks, which they would have 
dreaded so much the preceding night, 
they now solicited on their knees. What 
a jest, after all, are the most awful vicissi- 
tudes of human hfe! — they supplicated 
now for what they would have sacrificed 
their souls to avert four-and-twenty hours 
before. Then the agony of hunger in- 
creased, they shrunk from the door, and 
grovelled apart from each other. Apart ! 
— how I watched that. They were rapid- 
ly becoming objects of hostility to each 
other, — oh what a feast to me ! They could 
not disguise from each other the revolting 
circumstances of their mutual sufferings. 
It is one thing for lovers to sit down to a 
feast magnificently spread, and another for 
lovers to couch in darkness and famine, — 
to exchange that appetite which cannot be 
supported without dainties and flattery, 



A TALE. 2SS 

for that which would barter a descend- 
ed Venus for a morsel of food. The 
second night they raved and groaned, (as 
occurred) ; and, amid their agonies, (I 
must do justice to women, whom I hate 
as well as men), the man often accused 
the female as the cause of all his suffer- 
ings, but the woman never, — never re- 
proached him. Her groans might indeed 
have reproached him bitterly, but she 
never uttered a w^ord that could have caus- 
ed him pain. There was a change which 
I well could mark, however, in their phy- 
sical feelings. The first day they clung 
together, and every movement I felt was- 
like that of one person. The next the man 
alone struggled, and the woman moaned 
in helplessness. The third night, — how 
shall I tell it ? — but you have bid me go on. 
All the horrible and loathsome excrucia- 
tions of famine had been undergone ; the 
disunion of every tie of the heart, of pas- 
sion, of nature, had commenced. In the 
agonies of their famished sickness they 



234 MELMOTH : 

loathed each other, — they could have curb- 
ed each other, if they had had breath to 
curse. It was on the fourth night that I 
heard the shriek of the wretched female, — 
her lover, in the agony of hunger, had 
fastened his teeth in her shoulder ; — that 
bosom on which he had so often luxuriat- 
ed, became a meal to him now." * 
* * * * 

•* Monster ! and you laugh ?" — " Yes, I 
laugh at all mankind, and the imposition 
they dare to practise when they talk of 
hearts. I laugh at human passions and 
human cares, — vice and virtue, religion and 
impiety ; they are all the result of petty lo- 
calities, and artificial situation. One phy- 
sical want, one severe and abrupt lesson 
from the tintless and shrivelled lip of ne- 
cessity, is worth all the logic of the empty 
wretches who have presumed to prate it, 
from Zeno down to Burgersdicius. Oh ! it 
silences in a second all the feeble sophistry 
of conventional life, and ascetitious pas- 
sion. Here were a pair who would not 



A TALE. 235 

have believed all the world on their 
knees, even though angels had descended 
to join in the attestation, that it was pos- 
sible for them to exist without each other. 
They had risked every thing, trampled on 
every thing human and divine, to be in 
each others sight and arms. One hour of 
huno'er undeceived them. A trivial and 
ordinary want, whose claims at another time 
they would have regarded as a vulgar inter- 
ruption of their spiritualised intercourse, 
not only, by its natural operation, sundered 
it for ever, but, before it ceased, converted 
that intercourse into a sourceof torment and 
hostility inconceivable, except among canni- 
bals. The bitterest enemies on earth could 
not have re^rarded each other with more 
abhorrence than these lovers. Deluded 
wretches ! you boasted of having hearts, I 
boast I have none, and which of us gained 
most by the vaunt, let life decide. My story 
is nearly finished, and so I hope is the day. 
When I was last here 1 had something 



23(5 MELMOTIT : 

to excite me ; — talking of those things is 
poor employment to one who has been a 
witness to them. On the sixth day all Avas 
still. The door was unnailed, we enter- 
ed, — they were no more. They lay far 
from each other, farther than on that vo- 
luptuous couch into which their passion 
had converted the mat of a convent bed. 
She lay contracted in a heap, a lock of her 
long hair in her mouth. There was a 
slight scar on her shoulder, — the rabid de- 
spair of famine had produced no farther 
outrage. He lay extended at his length, 
— his hand was between his lips ; it seem- 
ed as if he had not strength to execute the 
purpose for which he had brought it there. 
The bodies were brought out for inter- 
ment. As we removed them into the 
light, the long hair of the female, falling 
over a face no longer disguised by the no- 
vice's dress, recalled a hkeness I thought 
I could remember. I looked closer, she 
was my own sister, — my only one, and 



A TALE, 2f7 

1 had heard her voice grow fainter and 

fainter. I had heard " and his own 

voice grew fainter — it ceased. 

" TrerabUng for a hfe with which my 
own was linls:ed, 1 staggered towards him. 
I raised him half up in my arms, and re- 
collecting there must be a current of air 
through the trap-door, I attempted to trail 
him along thither. I succeeded, and, as 
the breeze played over him, I saw with 
delight unutterable the diminution of the 
light that streamed through it. It was 
evening, — there was no longer any necessity^ 
no longer any time for delay. He recover- 
ed, for his swoon arose not from exhausted 
sensibility, but from mere inanition. How- 
ever it was, I found my interest in watch- 
ing his recovery ; and, had I been ade^ 
quate to the task of observing extraordi- 
nary vicissitudes of the human mind, I 
would have been indeed amazed at the 
change that he manifested on his recovery. 
Without the least reference to his late 
story, or late feelings, he started from my 



238 MELMOTH : 

arms at the discovery that the light had 
diminished, and prepared for our escape 
through the trap-door, with a restored 
energy of strength, and sanity of intellect, 
that might have been deemed miraculous if 
it had occurred in a convent : —Happening 
to occur full thirty feet below the proper 
surface for a miracle, it must be put to the 
account of strong excitement merely. I 
could not indeed dare to believe a miracle was 
wrought in favour of my profane attempt, 
and so I was glad to put up with second 
causes. With incredible dexterity he climb- 
ed up the wall, with the help of the rug- 
ged stones and my shoulders, — threw open 
the trap-door, pronounced that all was safe, 
assisted me to ascend after him, — and, with 
gasping delight, I once more breathed the 
breath of heaven. The night was perfect- 
ly dark. I could not distinguish the 
buildings from the trees, except when a 
faint breeze gave motion to the latter. To 
this darkness, I am convinced, I owe the 



A TALE. 239 

preservation of my reason under such vi- 
cissitudes, — the glory of a resplendent 
nvj-ht would have driven me mad, emero;- 
ing from darkness, famine, and cold. I 
would have wept, and laughed, and knelt, 
and turned idolater. I would have " wor- 
shipped the host of heaven, and the moon 
w\^lking in her brightness." Darkness was 
my best security, in every sense of the 
word. We traversed the garden, without 
feeling the ground under our feet. As we 
approached the wall, I became again dead- 
ly sick, — my senses grew giddy, I reeled. 
I whispered to my companion, " Are 
there not lights gleaming from the con- 
vent windows?" — " No, the lights are 
iQashing from your own eyes, — it is only 
the effect of darkness, famine, and fear, — 
come on." — " But I hear a sound of 
bells." — " The bells are ringing only in 
your ears, — an empty stomach is your 
sexton, and you fancy you hear bells. Is 
this a time to faulter ?— come on, come 



S40 3XELM0TH : 

on. Don't hang such a dead Weight oYi 
my arm, — don't fall, if you can help iU 
Oh God, he has swooned !" 

" These were the last words I heard. 1 
had fallen, I believe, into his arms. With 
that instinct that acts most auspiciously in 
the absence of both thought and feeling, 
he dragged me in his brawny arms to the 
wall, and twisted my cold fingers in the 
ropes of the ladder. The touch restored 
me in a moment ; and, almost before my 
hand had touched the ropes, my feet be- 
gan to ascend them. My companion fol- 
lowed extempore. We reached the sum- 
mit, — 1 tottered from weakness and terror. 
I felt a sickly dread, that, though the lad- 
der was there, Juan was not. A moment 
after a lanthom flashed in my eyes, —I saw 
a figure below. I sprung down, careless, 
in that wild moment, whether I met the 
dagger of an assassin, or the embrace of a 
brother. " Alonzo, dear Alonzo," murmur- 
ed a voice. " Juan, dear Juan," was all I 



A TALE. 241 

could utter, as I felt my shivering •breast 
held close to that of the most generous 
and affectionate of brothers. " How much 
you must have suffered, — how much I 
have suffered," he whispered; " during tlie 
last horrible twenty-four hours, I almost 
gave you up. Make haste, the carriage is 
not twenty paces off." And, as he spoke, 
the shifting of a lanthorn shewed me those 
imperious and beautiful features, which I 
had once dreaded as the pledge of eternal 
emulation, but which I now regarded as 
the smile of the proud but benignant god 
of my liberation. I pointed to my com- 
panion, I could not speak, — hunger was 
consuming my vitals. Juan supported 
me, consoled me, encouraged me; did 
all, and more, than man ever did for 
man, — than man ever did, perhaps, for the 
most shrinking and delicate of the other 
sex under his protection. Oh, with what 
agony of heart I retrace his manly tender- 
ness I We waited for my companion, — he 
descended the wall. " jNIake haste, make 

VOL. II. L 



242 MELMOTH : 

haste," Juan whispered ; " I am famishing 
too. I have not tasted food for four-and- 
twenty hours, watching for you." We 
hurried on. It was a waste place, — I could 
only distinguish a carriage by the light of 
a dim Ian thorn, but that was enough for 
me. I sprung lightly into it. " He is 
safe,^' cried Juan, following me. " But 
hre you ?" answered a voice of thunder. 
Juan staggered back from the step of the 
carriage, — he fell. I sprung out, I fell 
too — on his body. I was bathed in his 
blood, he was no more," 



CHAPTER X. 

Men who with mankind were foe-?. 

* V* * * 

Or who, in desperate doubt of grace.— 

« * * * 

Scott's Marmion- 

'* vJne wild moment of yelling agony, — 
one flash of a fierce and fiery light, that 
seemed to envelope and wither me soul and 
body, — one sound, that swept through my 
ears and brain like the last trumpet, as it 
will thrill on the senses of those who slept 
in guilt, and awake in despair, — one such 
moment, that condenses and crowds all 
imaginable sufferings in one brief and in- 



244 MELMOTH ; 

tense pang, and appears exhausted itself 
by the blow it has struck, — one such mo- 
ment I remember, and no more. Many 
a month of gloomy unconsciousness rolled 
over me, without date or notice. One 
thousand waves may welter over a sunk 
wreck, and be felt as one. I have a dim 
recollection of refusing food, of resisting 
change of place, &c. but they were like the 
faint and successless attempts we make 
under the burden of the night-mare ; and 
those with whom I had to do, probably re- 
garded any opposition I could make no 
more than the tossings of a restless sleeper. 
" From dates that I have since been en- 
abled to collect, I must have been four 
months at least in this state ; and ordinary 
persecutors would have given me up as a 
hopeless subject for any further sufferings ; 
but religious malignity is too industrious, 
and too ingenious, to resign the hope of a vic- 
tim butwith life. If the fire is extinguished, 
it sits and watches the embers. If the strings 
of the heart crack in its hearing, it listens if 



A TALK. 245 

it be the la^t that has broken. It is a spirit 
that delights to ride on the tenth tvave, 
and view it whelm and bury the sufferer 

for ever. * * * 

^ * * -^- 

" Many changes had taken place, without 
any consciousness on my part of them. 
Perhaps the profound tranquillity of my 
last abode contributed more than any thing 
else to the recovery of my reason. I dis- 
tinctly remember awaking at once to the 
full exercise of my senses and reason, and 
finding myself in a place which I examin- 
ed with the most amazed and jealous cu- 
riosity. My memory did not molest me 
in the least. Why I was there ? or what 
I had suffered before I was brought there ? 
it never occurred to me to inquire. The 
return of the intellectual powers came 
slowly in, like the waves of an advancing 
tide, and happily for me memory was the 
last, — the occupation of my senses was at 
first quite enough for me. You must ex- 
pect no romance-horrors, Sir, from mv 



246 MELMOTH : 

narrative. Perhaps a life like mine may 
revolt the taste that has feasted to fasti- 
diousness ; but truth sometimes gives full 
and dreadful compensation, in presenting 
us facts instead of images. 

" I found myself lying on a bed, not 
very different from that in my cell, but 
the apartment was wholly unlike the lat- 
ter. It was somewhat larger, and cover- 
ed with matting. There was neither cru- 
cifix, painting, or vessel for holy water ; — 
the bed, a coarse table which supported a 
lighted lamp, and a vessel containing wa- 
ter for the purpose, were all the furniture. 
There was no window ; and some iron 
knobs in the door, to which the light of 
the lamp gave a kind of dismal distinct- 
ness and prominence, proved that it was 
strongly secured. I raised myself on my 
arm, and gazed round me with the appre- 
hensiveness of one who fears that the 
slightest motion may dissolve the spell, 
and plunge him again in darkness. At 
that moment the recollection of all the 



A TALE. 247 

past struck me like a tbunder-bolt. I ut- 
tered a cry, that seemed to drain me of 
breath and being at once, and fell back on 
the bed, not senseless but exhausted. I 
remembered every event in a moment, 
with an intenseness that could only be 
equalled by actual and present agency in 
them, — my escape, — my safety, — my de- 
spair. I felt Juan's embrace,— then I felt 
his blood stream over me. I saw his eyes 
turn in despair, before they closed for ever, 
and 1 uttered another cry, such as had 
never before been heard within those walls. 
At the repetition of this sound the door 
opened, and a person, in a habit I had 
never seen before, approached, and signi- 
fied to me by signs, that I must observe 
the most profound silence. Nothmg, in- 
deed, could be more expressive of this 
meaning, than his denying himself the 
use of his voice to convey it. 1 gazed on 
this apparition in silence, — my amazement 
had all the effect of an apparent submission 



248 MELMOTH : 

to his injunctions. He retired, and I began 
to wonder where I was. Was it among the 
dead ? or some subterranean world of the 
mute and voiceless, where there was no air to 
convey sounds, and no echo to repeat them, 
and the famished ear waited in vain for its 
sweetest banquet, — the voice of man ? 
These wanderings were dispelled by the 
re-entrance of the person. He placed 
bread, water, and a small portion of meat 
on the table, motioned me to approach, 
(which I did mechanically), and, when I 
was seated, ivhispered me. That my un- 
happy situation having hitherto rendered 
me incapable of understanding the regula- 
tions of the place where I was, he had 
been compelled to postpone acquainting 
me with them ; but now he was obliged 
to warn me, that my voice must never be 
raised beyond the key in which he address- 
ed me, and which was sufficient for all pro- 
per purposes of communication ; finally, 
he assured me that cries, exclamations of 



A TALE. 249 

any kind, or even coughing too loud^'i 
(which might be interpreted as a signal), 
would be considered as an attempt on the 
inviolable habits of the place, and punish- 
ed with the utmost severity. To my re- 
peated questions of " Where am I? what 
is this place, with its mysterious regula- 
tions ?" he replied in a whisper, that his 
business was to issue orders, not to answer 
questions ; and so saying he departed. 
How^ever extraordinary these injunctions 
appeared, the manner in which they were 
issued was so imposing, peremptory, and 
habitualy — it seemed so little a thing of lo- 
cal contrivance and temporary display, — 
so much like the established language of an 
absolute and long-fixed s^^stem, that obe- 
dience to it seemed inevitable. I threw 
myself on the bed, and murmured to my- 
self, " Where am I ?" till sleep overcame 
me. 

" I have heard that the first sleep of a 

* This is a fact well established. 
I. 2 



250 MELMOTH : 

recovered maniac is intensely profound. 
]\lioe was not so, it was broken by many 
troubled dreams. One, in particular, 
brought me back to the convent. I 
thought I was a boarder in it, and study- 
ing Virgil. 1 was reading that passage in 
the second book, where the vision of Hec- 
tor appears to zlEneas hi his dream, and his 
ghastly and dishonoured form suggests the 
mournful exclamation, 

-Heu quantum mutatus ab illo, — 



Quibus ab oris. Hector expectate venis }" 

Then I thought Juan was Hector, — 
that the same pale and bloody phantom 
stood calling me to fly — " Heu fuge," 
while I vainly tried to obey him. Oh that 
dreary mixture of truth and delirium, of 
the real and visionary, of the conscious 
and unconscious parts of existence, that 
visits the dreams of the unhappy ! He was 
Pantheus, and murmured, 

" Venit summa dies^ et ineluctabile tempus." 



A TALE. 251 

I appeared to weep and stmggle in my 
dream. I addressed the figure that stood 
before me sometimes as Juan, and some- 
times as the image of the Trojan vision. 
At last the figure uttered, with a kind of 
querulous shriek, — that vox stridiila which 
we hear only in dreams, 

"^ Proximus ardet Ucalegon," 

and I started up fully awake, in all the 
horrors of an expected conflagration. 

*' It is incredible, Sir, how the senses 
and the mind can operate thus, during the 
apparent suspension of both ; how sound 
can affect organs that seem to be shut, and 
objects affect the sight, while its sense ap- 
pears to be closed, — can impress on its 
dreaming consciousness, images more hor- 
ribly vivid than even reality ever present- 
ed. I awoke with the idea that flames 
were raging in contact with my eye-balls, 
and I saw only a pale light, held by a 
paler hand — close to my eyes indeed, but 
withdrawn the moment I awoke. The 



2521 ^lELMOTH : 

person who held it shrouded it for a mo- 
ment, and then advanced and flashed its 
full light on me, and along with it — the 
person of my companion. The associa- 
tions of our last meeting rushed on me. 
I started up, and said, " Are we free, 
then?" — " Hush,— one of us is free; but 
you must not speak so loud." — " Well, I 
have heard that before, but I cannot com- 
prehend the necessity of this whispering 
secrecy. If I am free, tell me so, and tell 
me whether Juan has survived that last 
horrible moment,— my intellect is but just 
respiring. Tell me how Juan fares." — " Oh, 
sumptuously. No prince in all the land 
reposes under a more gorgeous canopy, — 
marble pillars, waving banners, and nod- 
ding phimes. He had music too, but he 
did not seem to heed it. He lay stretched 
on velvet and gold, but he appeared in- 
sensible of all these luxuries. There was 
a curl on his cold white lip, too, that seem- 
ed to breathe ineffable scorn on all that 



A TALE. 25S 

was going on, — but he was proud enough 
even in his Hfe-time." — " His life-time !'' 
I shrieked ; " then he is dead ?" — " Can 
you doubt that, when you know who 
struck the blow ? None of my victims 
ever gave me the trouble of a second." — 
" You, — you ?" I swam for some moments 
in a sea of flames and blood. My frenzy 
returned, and I renjember only uttering 
curses that would have exhausted divine 
vengeance in all its plenitude to fulfil. I 
might have continued to rave till my rea- 
son was totally lost, but 1 was silencpd 
and stunned by his laugh bursting out a- 
mid my curses, and overwhelming them. 

" That laugh made me cease, and lift up 
my eyes to him, as if I expected to see 
another being, -it was still the same. 
•* And you dreamt," he cried, " in your 
temerity, you dreamt of setting the vigi- 
lance of a convent at defiance ? Two boys, 
one the fool of fear, and the other of te- 
merity, were fit antagonists for that stu- 
pendous system, whose roots are in the 



254 MELMOTH : 

bowels of the eartli, and whose head is a- 
mong the stars,— you escape from a con- 
vent ! you defy a power that has defied 
sovereigns! A power whose influence is 
unlimited, indefinable, and unknown, even 
to those who exercise it, as there are man- 
sions so vast, that their inmates, to their 
last hour, have never visited all the apart- 
ments ; — a power whose operation is like 
its motto, — one and indivisible. The soul 
of the Vatican breathes in the humblest 
convent in Spain, — and you, an insect 
perched on a wheel of this vast machine, 
imagined you were able^ to arrest its pro- 
gress, while its rotation was hurrying on 
to crush you to atoms." While he was 
uttering these words, with a rapidity and 
energy inconceivable, (a rapidity that lite- 
rally made one word seem to devour an- 
other), I tried, with that effort of intellect 
which seems like the gasping respiration 
of one whose breath has long been forcibly 
suppressed or suspended, to comprehend 
and follow him. The first thought that 



A TALE. 255 

struck me was one not very improbable 
in my situation, that he was not the per- 
son he appeared to be, — that it was not the 
companion of my escape who now address- 
ed me ; and I summoned all the remains of 
my intellect to ascertain this. A few 
questions must determine this point, if I 
had breath to utter them. " Were you 
not the agent in my escape ? Were you 

not the man who What tempted 

you to this step, in the defeat of which 
you appear to rejoice ?" — " A bribe." — 
" And you have betrayed me, you say, 
and boast of your treachery, — what tempt- 
ed you to this ?" " A higher bribe. 

Your brother gave gold, but the con- 
vent promised me salvation, — a business 
I was very wiUing to commit to their 
hands, as I was totally incompetent to ma- 
nage it myself" — '* Salvation, for treachery 
and murder ?"— " Treachery and murder, — 
hard words. Now, to talk sense, was not 
yours the vilest treachery ? You reclaimed 
your vows,— you declared before God and 



256 MELMOTH : 

man, that the words you uttered before 
both were the babble of an infant; then 
you seduced your brother from his duty 
to his and your parents,— you connived at 
his intriguing against the peace and sancti- 
ty of a monastic institution, and dare you 
talk of treachery ? And did you not, with 
a callosity of conscience unexampled in 
one so young, accept, nay, cling to an as- 
sociate in your escape whom you knew 
you were seducing from his vows, — from 
all that man reveres as holy, and all that 
God (if there be a God) must regard as 
binding on man ? You knew my crime, 
you knew my atrocity, yet you brandish- 
ed me as your banner of defiance against 
the Almighty, though its inscription was, 
in glaring characters,--impiety— parricide 
— irrehgion. Torn as the banner was, it 
still hung near the altar, till you dragged 
it away, to wrap yourself from detection 
in its folds,— and you talk of treachery ?— 
there is not a more traitorous wretch 
on earth than yourself. Suppose that I 



A TALE. 257 

was all that is vile and culpable, was 
it for you to double-dye the hue of my 
crime in the crimson of your sacrilege and 
apostacy ? And for murder, I know I am 
a parricide. I cut my father's throat, but 
he never felt the blow, — nor did I, — I was 
intoxicated with wine, with passion, with 
blood, — no matter which ; but you, with 
cold deliberate blows, struck at the hearts 
of father and mother. You killed by 
inches, — I murdered at a blow, — which of 
us is the murderer ? — And you prate of 
treachery and murder ? I am as innocent 
as the child that is born this hour, com- 
pared to you. Your father and mother 
have separated, — she is gone into a con- 
vent, to hide her despair and shame at your 
unnatural conduct, — your father is plunging 
successively into the abysses of voluptuous- 
ness and penitence, wretched in both ; your 
brother, in his desperate attempt to libe- 
rate you, has perished, — you have scatter- 
ed desolation over a whole family, — you 
have stabbed the peace and heart of each 



258 31ELM0TH : 

of them, with a hand that deliberated and 
paused on its blow, and then struck it 
calmly, — and you dare to talk of treachery 
and murder ? You are a thousand times 
more culpable than I am, guilty as you 
think me. I stand a blasted tree, — I am 
struck to the heart, to the root, — !• wither 
alone, — but you are the Upas, under whose 
poisonous droppings all things living have 
perished, — father — mother — brother, and 
last yourself; — the erosions of the poison, 
having nothing left to consume, strike in- 
ward, and prey on your own heart. 
Wretch, condemned beyond the sympa- 
thy of man, beyond the redemption of the 
Saviour, what can you say to this ?" — I an- 
swered only, " Is Juan dead, and were 
you his murderer, — were you indeed ? I 
believe all you say, I must be very guilty, 
but is Juan dead ?" As 1 spoke, I lifted up 
to him eyes that no longer seemed to see, 
— a countenance that bore no expression 
but that of the stupefaction of intense grief 
I could neither utter nor feel reproaches, — 



A TALE. 259 

I had suffered beyond the power of com- 
plaint. I awaited his answer ; he was si- 
lent, but his diabolical silence spoke. " And 
my mother retired to a convent ?" he nod- 
ded. " And my father ?" he smiled, and 
I closed my eyes. I could bear any thing 
but his smile. I raised my head a few 
moments after, and saw him, with an ha- 
bitual motion, (it could not have been 
more), make the sign of the cross, as a 
clock in some distant passage struck. This 
sight reminded me of the play so often 
acted in Madrid, and which I had seen in 
my few days of liberation, — El diablo Pre- 
dicador. You smile. Sir, at such a recol- 
lection operating at such a moment, but 
it is a fact ; and had you witnessed that 
play under the singular circumstances I 
did, you would not wonder at my being 
struck with the coincidence. In this per- 
formance the infernal spirit is the hero, 
and in the disguise of a monk he appears 
in a convent, where he torments and per- 
secutes the community with a mixture of 



260 MELMOTH : 

malignity and mirth truly Satanic. One 
night that I saw it performed, a groupe 
of monks were carrying the Host to a 
dying person ; the walls of the theatre 
were so slight, that we could distinctly 
hear the sound of the bell which they ring 
on that occasion. In an instant, actors, 
audience, and all, were on their knees, 
and the devil, who happened to be on the 
stage, knelt among the rest, and crossed 
himself with visible marks of a devotion 
equally singular and edifying. You will 
allow the coincidence to be irresistibly 
striking. 

" When he had finished his monstrous 
profanation of the holy sign, I fixed my 
eyes on him with an expression not to be 
mistaken. He saw it. There is not so 
bitter a reproach on earth as silence, for it 
always seems to refer the guilty to their 
own hearts, whose eloquence seldom fails 
to fill up the pause very little to the sa- 
tisfaction of the accused. My look threw 
J)im into a rage, that I am now convinced 



A TALE. 261 

not the most bitter upbraidings could have 
caused. The utmost fury of imprecation 
would have fallen on his ear like the most 
lulling harmony ; — it would have convinc- 
ed him that his victim was suffering all 
he could possibly inflict. He betrayed 
this in the violence of his exclamations. 
" What, wretch !" he cried ; — " Do you 
think it was for your masses and your 
mummeries, your vigils, and fasts, and 
mumbling over senseless unconsoling beads, 
and losing my rest all night watchingfor the 
matins, and then quitting my frozen mat 
to nail my knees to stone till they grew 
there, — till I thought the whole pavement 
would rise with me when I rose, — do you 
think it was for the sake of listening to 
sermons that the preachers did not believe, 
— and prayers that the lips that uttered 
them yawned at in the listlessness of their 
infidelity, — and penances that might be 
hired out to a lay-brother to undergo for 
a pound of coffee or of snuff, — and the 
vilest subserviencies to the caprice and 



262 MELMOTH : 

passion of a Superior, — and the listening 
to men with God for ever in their mouths, 
and the world for ever in their hearts, — 
men who think of nothing but the ag- 
grandizement of their temporal distinc- 
tion, and screen, under the most revolt- 
ing affectation of a concern in spiritua- 
lities, their ravening cupidity after earth- 
ly eminence :— Wretch ! do you dream 
that it was for this ? — that this atJieism 
of bigotry, — this creed of all the priests 
that ever have existed in connexion with 
the state, and in hope of extending their 
interest by that connexion, — could have 
any influence over me? I had sound- 
ed every depth in the mine of depravity 
before them. I knew them, — I despised 
them. I crouched before them in body, 
I spurned them in my soul. With all 
their sanctimony, they had hearts so 
worldly, that it was scarce worth while to 
watch their hypocrisy, the secret developed 
itself so soon. There was no discovery to 
be made, no place for detection. I have seen 



A Tale. 263 

them on their high festivals, prelates, and 
abbots, and priests, in all their pomp of 
office, appearing to the laity like descend- 
ed gods, blazing in gems and gold, amid 
the lustre of tapers and the floating splen- 
dour of an irradiated atmosphere alive 
with light, and all soft and delicate har- 
monies and delicious odours, till, as they 
disappeared amid the clouds of incense so 
gracefully tossed from the gilded censers, 
the intoxicated eye dreamed it saw them 
ascending to Paradise. Such was the 
scene ^ but what was behind the scene ? — / 
saw it all. Two or three of them would 
rush from service into the vestry together, 
under the pretence of changing their vest- 
ments. One would imagine that these 
men would have at least the decency 
to refrain, while in the intervals of the 
holy mass. IVo, 1 overheard them. 
While shifting their robes, they talked in- 
cessantly of promotions and appointments, 
— of this or that prelate, dying or dead, 
—of a wealthy benefice being vacant, 



264 MELMOTH : 

— of one dignitary having bargained hard 
with the state for the promotion of a rela- 
tive,— of another who had well-founded 
hopes of obtaining a bishoprick, for what ? 
neither for learning or piety, or one fea- 
ture of the pastoral character, but because 
he had valuable benefices to resign in ex- 
change, that might be divided among nu- 
merous candidates. Such was their con- 
versation,— such and such only were their 
thoughts, till the last thunders of the alle- 
lujah from the church made them start, 
and hurry to resume their places at the 
altar. Oh what a compound of mean- 
ness and pride, of imbecillity and preten- 
sion, of sanctimony so transparently and 
awkwardly worn, that the naked frame 
of the natural mind was visible to every 
eye beneath it, — that mind which is 
'' earthly, sensual, devilish." Was it 
to live among such wretches, who, all- 
villain as I was, made me hug myself with 
the thought that at least I was not like 
them, a passionless prone reptile,— a thing 



A TALE. 265 

fiiade of forms and dressings, half satin 
and shreds, half ave's and credo's, — bloat- 
ed and abject,— creeping and aspiring, — 
winding up and up the pedestal of power 
at the rate of an inch a day, and tracking 
its advance to eminence by the flexibility 
of its writhings, the obliquity of its course, 
and the filth of its slime,— was it for this ?'* 
— he paused, half-choaked with his emo- 
tions. 

" This man might have been a better be- 
ing under better circumstances ; he had at 
least a disdain of all that was mean in vice, 
with a wild avidity for all that was atro- 
cious. " Was it for this," he continued, 
" that I have sold myself to work their 
works of darkness,— .that I have become 
in this life as it were an apprentice to Sa- 
tan, to take anticipated lessons of torture, 
— that I have sealed those indentures here, 
which must be fulfilled below ? No, I 
despise — I loathe it all, the agents and the 
system, — the men and their matters. But 
it is the creed of that system, (and true or 

VOL. II. M 



Z66 MELMOTH : 

false it avails not,— some kind of creed is 
necessary, and the falser perhaps the bet- 
ter, for falsehood at least flatters), that the 
greatest criminal may expiate his offences, 
b}' vigilantly watching, and severely pu- 
nishing, those of I he enemies of heaven. 
Every offender may purchase his immuni- 
ty, by consenting to become the execu- 
tioner of the offender whom he betrays 
and denounces. In the language of the 
laws of another country, they may turn 
** king's evidence," and buy their own 
lives at the price of another's,— a bargain 
which every man is very ready to make. 
But, in religious life, this kind of transfer, 
this substitutional suffering, is adopted with 
an avidity indescribable. How we love 
to punish those whom the church calls the 
enemies of God, while conscious that, 
though our enmity against him is infi- 
nitely greater, we become acceptable in 
his sight by tormenting those who may be 
less guilty, but who are in our power ! I 
hate you, not because I have any natural 



A TALE. 267 

or social cause to do so, but because the' 
exhaustion of my resentment on you, mar 
diminish that of the Deity towards me. 
If I persecute and torment the enemies of 
God, must I not be the friend of God ? 
Must not every pang 1 inflict on another, 
be recorded in the book of the All-remem- 
bering, as an expurgation of at least one 
of the pangs that await me hereafter ? I 
have no religion, I believe in no God, I 
repeat no creed, but I have that supersti- 
tion of fear and of futurity, that seeks its 
wild and hopeless mitigation in the suffer- 
ings of others when our own are exhaust- 
ed, or when (a much more common case) 
we are unwilling to undergo them. I am 
convinced that my own crimes will be 
obhterated, by whatever crimes of others 
I can promote or punish. Had I not, 
then, every motive to urge you to crime ? 
Had I not every motive to watch and ag- 
gravate your punishment ? Every coal of 
fire that I heaped on your head, was re- 
moving one from that fire that bums for 



268 MELMOTH : 

ever and ever for mine. Every drop of 
water that I withheld from your burning 
tongue, I expect will be repaid to me in 
slaking the fire and brimstone into which 
I must one day be hurled. Every tear that I 
draw, every groan that 1 extort, will, I am 
convinced, be repaid me in the remission 
of my own ! — guess what a price I set on 
yours, or those of any other victim. The 
man in ancient story trembled and paused 
over the scattered limbs of his child, and 
failed in the pursuit, — the true penitent 
rushes over the mangled members of na- 
ture and passion, collects them with a 
hand in which there is no pulse, and a 
heart in which there is no feeling, and 
holds them up them in the face of the Di- 
vinity as a peace-offering. Mine is the best 
theology, — the theology of utter hostility 
to all beings whose sufferings may mitigate 
mine. In this flattering theory, your 
crimes become my virtues, — I need not 
any of my own. Guilty as 1 am of 
the crime that outrages nature, your 



A TALE. 269 

crimes (the crimes of those who offend a- 
gainst the church) are of a much more 
heinous order. But your guilt is my ex- 
culpation, your sufferings are my triumph. 
I need not repent, I need not believe ; if 
you suffer, I am saved, — that is enough 
for me. How glorious and easy it is to 
erect at once the trophy of our salvation, 
on the trampled and buried hopes of an- 
other's ! How subtle and sublime that al- 
chemy, that can convert the iron of an- 
other's contumacy and impenitence into 
the precious gold of your own redemption ! 
I have literally worked out mij salvation 
by i/ou?' fear and trembhng. With this 
hope I appeared to concur in the plan laid 
by your brother, every feature of which was 
in its progress disclosed to the Superior. 
With this hope I passed that wretched 
night and day in the dungeon with you, 
for, to have effected our escape by day- 
Ught, would have startled credulity as 
gross as even yours. But all the time I 
was feeling the dagger I bore in my breast. 



!S70 MELMOTH ; 

and which I had received for a purpose 
amply accomplished. As for you, — the Su- 
perior consented to your attempt to escape, 
merely that he might have you more in 
his power. He and the community were 
tired of you, they saw you w^ould never 
make a monk, — your appeal had brought 
disgrace on them, your presence was a re- 
proach and a burden to them. The sight 
of you was as thorns in their eyes, — they 
judged you would make a better victim 
than a proselyte, and they judged well. 
You are a much fitter inmate for your pre- 
sent abode than your last, and from hence 
there is no danger of your escaping." — 
*' And where, then, am I ?" — " You are 
in the 'prison of the Inquisition^ 



CHAPTER XI. 

Oh ! torture me no more^ I will confess. 

Henry the Sixth. 

You have betrayed her to her own reproof. 

Comedy of Errors. 

" And it was true, — I was a prisoner in 
the Inquisition. Great emergencies cer- 
tainly inspire us with the feelings they de- 
mand ; and many a man has braved a 
storm on the wide wild ocean, who would 
have shrunk from its voice as it pealed 
down his chimney. I believe so it fared 
with me, — the storm had risen, and I 
braced myself to meet it. I was in the 



S72 MELMOTH : 

Inquisition, but 1 knew that my crime, 
heinous as it was, was not one that came 
properly under the cognizance of the In- 
quisition. It was a conventual fault of the 
highest class, but liable only to be punish- 
ed by the ecclesiastical power. The pu- 
nishment of a monk who had dared to 
escape from his convent, might be dread- 
ful enough, — immurement, or death per- 
haps, but still I was not legitimately a 
prisoner of the Inquisition. I had never, 
under all my trials, spoken a disrespectful 
word of tlie holy Catholic church, or a 
doubtful one of our most holy faith, — I 
had not dropped one heretical, obnoxious, 
or equivocal expression, relative to a single 
point of duty, or article of faith. The 
preposterous charges of sorcery and pos- 
session, brought against me in the con- 
vent, had been completely disproved at 
the visitation of the Bishop. JNly aversion 
to the monastic state was indeed sufficient- 
ly known and fatally proved, but that w^as 
no subject for the investigation or penal- 



A TALE. 273 

ties of the Inquisition. I had nothing to 
fear from the Inquisition, — at least so I 
said to myself in my prison, and I believ- 
ed myself. The seventh day after the re- 
covery of my reason was fixed on for my 
examination, and of this I received due 
notice, though I believe it is contrary to 
the usual forms of the Inquisition to give 
this notice ; aixl the examination took 
place on the day and hour appointed. 

" You are a\vare, Sir, that the tales re- 
lated in general of the interior discipline 
of the Inquisition, must be in nine out of 
ten mere fables, as the prisoners are bound 
by an oath never to disclose what happens 
within its walls ; and they who could vio- 
late this oath, would certainly not scruple 
to violate truth in the details with which 
their emancipation from it indulges them. 
I am forbidden, by an oath which I shall 
never break, to disclose the circumstances 
of my imprisonment or examination. I am 
at liberty to mention some general features 
of both, as they are connected with my ex- 
M 2 



274 MELMOTH : 

traordinary narrative. IVlyfirst examination 
terminated rather favourably ; my contuma- 
cy and aversion to monasticism were indeed 
deplored and reprobated, but there was no 
ulterior hint, — nothing to alarm the pecu- 
liar fears of an inmate of the Inquisition. 
So I was as happy as solitude, darkness, 
straw, bread, and water, could make me, 
or any one, till, on the fourth night after 
my first examination, I w^as awoke by a 
light gleaming so strongly on my eyes, 
that I started up. The person then retired 
with his light, and I discovered a figure 
sitting in the farthest corner of my cell. 
Delighted at the sight of a human form, 
I yet had acquired so much of the habit 
®f the Inquisition, that 1 demanded, in a 
cold and peremptory voice, who had ven- 
tured to intrude on the cell of a pri- 
soner ? The person answered in the bland- 
est tones that ever soothed the human ear, 
that he was, like myself, a prisoner in the 
Inquisition ; — that, by its indulgence, he 
had been permitted to visit me, and 



A TALE. 275 

hoped ** And is hope to be named 

here ?" I could not help exclaiming. He 
answered in the same soft and deprecatory 
tone ; and, without adverting to our pecu- 
liar circumstances, suggested the x^onsola- 
tion that might be derived from the so- 
ciety of two sufferers w ho were indulged 
with the powder of meeting and communi- 
cating with each other. 

" This man visited me for several suc- 
cessive nights ; and I could not help no- 
ticing three extraordinary circumstances 
in his visits and his appearance. The 
first was, that he always (when he could) 
concealed his eyes from me ; he sat side- 
ways and backways, shifted his position, 
changed his seat, held up his hand before 
his eyes ; but w hen at times he was com- 
pelled or suiyrised to turn their light on 
me, I felt that I had never beheld such 
eyes blazing in a mortal face, — in the dark- 
ness of my prison, I held up my hand to 
shield myself from their preternatural 
oflare. The second was, that he came and 



276 MELMOTH : 

retired apparently without help or hin- 
drance, — that he came, like one who had a 
key to the door of my dungeon, at all 
hours, without leave or forbiddance, — 
that he traversed the prisons of the Inqui- 
sition, like one who had a master-key to 
its deepest recesses. Lastly, he spoke not 
only in a tone of voice clear and audible, 
totally unlike the whispered communica- 
tions of the Inquisition, but spoke his 
abhorrence of the whole system, — his in- 
dignation against the Inquisition, Inquisi- 
tors, and all their aiders and abettors, 
from St Dominic down to the lowest 
official, — with such unqualified rage of 
vituperation, such caustic inveteracy of 
satire, such unbounded license of ludi- 
crous and yet withering severity, that I 
trembled. 

" You know, Sir, or perhaps have yet 
to know, that there are persons accredit- 
ed in the Inquisition, who are permitted 
to solace the solitude of the prisoners, on 
the condition of obtaining, under the pre- 



A TALE. 277 

tence of friendly communication, those se- 
crets which even torture has failed to ex- 
tort. I discovered in a moment that my 
visitor was not one of these, — his abuse of 
the system was too gros^, his indignation 
too unfeigned. Yet, in his continued vi- 
sits, there was one circumstance more, 
which struck me with a feeling of terror 
that actually paralyzed and annihilated all 
the terrors of the Inquisition. 

" He constantly alluded to events and 
personages beyond his possible memory^ — 
then he checked himself, — then he appear- 
ed to go on, with a kind of wild and 
derisive sneer at his own absence. But 
this perpetual reference to events long 
past, and men long buried, made an im- 
pression on me I cannot describe. His 
conversation was rich, various, and intelli- 
gent, but it was interspersed with such 
reiterated mention of the dead, that I 
might be pardoned for feeling as if the 
speaker w^as one of them. He dealt much 
in anecdotical history, and I, who was 



278 MELMOTH : 

very ignorant of it, was delighted to lis- 
ten to him, for he told every thing with 
the fidelity of an eye-witness. He spoke 
of the Restoration in England, and repeat- 
ed the well-remembered observation of the 
queen-mother, Henriette of France, — that, 
had she known as much of the English on 
her first arrival, as she did on her second, 
she never would have been driven from 
the throne ; then he added, to my astonish- 
ment, I was beside her carriage *, it was the 
only one then in London. He afterwards 
spoke of the superb fetes given by Louis 
Quatorze, and described, with an accuracy 
that made me start, the magnificent cha- 
riot in which that monarch personated the 
god of day, while all the titled pimps and 
harlots of the court followed as the rabble 
of Olympus. Then he reverted to the 



* I have read this somewhere^, but cannot be- 
lieve it. Coaches are mentioned by Beaumont and 
Fletcher^ and even glass-coaches by Butler, in his 
•^ Remains." 



A TALE. 279 

death of the Duchesse d'Orleans, sister to 
Charles II. — to Pere Bourdalone's awful 
sermon, preached at the death-bed of the 
royal beauty, dying of poison, (as sus- 
pected) ; and added, I saw the roses heap- 
ed on her toilette, to array her for a 
fete that very night, and near them stood 
the pix, and tapers, and oil, shrouded 
with the lace of that very toilette. Then 
he passed to England ; he spoke of the 
wretched and well-rebuked pride of the 
wife of James II. who " thought it scorn'* 
to sit at the same table with an Irish officer 
who informed her husband (then Duke of 
York) that he had sat at table, as an officer 
in the Austrian service, where the Duchess's 
father (Duke of Modena) had stood be- 
hind a chair, as a vassal to the Emperor of 
Germany. 

" These circumstances were trifling, and 
might be told by any one, but there was 
a minuteness and circumstantiality in his 
details, that perpetually forced on the mind 
the idea that he had himself seen what he 



2180 3IELM0TH : 

described, and been conversant with the 
personages he spoke of. 1 Hstened to him 
with an indefinable mixture of curiosity 
and terror. At last, while relating a 
trifling but characteristic circumstance that 
occurred in the reign of Louis the Thir- 
teenth, he used the following expressions *' : 
*' One night that the king was at an enter- 
tainment, where Cardinal Richeheu also 
was present, the Cardinal had the inso- 
lence to rush out of the apartment before 
his Majesty, just as the coach of the latter 
was announced. The King, without any 
indignant notice of the arrogance of the 
minister, said, with much hon hommie, 
*^ His Eminence the Cardinal wdll always 
be first."— " The first to attend your Majes- 
ty," answ^ered the Cardinal, with admir- 
able polite presence of mind ; and, snatch- 
ing a flambeau from a page who stood near 
me, he lighted the King to his carriage." 



* This circumstance is related^ I believe, in the 
Jewish Spy. 



A TxVLE. 281 

I could not help catching at the extraor- 
dinary words that had escaped him ; and 
I asked him, " Were you there?" He 
gave some indirect answer ; and, avoiding 
the subject, went on to amuse me with 
some other curious circumstances of the 
private history of that age, of which he 
spoke with a minute fidehty somewhat 
alai^miiig, I confess my pleasure in listen- 
ing to them was greatly diminished by 
the singular sensation with which this 
man's presence and conversation inspired 
me. He departed, and I regretted his ab- 
sence, though I could not account for the 
extraordinary feeling which I experienced 
during his visits. 

*' A few days after I was to encounter my 
second examination. The night before it 
one of the officials visited me. These are 
men who are not the common officers of a 
prison, but accredited in some degree by 
the higher powers of the Inquisition, and 
I paid due respect to his communications^ 



282 MELMOTH : 

particularly as they were delivered more 
in detail, and with more emphasis and 
energy than I could have expected from 
an inmate of that speechless mansion. 
This circumstance made me expect some- 
thing extraordinary, and his discourse 
verified "all, and more than I expected. 
He told me in plain terms, that there had 
been lately a cause of disturbance and in- 
quietude, which had never before occurred 
in the Inquisition. That it was reported 
a human figure had appeared in the cells 
of some of the prisoners, uttering words 
not only hostile to the Cathohc religion, 
and the discipline of the most holy In- 
quisition, but to religion in generJ, to 
the belief of a God and a future state. 
He added, that the utmost vigilance of 
the officials, on the rack for discovery, 
had never been able to trace this being in 
his visits to the cells of the prisoners ; that 
the guards had been doubled, and every 
precaution that the circumspection of the 



A TALE. 28S 

Inquisition could employ, was had re- 
course to, hitherto witliout success; and 
that the only intimation they \\d of this 
singular visitor, was from some of the 
prisoners whose cells he had entered, and 
whom he had addressed in language that 
seemed lent him by the enemy of man- 
kind, to accomplish the perdition of these 
unhappy beings. He himself had hither- 
to eluded all discovery ; but he trusted, 
that, with the means lately adopted, it 
was impossible for this agent of the evil 
one to insult and baffle the holy tribunal 
much longer. He advised me to be pre- 
pared on this point, as it would undoubt- 
edly be touched on at my next examina- 
tion, and perhaps more urgently than I 
might otherwise imagine ; and so, com*- 
mending me to the holy keeping of God, 
he departed. 

" Not wholly unconscious of the subject 
alluded to in this extraordinary communi- 
cation, but perfectly innocent of any ulte- 



2S4t MELMOTH : 

rior signification, as far as related to myself, 
I awaited my next examination rather with 
hope than fear. After the usual questions 
of — Why I was there ? who had accused 
me ? for what offence ? whether I could 
recollect any expression that had ever in- 
timated a disregard for the tenets of the 
holy church ? kc. kc. &c. — after all this 
had been gone through, in a detail that 
may be spared the hearer, certain extra- 
ordinary questions were proposed to me, 
that appeared to relate indirectly to the 
appearance of my late visitor. I answer- 
ed them with a sincerity that seemed to 
make a frightful impression on my judges. 
I stated plainly, in answer to their ques- 
tions, that a person had appeared in my 
dungeon. " You must call it cell," said 
the Supreme. " In my cell, then. He 
spoke with the utmost severity of the 
holy office, — he uttered words that it would 
not be respectful for me to repeat. I could 
scarcely believe that such a person w^ould 



A TALE* 285 

be permitted to visit the dungeons (cells, 
I should say) of the holy Inquisition." 
As 1 uttered these words, one of the 
judges, trembling on his seat, (while his 
shadow, magnified by the imperfect light, 
pictured the figure of a paralytic giant 
on the wall opposite to me), attempted 
to address some question to me. As 
he spoke, there came a hollow sound 
from his throat, his eyes were rolled up- 
w^ards in their sockets, — he was in an apo- 
plectic paroxysm, and died before he 
could be removed to another apartment. 
The examination terminated suddenly, 
and in some confusion ; but, as 1 was re- 
manded back to my cell, I could perceive, 
to my consternation, that I had left an im- 
pression the most unfavourable on the 
minds of the judges. They interpreted this 
accidental circumstance in a manner the 
most extraordinary and unjust, and I felt 
the consequences of it at my next exami- 
nation. 

'•' That night I received a visit in my 



286 MELMOTH : 

cell from one of the judges of the Inqui- 
sition, who conversed with me a consider- 
able time, and in an earnest and dispas- 
sionate manner. He stated the atrocious 
and revolting character under which I ap- 
peared from the first before the Inquisi- 
tion, — that of a monk who had apostatiz- 
ed, had been accused of the crime of sor- 
cery in his convent, and, in his impious 
attempt at escape, had caused the death of 
his brother, whom he had seduced to join 
in ity and had overwhelmed one of the 
first families with despair and disgrace. 
Here I was going to reply, but he stop- 
ped me, and observed, that he came 
not to listen, but to speak ; and went 
on to inform me, that though 1 had 
been acquitted of the charge of com- 
munication with the evil spirit at the 
visitation of the Bishop, certain suspi- 
cions attached to me had been fearfully 
strengthened, by the fact that the visits of 
the extraordinary being, of whom I had 
heard enough to assure me of his actuah"- 



A TALE. 287 

ty, had never been known in the prison 
of the Inquisition till my entrance into it. 
That the fair and probable conclusion was, 
that I was really the victim of the enemy 
of mankind, whose power (through the 
reluctant permission of God and St Domi- 
nic, and he crossed himself as he spoke) 
had been suffered to range even through 
the walls of the holy office. He caution- 
ed me, in severe but plain terms, against 
the danorer of the situation in which I was 
placed, by the suspicions universally and 
(he feared) too justly attached to me ; and, 
finally, adjured me, as 1 valued my salva- 
tion, to place my entire confidence in the 
mercy of the holy office, and, if the figure 
should visit me again, to watch what its 
impure lips might suggest, and faithfully 
report it to the holy office. 

" When the Inquisitor had departed, I 
reflected on what he had said. I conceived 
it was something like the conspiracies so 
often occurring in the convent. I conceived 



588 MELMOTH : 

that this might be an attempt to involve 
me in some plot against myself, something 
in which I might be led to be active in my 
own condemnation, — I felt the necessity 
of viffilant and breathless caution. I knew 
myself innocent, and this is a conscious- 
ness that defies even the Inquisition itself; 
but, within the walls of the Inquisition, 
the consciousness, and the defiance it in- 
spires, are alike vain. I finally resolved, 
however, to watch every circumstance that 
might occur within the walls of my cell 
very closely, threatened as I was at once 
by the powers of the Inquisition, and 
those of the infernal demon, and I had 
not long to watch. It was on the second 
night after my examination, that I saw 
this person enter ray cell. My first im- 
pulse was to call aloud for the officials of 
the Inquisition. I felt a kind of vacilla- 
tion I cannot describe, between throwing 
myself into the power of the Inquisition, 
or the power of this extraordinary being, 



A TALE. ^89 

more formidable perhaps than all the In- 
quisitors on earth, from Madrid to Goa. 
I dreaded imposition on both sides. I be- 
lieved that they were playing off terror a- 
gainst terror ; I knew not what to believe 
or think. I felt myself surrounded by 
enemies on every side, and would have 
given my heart to those who would first 
throw off the mask, and announce them- 
selves as my decided and avowed enemy. 
After some reflection, I judged it best to 
distrust the Inquisition^ and to hear all 
that this extraordinary visitor had to say. 
In my secret soul I believed him their se- 
cret agent, — I did them great injustice. 
His conversation on this second visit w^as 
more than usually amusing, but it was 
certainly such as might justify all the sus- 
picions of the Inquisitors. At every sen- 
tence he uttered, I was disposed to start 
up and call for the officials. Then I re- 
presented to myself his turning accus- 
er, and pointing me out as the victim 

VOL. 11. N 



290 MELMOTH : 

of their condemnation. I trembled at the 
idea of committing myself by a word, 
while in the power of that dreadful body 
that might condemn me to expire under 
the torture,— or, worse, to die the long and 
lingering death of inanity, — the mind fa- 
mished, the body scarcely fed, — the anni- 
hilation of hopeless and interminable soli- 
tude, — the terrible inversion of natural 
feeling, that makes life the object of depre- 
cation, and death of indulgence. 

'* The result was, that I sat and listen* 
ed to the conversation (if it may be call- 
ed so) of this extraordinary visitor, who 
appeared to regard the w^alls of the Inqui- 
sition no more than those of a domestic a- 
partment, and who seated himself beside 
me as quietly as if he had been reposing 
on the most luxurious sofa that ever was 
arrayed by the fingers of voluptuousness. 
My senses were so bewildered, my mind 
so disarranged, that I can hardly remem- 
ber his conversation. Part of it ran thus : 
" You are a prisoner of the Inquisition. 



A TALE. 2^1 

The holy office, no doubt, is instituted 
for wise purposes, beyond the cognizance 
of sinful beings like us ; but, as far as we 
can judge, its prisoners are not only insen- 
sible of, but shamefully ungrateful for, the 
benefits they might derive from its provi- 
dent vigilance. For instance, you, who 
are accused of sorceiy, fratricide, and 
plunging an illustrious and affectionate fa- 
mily in despair, by your atrocious miscon- 
duct, and who are now fortunately re- 
strained from farther outrages against na- 
ture, religion, and society, by your salu- 
tary confinement here ; — you, 1 venture to 
say, are so unconscious of these blessings, 
that it is your earnest desire to escape from 
the further enjoyment of them. In a 
word, I am convinced that the secret wish 
of your heart (unconverted by all the pro- 
fusion of charity which has been heaped 
on you by the holy office) is not on any 
account to increase the burden of your obli- 
gation to them, but, on the contrary, to 



S92 MEL3fOTH : 

diminish as much as possible the grieif 
these worthy persons must feel, as long as 
your residence pollutes their holy walls, 
by abridging its period, even long before 
they intend you should do so. Your wish 
is to escape from the prison of the holy 
office, if possible, — you know it is." I did 
not answer a word. I felt a terror at this 
wild and fierce irony, — I felt a ten-or at 
the mention of escape, (I had fatal reasons 
for this feehng), — a terror of every thing, 
and every one near me, indescribable. I 
believed myself tottering on a narrow 
ridge, — an Al-araf, between the alternate 
gulphs which the infernal spirit and the 
Inquisition (not less dreaded) disclosed on 
each side of my trembling march. I com- 
pressed my lips, — I hardly suffered my 
breath to escape. 

" The speaker went on. " With regard 
to your escape, though I can promise that 
to you, (and tliat is what no human power 
can promise you), you must be aware of 



A TALE. 293 

the difficulty which will attend it, — and, 
should that difficulty terrify you, will j'ou 
hesitate ?" Still I was silent ; — my visitor 
perhaps took this for the silence of doubt. 
He went on. " Perhaps you think that 
your lingering here, amid the dungeons of 
the Inquisition, will infallibly secure your 
salvation. There is no error more absurd, 
and yet more rooted in the heart of man, 
than the belief that his sufferings will pro- 
mote his spiritual safety." Here I thought 
myself safe in rejoining, that I felt, — I 
trusted, my sufferings here would indeed 
be accepted as a partial mitigation of my 
well-merited punishment hereafter. I ac- 
knowledged my many errors, — I professed 
myself as penitent for my misfortunes as 
if they had been crimes ; and the energy 
of my grief combining with the innocence 
of my heart, J commended myself to the 
Almighty with an unction I really felt,-— 
1 called on the names of God, the Saviour, 
and the Virgin, with the earnest supplica- 
lion of sincere devoutness. When I had 



294j l^IELMOTH : 

risen from my knees, my visitor had re- 
tired. * * "'•'" 
^ 7^ * * 

" Examination followed examination be- 
fore the judges, with a rapidity unexam- 
pled in the annals of the Inquisition. 
Alas ! that they should be annals, — that 
they should be more than records of one 
day of abuse, oppression, falsehood, and 
torture. At my next examination before 
the judges, I ^vas interrogated according to 
the usual forms, and afterwards was led, 
by questions as artfully constructed, as if 
there was any necessity for art to lead me, 
to speak to the question on v/hich I long- 
ed to disburden myself The moment the 
subject was mentioned, I entered on my 
narrative with an eagerness of sincerity 
that would have undeceived any but Inqui- 
sitors. I announced that I had received 
another visit from this unknown being, 
I repeated, with breathless and trembling 
eagerness, every word of our late confe- 
rence. I did not suppress a syllable of the 



A TALE. 295 

insults on the holy office, the uild and 
fiend-like acrimony of his satire, the avow- 
ed atheism, the diabolism of his conversa- 
tion, — I dwelt on every particular. I 
hoped to make merit with the Inquisi- 
tion, by accusing their enemy, and that 
of mankind. Oh ! there is no telling the 
agony of zeal with which we work be- 
tween two mortal adversaries, hoping to 
make a friend of one of them ! I had suf- 
fered enough already from the Inquisition, 
but at this moment I would have crouched 
at the knees of the Inquisitors, — I would 
have pleaded for the place of the meanest 
official in their prison, — I would have sup- 
plicated for the loathsome office of their exe- 
cutioner, — 1 would have encountered any 
thing that the Inquisition could inffict, to 
be spared the horror of being imagined the 
ally of the enemy of souls. To my distrac- 
tion, I perceived that every word I utter- 
ed, in all the agony of truth, — in all the 
hopeless eloquence of a soul struggling 
with the fiends who are bearing it beyond 



290 MKLMOTH : 

the reach of mercy, was disregarded. The 
judges appeared struck, indeed, by the 
earnestness with which I spoke. They 
gave, for a moment, a kind of instinctive 
credit to my words, extorted by terror ; 
but, a moment after, I could perceive that 
/, and not my communication, was the 
object of that terror. They seemed to 
view me through a distorting atmosphere 
of mystery and suspicion. They urged 
me, over and over again, for further parti- 
culars, — for ulterior circumstances, — for 
something that was in their minds, but 
not in mine. The more pains they took 
to construct their questions skilfully, the 
more unintelligible they became to me. 
I had told all 1 knew, I was anxious to 
tell all, but I could not tell more than I 
knew, and the agony of my solicitude to 
meet the object of the judges, was aggra- 
vated in proportion to my ignorance of 
it. On being remanded to my cell, I 
was warned, in the most solemn manner, 
that if T neglected t6 watch, remember^ 



A TALE. 297 

and report every word uttered by the ex- 
traordinary being, whose visits they tacitly 
acknowledged they could neither prevent 
or detect, 1 might expect the utmost se- 
verity of the holy office. I promised all 
this, — all that could be demanded, and, 
finally, as the last proof I could give of 
my sincerity, I implored that some one 
might be allowed to pass the night in my 
cell, — or, if that was contrary to the rules 
of the Inquisition, that one of the guard 
might be stationed in the passage commu- 
nicating with my cell, to whom I could, 
by a signal agreed on, intimate when this 
nameless being burst on me, and his im- 
pious intrusion might be at once detected 
and punished. In speaking thus, I was 
indulged with a privilege very unusual in 
the Inquisition, where the prisoner is only 
to answer questions, but never to speak 
unless vv^heu called on. My proposal, 
however, caused some consultation ; and it 
was with horror I ibund, on its termi- 
nation, that not one of the officials, even 
N 2 



298 MELMOTH : 

under the discipline of the Inquisition, 
would undertake the task of watching at 
the door of my cell. 

" I went back to it in an agony inex- 
pressible. The more I had laboured to 
dear myself, the more I had become in- 
volved. My only resource and consola- 
tion was in a determination to obey, to 
the strictest letter, the injunctions of the 
Inquisition. I kept myself studiously 
awake, — he came not all that night. To- 
wards the morning I slept, — Oh what a 
sleep was mine ! — the genii, or the demons 
of the place, seemed busy in the dream 
that haunted me. I am convinced that 
a real victim of an auto da fe (so called) 
never suffered more during his horrible 
procession to flames temporal and eternal, 
than I did during that dream. I dreamed 
that the judgement had passed,— the bell 
had tolled,— and we marched out from the 
prison of the Inquisition ; — my crime was 
proved, and my sentence determined, as 
an apostate monk and a diabolical heretic. 



A TALE. 299 

The procession commenced, — the Domi- 
nicans went first, then followed the peni- 
tents, arms and feet bare, each hand hold- 
ing a wax taper, some with san henitos, 
some without, all pale, haggard, and breath- 
less, the hue of their faces frightfully re- 
sembling that of their clay-coloured arms 
and feet. Then followed those who had 
on their black dresses the fuego revolto*. 
Then followed — 1 saw myself; and this 
horrid tracing of yourself in a dream, — 
this haunting of yourself by your own 
spectre, while you still live, is perhaps 
a curse almost equal to your crimes visit- 
ing you in the punishments of eterni- 
ty. I saw myself in the garment of con- 
demnation, the flames pointing iipwai^ds, 
while the demons painted on my dress 
were mocked by the demons who beset 
my feet, and hovered round my temples. 
The Jesuits on each side of me, urged mc 



* Fhmcf! rnrrsed, intimating that the criminal is 
not to be burned. 



300 MELMOTH : 

to consider the difference between these 
painted fires, and those which were about 
to enwrap my writhing soul for an eterni- 
ty of ages. All the bells of Madrid seem- 
ed to be ringing in my ears. There was 
no light but a dull twilight, such as one 
always sees in his sleep, (no man ever 
dreamed of sun-light) ; — there was a dim 
and smoky blaze of torches in my eyes, 
\vhose flames were soon to be in my eyes, 
I saw the stage before me, — I was chained 
to the chair, amid the ringing of bells, the 
preaching of the Jesuits, and the shouts 
of the multitude. A splendid amphi- 
theatre stood opposite, — the king and 
queen of Spain, and all the nobility and 
hierarchy of the land, were there to see 
us burn. Our thoughts in dreams wan- 
der ; I had heard a story of an auto dafe, 
where a young Jewess, not sixteen, doom- 
ed to be burnt alive, had prostrated her- 
self before the queen, and exclaimed, " Save 
me, — save me, do not let me burn, my 
only crime is believing in the God of my 



A TALE. 301 

fathers;" — the queen (I believe Eliza- 
beth of France, wife of Philip) wept, but 
the procession went on. Something like 
this crossed my dream. I saw the supplicant 
rejected ; the next moment the figure was 
that of my brother Juan, who clung to me, 
shrieking, " Save me, save me." The next 
moment I w^as chained to my chair again, — 
the fires were lit, the bells rang out, the 
litanies were sung ; — my feet were scorch- 
ed to a cinder, — my muscles cracked, my 
blood and marrow hissed, my flesh con- 
sumed like shrinking leather, — the bones 
of my legs hung two black withering 
and moveless sticks in the ascending blaze ; 
— it ascended, caught my hair, — I w^as 
crowned with fire, — my head w^as a ball of 
molten metal, my eyes flashed and melted 
in their sockets ; — I opened my mouth, it 
drank fire, — I closed it, the fire was with- 
in, — and still the bells rung on, and the 
crowd shouted, and the king and queen, 
and all the nobility and priesthood, look- 



302 MELMOTH : 

ed on, and we burned, and burned ! — I was 
a cinder body and soul in my dream. 

" I awoke from it with the horrible ex- 
clamation — ever shrieked, never heard — 
of those wretches, when the fires are 
climbing fast and fell, — Misericordia por 
amor di Dios ! My own screams awoke 
me, — I was in my prison, and beside me 
stood the tempter. With an impulse I 
could not resist, — an impulse borrowed 
from the horrors of my dream, I flung 
myself at his feet, and called on him to 
" save me." 

" I know not. Sir, nor is it a problem to be 
solved by human intellect, whether this in- 
scrutable being had not the power to influ- 
ence my dreams, and dictate to a tempting 
demon the images which had driven me to 
fling myself at his feet for hope and safety. 
However it was, he certainly took advan- 
tage of my agony, half- visionary, half- real 
as it was, and, while proving to me that he 
had the power of effecting my escape from 



A TALE. 303 

the Inquisition, proposed to me that in- 
communicable condition which I am for- 
bid to reveal, except in the act of confes- 
sion." 

Here Melmoth could not forbear re- 
membering the incommunicable condition 
proposed to Stanton in the mad-house, — 
he shuddered, and was silent. The Spa- 
niard went on. 

" At my next examination, the ques- 
tions were more eager and earnest than 
ever, and 1 w^as more anxious to be heard 
than questioned ; so, in spite of the eter- 
nal circumspection and formality of an in- 
quisitorial examination, we soon came to 
understand each other. I had an object 
to gain, and they had nothing to lose by 
my gaining that object. I confessed, with- 
out hesitation, that I had received another 
visit from that most mysterious being, 
who could penetrate the recesses of the In- 
quisition, without either its leave or pre- 
vention, (the judges trembled on their 
seats, as I uttered these words) ; — that I 



304 melmoth: 

was most willing to disclose all that had 
transpired at our last conference, but that 
I required to first confess to a priest, anti 
receive absolution. This, though quite 
contrary to the rules of the Inquisition, 
was, on this extraordinary occasion, com- 
plied with. A black curtain was dropt 
before one of the recesses ; I knelt down 
before a priest, and confided to him that 
tremendous secret, which, according to 
the rules of the CathoHc church, can 
never be disclosed by the confessor but 
to the Pope. I do not understand how 
the business was managed, but I was 
called on to repeat the same confession 
before the Inquisitors. I repeated it 
word for word, saving only the words 
that my oath, and my consciousness of 
the holy secret of confession, forbade 
me to disclose. The sincerity of this con- 
fession, I thought, would have worked 
a miracle for me, — and so it did, but not 
the miracle that I expected. They re- 
quired from me that incommunicable se- 



A TALE. 305 

cret ; I announced it was in the bosom of 
the priest to whom I had confessed. They 
whispered, and seemed to debate about the 
torture. 

" At this time, as may be supposed, I 
cast an anxious and miserable look round 
the apartment, where the large crucifix, 
thirteen feet high, stood bending above 
the seat of the Supreme. At this mo- 
ment 1 saw a person seated at the table 
covered with black cloth, intensely busy 
as a secretary, or person employed in tak- 
ing down the depositions of the accused. 
As 1 was led near the table, this person 
flashed a look of recognition on me, — he 
w^as my dreaded companion, — he was an 
official now of the Inquisition. I gave all 
up the moment I saw his ferocious and 
lurking scowl, like that of the tiger before 
he springs from his jungle, or the wolf 
from his den. This person threw on me 
looks, from time to time, which I could 
not nustake, and I dared not interpret ; — 
and I had reason to believe that the trc- 



306 MELMOTH : 

mendous sentence pronounced against me, 
issued, if not from his lips, at least from 
liis dictation. — " You, Alonzo di Mon^ada, 

monk, professed of the order of , 

accused of the crimes of heresy, apostacy, 
fratricide, (" Oh no, — no !" 1 shrieked, but 
no one heeded me), and conspiracy with 
the enemy of mankind against the peace 
of the community in which you professed 
yourself a votary of God, and against the 
authority of the holy office ; accused, 
moreover, of intercourse in your cell, the 
prison of the holy office, with an infernal 
messenger of the foe of God, man, and 
your own apostatized soul ; condemned on 
your own confession of the infernal spirit 
having had access to your cell, — are hereby 

delivered to '' 

" I heard no more. I exclaimed, but 
my voice was drowned in the murmur of 
the officials. The crucifix suspended be- 
'hind the chair of the judge, rocked and 
reeled before my eyes; the lamp that hung 
from the ceiling, seemed to send forth 



A TALE. 307 

twenty lights. I held up my hands in 
abjuration — they were held down by stron- 
ger hands. I tried to speak — my mouth 
was stopped. I sunk on my knees — on 
my knees I was about to be dragged away, 
when an aged Inquisitor giving a sign to 
the officials, I was released for a few mo- 
ments, and he addressed me in these words 
— words rendered terrible by the sincerity 
of the speaker. From his age, from his 
sudden interposition, I had expected mercy. 
He was a very old man — he had been 
blind for twenty years ; and as he rose to 
speak my malediction, my thoughts wan- 
dered from Appius Claudius of Rome, 
— blessing the loss of sight, that saved 
him from beholding the disgrace of his 
country, — to that blind chief Inquisitor 
of Spain, who assured Philip, that in 
sacrificing his son, he imitated the Al- 
mighty, who had sacrificed his Son also 
for the salvation of mankind. — Horrid 
profanation ! yet striking application to 
the bosom of a Catholic. The words of 



308 ]MELMOTH : 

the Inquisitor were these : " Wretch, a- 
postate, and excommunicate, I bless God 
that these withered balls can no longer be- 
hold you. The demon has haunted you 
from your birth — you were born in sin 
—fiends rocked your cradle, and dipt 
their talons in the holy font, while they 
mocked the sponsors of your unsanc- 
tified baptism. Illegitimate and accursed, 
you were alwaj^s the burden of the holy 
church ; and now, the infernal spirit comes 
to claim his own, and you acknowledge 
him as your lord and master. He has 
sought and sealed you as his own, even a- 
inid the prison of the Inquisition. Begone, 
accursed, we deliver you over to the secu- 
lar arm, praying that it may deal with you 
not too severely." At these terrible words, 
whose meaning I understood but too well, 
I uttered one shriek of agony — the only 
human sound ever heard within the walls 
of the Inquisition. But I was borne a- 
way; and that cry into which I had thrown 
the whole strength of nature, was heeded 



A TALE. S09 

no more than a cry from the torture room. 
On my return to my cell, J felt convinced 
the whole was a scheme of inquisitorial 
art, to involve me in self-accusation, (their 
constant object when they can effect it), 
and punish me for a crime, while I was 
guilty only of an extorted confession. 

" With compunction and anguish un- 
utterable, I execrated my own beast-like 
and credulous stupidity. Could any but 
an idiot, a driveller, have been the victim 
of such a plot ? Was it in nature to be- 
lieve that the prisons of the Inquisition 
could be traversed at will by a stranger 
whom no one could discover or apprehend? 
That such a being could enter cells imper- 
vious to human power, and hold conversa- 
tion with the prisoners at his pleasure — ap- 
pear and disappear — insult, ridicule, and 
blaspheme — propose escape, and point out 
the means with a precision and facility, 
that must be the result of calm and pro- 
found calculation— and this within the walls 
of the Inquisition, almost in the hearing of 



310 MELMOTH : 

the judges— actually in the hearing of the 
guards, who night and day paced the pas- 
sages with sleepless and inquisitorial vigi- 
lance ? — ridiculous, monstrous, impossible ! 
it was all a plot to betray me to self-con- 
demnation. My visitor was an agent and 
accomplice of the Inquisition, and I was 
my own betrayer and executioner. Such 
was my conclusion ; and, hopeless as it was, 
it certainly seemed probable. 

" I had now nothing to await but the 
most dreadful of all destinations, amid the 
darkness and silence of my cell, where the 
total suspension of the stranger's visits con- 
firmed me every hour in my conviction of 
their nature and purport, when an event 
occurred, whose consequences alike defeat- 
ed fear, hope, and calculation. This was 
the great fire that broke out within the 
walls of the Inquisition, about the close of 
the last century. 

" It was on the night of the 29th No^ 
vember 17 — > that this extraordinary cir- 
cumstance took place — extraordinary from 



A TALE. 311 

the well-known precautions adopted by 
the vigilance of the holy office against 
such an accident, and also from the very 
small quantity of fuel consumed within its 
walls. On the first intimation that the fire 
was spreading rapidly, and threatened dan- 
ger, the prisoners were ordered to be 
brought from their cells, and guarded in 
a court of the prison. I must acknow- 
ledge we were treated with great humani- 
ty and consideration. We were conduct- 
ed deliberately from our cells, placed each 
of us between two guards, who did us no 
violence, nor used harsh language, but as- 
sured us, from time to time, that if the 
danger became imminent, we would be 
permitted every fair opportunity to effect 
our escape. It was a subject worthy of 
the pencil of Salvator E-osa, or of Murillo, 
to sketch us as we stood. Our dismal garbs 
and squalid looks, contrasted with the e- 
qually dark, but imposing and authoritative 
looks of the guards and officials, all dis- 
played by the light of torches, which burn- 



312 M^LMOTH : 

ed, or appeared to burn, fainter and faint- 
er, as the flames rose and roared in tri- 
umph above the towers of the Inquisition. 
The heavens were all on fire — and the tor- 
ches, held no longer in firm hands, gave a 
tremulous and pallid light. It seemed to 
me like a wildly painted picture of the 
last day. God appeared descending in the 
light that enveloped the skies — and we 
stood pale ^nd shuddering in the light be- 
low. 

" Among the groupe of prisoners, there 
were fathers and son«, who perhaps had 
been inmates of adjacent cells for years, 
without being conscious of each others vi- 
cinity or existence —but they did not dare 
to recognize each other. Was not this like 
the day of judgement, where similar mor- 
tal relations may meet under different class- 
es of the sheep and goats, without presum- 
ing to acknowledge the strayed one amid 
the flock of a different shepherd ? There 
were also parents and children who did re- 
cognize and stretch out their wasted arms 



A TALE. 313 

to each other, though feeling they must 
never meet, — some of them condemned to 
the flames, some to imprisonment, and 
some to the official duties of the Inquisi- 
tion, as a mitigation of their sentence, — 
and was not this Uke the day of judge- 
ment, where parent and child may be al- 
lotted different destinations, and the arms 
tliat would attest the last proof of mortal 
affection, are expanded in vain over the 
gulph of eternity. Behind and around us 
stood the officials and guards of the 
Inquisition, all watching and intent on 
the progress of the flames, but fearless 
of the result with regard to themselves. 
Such may be the feeling of those spirits 
who watch the doom of the Almighty, 
and know the destination of those they 
are appointed to watch. And is not this 
like the day of judgement? Far, far, a- 
bove us, tlie flames burst out in volumes, 
in solid masses of fire, spiring uj) to the 
])urning heavens. The towers of the In- 
quisition shrunk into cinders — that tre- 
voi,. ir. o 



314 MELMOTH : 

mendous monument of the power, and 
crime, and gloom of the human mind, was 
wasting like a scroll in the fire. Will it 
not be thus also at the day of judgement ? 
Assistance was slowly brought — Spaniards 
are very indolent — the engines played im- 
perfectly — the danger increased — the fire 
blazed higher and higher — the persons 
employed to work the engines, paralyzed 
by terror, fell to the ground, and called on 
every saint they could think of, to arrest 
the progress of the flames. Their excla- 
mations were so loud and earnest, that 
really the saints must have been deaf, or 
must have felt a particular predilection for 
a conflagration, not to attend to them. 
However it was, the fire went on. Every 
bell in Madrid rang out. — Orders were is« 
sued to every Alcaide to be had.- — The 
king of Spain himself, (* after a hard day's 
shooting), attended in person. The church- 



■^ The pcassion of the ]ate king of Spain for field 
sports was well known. 



A TALE. 315 

es were all lit up, and thousands of the de- 
vout supplicated on their knees by torch- 
light, or whatever light they could get, 
that the reprobate souls confined in the 
Inquisition might feel the fires that were 
consuming its w^alls, as merely a slight 
foretaste of the fires that glowed for them 
for ever and ever. The fire went on, do- 
ing its dreadful work, and heeding kings 
and priests no more than if they were fire- 
men. I am convinced twenty able men, 
accustomed to such business, could have 
quenched the fire ; but when our work- 
men should have played their engines, 
they were all on their knees. 

" The flames at last began to descend 
into the court. Then commenced a scene 
of horror indescribable. The wretches 
who had been doomed to the flames, ima- 
gined their hour was come. Idiots from 
long confinement, and submissive as the 
holy office could require, they became de- 
lirious as they saw the flames approaching, 
and shrieked audibly, " Spare me — spare 



316 MELMOTH : 

me — put me to as little torture as you 
can." Others, kneeling to the approach- 
ing flames, invoked them as saints. They 
dreamt they saw the visions they had 
worshipped, — the holy angels, and even 
the blessed virgin, descending in flames to 
receive their souls as parting from the 
stake; and they howled out their allelujahs 
half in horror, half in hope. Amid this 
scene of distraction, the Inquisitors stood 
their ground. It was admirable to see 
their firm and solemn array. As thq 
flames prevailed, they never faultered 
with foot, or gave a sign with hand, or 
winked with eye ; — their duty, their stern 
and heartless duty, seemed to be the only 
principle and motive of their existence. 
They seemed a phalanx clad in iron im- 
penetrable. When the fires roared, they 
crossed themselves calmly ; — when the pri- 
soners shrieked, they gave a signal for si- 
lence ; — when they dared to pray, they tore 
them from their knees, and hinted the 
inutility of prayer at such a juncture, 



A TALE. 317 

when they might be sure that the flames 
they were deprecating would bum hotter 
in a region from which there was neither 
escape or hope of departure. At this mo- 
ment, while standing amid the groupe of 
prisoners, my eyes were struck by an ex- 
traordinary spectacle. Perhaps it is amid 
the moments of despair, that imagination 
has most power, and they who have suf- 
fered, can best describe and feel. In the 
burning light, the steeple of the Domini- 
can church was as visible as at noon-day. 
It was close to the prison of the Inquisi- 
tion. The night was intensely dark, but 
so strong was the light of the conflagra- 
tion, that I could see the spire blazing, 
from the reflected lustre, like a micteor. 
The hands of the clock were as visible as 
if a torch was held before them ; and this 
calm and silent progress of time, amid the 
tumultuous confusion of midnight horrors, 
— this scene of the physical and mental 
world in an agony of fruitless and inces* 
sant motion, might Iiave suggested a pro* 



^18 31ELM0TH : 

found and singular image, ]iad not my 
whole attention been rivetted to a human 
figure placed on a pinnacle of the spire, 
and surveying the scene in perfect tran- 
quillity. It was a figure not to be mista- 
ken — it was the figure of him who had 
visited me in the cells of the Inquisition. 
The hopes of my justification made me 
forget every thing. I called aloud on 
the guard, and pointed out the figure, vi- 
sible as it was in that strong fight to every 
eye. No one had time, however, to give 
a glance towards it. At that very mo- 
ment, the archway of the court opposite 
to us gave way, and sunk in ruins at our 
feet, dashing, as it fell, an ocean of flame 
against us. One wild shriek burst from 
every lip at that moment. Prisoners, 
guards, and Inquisitors, all shrunk toge- 
ther, mingled in one groupe of terror. 

" The next instant, the flames being 
suppressed by the fall of such a mass of 
stone, there arose such a blinding cloud of 
smoke and dust, that it was impossible to 



A TALE. 319 

distinguish the face or figure of those who 
were next you. The confusion was in- 
creased by the contrast of this sudden 
darkness, to the intolerable light that had 
been drying up our sight for the last hour, 
and by the cries of those who, being near 
the arch, lay maimed and writhing under 
its fragments. Amid shrieks, and dark- 
ness, and flames, a space lay open before 
me. The thought, the motion, were si- 
multaneous — no one saw — no one pur- 
sued ; — and hours before my absence could 
be discovered, or an inquiry be made 
after me, I had struggled safe and secret 
through the ruins, and was in the streets 
of Madrid. 

'• To those who have escaped present 
and extreme peril, all other peril seems 
trifling. The wretch who has swum from 
a wreck cares not on what shore he is cast; 
and though Madrid was in fact only a wi- 
der prison of the Inquisition to mc, in know- 
ing that I was no longer in the hands of the 
oflicials, 1 felt a dehrious and indefinite 



320 MELMOTH : 

consciousness of safety. Had I reflected 
for a moment, I must have known, that 
my peculiar dress and hare feet must be- 
tray me wherever I went. The conjuncture, 
however, was very favourable to me — the 
streets were totally deserted ; — every inha- 
bitant who was not in bed, or bed-rid, was 
in the churches, deprecating the wrath of 
heaven, and praying for the extinction of 
the flames. 

" I ran on, I know not where, till I 
could run no longer. The pure air, which 
I had been so long unaccustomed to breathe, 
acted like the most torturing spicula on 
my throat and lungs as I flew along, and 
utterly deprived me of the power of respi- 
ration, which at first it appeared to restore. 
I saw a building near me, whose large 
doors were open. I rushed in — it was a 
church. I fell on the pavement panting. 
It was the aisle into which I had burst — 
it was separated from the chancel by large 
grated railings. Within 1 could see the 
priests at the altar, by the lamps recently 



A TALE. 321 

and rarely lighted, and a few trembling 
devotees on their knees, in the body of the 
cliancel. There was a strong contrast be- 
tween the glare of the lamps within the 
chancel, and the faint light that trembled 
through the windows of the aisle, scarcely 
showing me the monuments, on one of 
which 1 leaned to rest my throbbing tem- 
ples for a moment. I could not rest — I 
dared not — and rising, 1 cast an involun- 
tary glance on the inscription which the 
monument bore. The light appeared to 
increase maliciously, to aid my powers of 
vision. I read, " Orate pro anima." I 
at last came to the name — " Juan di Mon- 
9ada." I flew from the spot as if pursued 
by demons — my brother's early grave had 
been my resting place. 



END OF VOLUME SECOND. 



