FLORENCE MACARTHY 



BY 

LADY MORGAN, 

AUTHOR OF 44 FRANCE, " 44 O'DONNEL," &C. 



Know thus far forth : 
By accident most strange, bountiful fortune, 
Now, my dear lady, hath mine enemies 
Brought to this shore; and by my prescience, 
I find my zenith doth depend upon 
A most auspicious star, whose influence, 
If now I court not but omit, my fortunes 
"Will ever after droop. Shakespeare. 



I < - femmes ne root p Q « tn n) d'humpur a pardonner de 
certaines injures, et quand elles se promettent le plaisir de la 
vengeance elles n.'y vont pas de main-morte. 

De Grammont. 



IN FOUR VOLUMES. 
VOL. IV. 



JFourfh, CtJition. 



LONDON : 
PRINTED FOR HKNRY COLBURN, 

PUBLIC LIBRARY, CONDUIT STREET, II AN V BR IQUAEE. 



B. Clarke, Printer, Well Street, Loadon. 



FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 



CHAPTER L 

lie seems to have the quotidian of lore upo» 
kirn. Shakespeare. 

I'll Tenturc — for my new enlivened spirits 
prompt me. Milton. 

General Fitz Walter was dressed 
for dinner a full hour before the usual 
time of assembling at Dunore Castle. 
All his motions were involuntarily acce- 
lerated : a feverish restlessness urged 
his most trivial actions : his whole 
existence had received a new impulsion 
by the operation of one unaccustomed 
and absorbing sentiment: an overpower- 
ing motive had unexpectedly sprung up 
to actuate his conduct, and the obedient 

VOL. IV. K 



t FLORENCE MACARTI1Y. 

will followed its spring with a prompti- 
tude and energy consonant to his na- 
ture and his habits. 

Woman, who had hitherto imperi- 
ously governed his senses, now, for the 
first time, obtained a moral influence 
over his mind, and became, not the ob- 
ject of a caprice, but of a passion ; and 
passion, whatever might be its cause, 
was his element. 

The person of Lady Clancare was not 
particularly distinguished by its beauty, 
but it was characteristic. Fresh, health- 
ful, and intelligent, she had neither the 
symmetry of statuary loveliness nor the 
brilliant colouring of pictured charms ? 
but she was piquante, graceful, and vi- 
vacious : her mouth and teeth were 
well compared by O'Leary to those of 
a young hound ; her head was pic- 
turesque, and her whole appearance the 
very .personification of womanhood. 
Silent, and at rest, ghe was scarcely dis- 



FLORENCE M ACARTHY. 3 



tinguishable from the ordinary class of 
women; but when her countenance was 
thrown into play, when she spoke with 
the anxiety or the consciousness of 
pleasing, or under the impression of 
being pleased, there was a mobility, a 
variety of expression and colouring, 
which corresponded with the vigour, 
spirit, and energy of her extraordinary 
mind. 

This indication, which might have 
repelled others, was the charm that 
fascinated Fitzwalter. The kindling 
susceptibility it betrayed harmonized 
with his own prompt and impetuous 
disposition, bespeaking a congeniality 
of feeling, and a reciprocity of intelli- 
gence, which he had never found in 
man, which he had never sought for in 
woman, and which, whether it took 
the calm and steady form of friendship, 
or the bright intoxicating aspect of 
love, was still the object of his uncon- 

B 2 



4 FLORENCE MACAUTHY. 

scious research, and the indispensiblc 
ingredient of his permanent schemes of 
happiness. Hitherto he had lived un- 
associated and solitary in the midst of 
the universe ; his deep and lonely feel- 
ings preying on a mind left to its own 
resources, unanswered, unreciprocated. 
He now found one, like himself, vigor- 
ous in intellect and rapid in action ; 
full of that life and spirit which suited 
his own habits and modes of being ; 
devoted to that country whose interests 
was the object of his future life ; and 
drooping, like himself, in that feeble 
and futile society, whose very atmos- 
phere is fatal to the elevation of great 
mind3, or the vivacity of lively and 
energetic ones. 

This conviction struck at once upon 
his imagination with that force which 
accompanied all its strong and promptly 
received impressions. It awakened his 
passions in all their natural vehemence ; 



FLORE>i CE MACAItTHY. * 



and, impatient of all suspense, ill-brook- 
ing even inevitable delay, he would 
have gone at once to the 6 head and 
front' of his views and hopes ; he would, 
in his own language, have followed their 
object ' from pole to pole, over alps 
and oceans, or have remained fixed and 
rooted to the spot she inhabited, wooed 
her, won her, clung to her, and cherish- 
ed her and, according to the startling 
conclusion of Lord Adelm, ' married 
her,' but that he was already married ; 
married, at least, he considered him- 
self, in honour, in gratitude, until she 
who shared his bondage voluntarily 
broke it. 

There was too another barrier to the 
impulse of his passionate feelings. It 
was just possible that all he admired 
and all he sought was devoted to ano 
ther. Those powers and endowments, 
so attractive in his eyes, might be ap- 
plied to the subjection of one, wh© 
B 3 



6* FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



would only prize them so long as their 
versatility and ingenuity could confirm 
and feed his visionary tastes and meta- 
physical delusions; so long as they 
could excite ideal prepossessions in fa- 
vour of the invisible agent, which the 
actual woman would probably neither 
awaken nor perpetuate. From several 
corroborating circumstances, Fitzwalter 
was almost convinced that Lady Clan- 
care was the Egeria, the demon of 
Lord Adclm, who had either watched 
over or bewildered him, had made him 
the object of her care, or the victim of 
her caprice, since his arrival in Ireland. 
Her knowledge of himself, his name, 
and profession, which she had revealed 
to Lord Adelm, might have come 
through details received from her 
cousin Florence Macarthy ; but where 
she could have seen him in Ireland, or 
how Miss Macarthy had learned his 
arrival, were still enigmas. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 7 

That talent and love for the embrog- 
lio, which Lady Clancare had herself 
confessed to have inherited from her 
Spanish mother, and which took from 
the simplicity of her character what it 
added to its spirit and ingenuity, 
pointed her out as the agent of mystery, 
who had directed the conduct and led 
the steps of the accomplished ideolo- 
gist; and who had summoned around 
her 6 most willing spirits to do her ser- 
vice' in the incongruous forms of Mrs. 
Magillicuddy, and Owny, the Rabragh. 
The object of employing so clumsy an 
agent as the former was not very ob- 
vious; but the latter personage was 
manifestly devoted to her orders, and 
might for many reasons be deemed 
capable of promoting her still inexpli- 
cable views. He was her foster brother, 
that bond of service and devotion so 
sacred in Ireland. She had also re- 
lieved him from misery and incarcera- 
6 4 



& FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

tion by her exertion and interference. 
He had conveyed her from Dunore to 
Dublin, according to O'Leary's account, 
and he might, on her return to the 
south, have been naturally summoned 
to meet her at Cashel, either to carry 
her home, or to ' do her behests.' 

Alert, adroit, gay, humorous, and 
deviceful, as he evidently was, he 
might unite to these personal peculiari- 
ties qualities inherent in the lower 
Irish in general. Warm friends and 
revengeful enemies, inviolable in their 
tecrecy, devoted in their attachments, 
inexorable in their resentments, enter- 
taining such notions of honour that 
neither threats nor recompense could 
induce them to betray a confidence to 
which they have once pledged them- 
selves, they are obviously adapted to 
the service of a mysterious agency, 
whether for a political or a private 
purpose. Owny, who was a genuine 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 9 

Irishman of this class, endowed with 
zeal, activity, and evasion, the qualities 
of a finely organized, but socially de- 
based people, as one too who owed 
every thing to Lady Clancare, might, 
with great probability, have engaged in 
any scheme to forward the interests of 
his benevolent patroness, as he would 
be true to any trust reposed in him, 
but more especially by that popular 
Bhan Tierna, whose health he had 
pledged at the cottage at Lis-na-sleugh 
with a solemnity almost religious. 

This act had not escaped the obser- 
vation of Fitzwalter, and these supposi- 
tions and inferences, quite possible, and 
more than probable, were gradually 
worked out, distinctly examined, and 
rapidly combined in his fluctuating 
thoughts, as he pursued his way on foot 
to Dunore castle. To a mind so quick 
in its preceptions, so energetic in all 
its workings, slight data were sufficient 
B 5 



10 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



to lead to a just result; and his natural 
acutencss got the start in this, as in 
many other instances, of progressive 
investigation. 

To detect Lady Clancare in her con- 
cealed and mysterious character was 
one thing; to ascertain the motive to ar- 
rive at the object of her singular, and 
almost equivocal conduct, was another. 
His life had not been a life of reflec- 
tion; and woman, though frequently an 
object of his devotion, had never been 
to him a subject of analysis. Yet he 
knew enough of the general principles 
of human nature to understand that 
human conduct must be motived by 
passion, and he could conceive but one 
passion incidental to female existence 
— and that was love. All that he 
had known of the sex or the sexes 
tendencies had been acquired under 
the voluptuous influence of tropical 
climes, among the moon-eyed beauties 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. II 

of India, the languid dames of Mexico 
and Peru ; and he would have decided 
at once that Lady Clancare was in love 
with Lord Adelm, but that the suppo- 
sition was too painful to indulge. He 
knew not why, but it maddened him ; 
and he was rescued from its poignancy 
by the reflection that Lord Adelm -had 
never seen her, but on her first appear- 
ance in the hall of Dunore, when she 
had given him the impression of being 
a mere minaudiere y a caprice of his 
mother, having recourse to stratagem 
to procure an introduction to the insipid 
circle which Lady Dunore had grouped 
around her. As a woman of talent, 
one too who had obtained celebrity by 
that talent, Lord Adelm would have 
detested her; and that spirit and vigour 
of mind, which made her charm with 
Fitzwalter, would have rendered her 
insupportable in the eyes of one who 
placed the perfection of woman in her 



12 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



fatuity, and who knew no medium be- 
tween the pretenders of the Hotel 
Rambonillet, and the unideaed beauties 
of a Turkish seraglio. Still he believed, 
that in spite of her equivocal and play- 
ful evasion, the handkerchief found by 
Lord Adelm was purposely dropped by 
Lady Clanclare. The motive of this 
mystery, as well as the train of events in 
which he had in some respects been in- 
volved himself since his arrival in 
Ireland, remained unfathomable. The 
agent and chief mover was still (he re- 
flected himself into the conviction) the 
singular Bhan Tierna, whom O'Leary 
represented as one endowed with the 
art of vanquishing whom she pleased, 
and whose powers were darkly sketch- 
ed, according to the genealogist of the 
Macarthies, in the obscure and remote 
prophecies of Friar Con. 

The suspicions which now gradually 
lighted on the head of Lady Clancarc 



FLORENCE MACAkTHY- 13 



were necessarily withdrawn from Flo- 
rence Macarthy, the refugee of the Con- 
vent of the Annunciation. With this 
person, the fate of General Fitzwalter 
was strangely linked. His connexion 
with the daughter of the brave Colonel 
Macarthy, to which he had alluded in 
his conversation with Lady Clancare, 
and with which, to his amazement, and 
a little to his confusion, that lady had 
confessed she was already acquainted, 
was a romantic episode in the strange 
history of his eventful life. To that 
event memory referred with a painful 
sensation, that originated in feelings 
not at rest with themselves. If there 
was one circumstance in his life which 
had left a shadow behind it, it was his 
connexion with Florence Macarthy. 
His efforts to become reconciled to him- 
self were reduced to a proposal, which 
hastily conceived, and a^ hastily execu- 
ted, was contained in the letter which 



14 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

he now lamented having trusted to 
Lady Clancare. The misery or happi- 
ness of his future life might depend up- 
on the answer that letter produced ; 
meantime he was the slave of feelings 
new to his nature, uncongenial to his 
habits, but powerfully assimilating with 
his vehement and restless passions. He 
was the victim of a suspense intolera- 
ble, and wholly at variance with a cha- 
racter formed alike to suffer and to en- 
joy ; but unequal to hang upon the 
slow course of probabilities, for the sen- 
tence which would consign him to 
bliss or to misery, which he could nei- 
ther hasten nor control, and which, for 
the first time, took his destiny out of 
his own hands, and placed him in sub- 
ordination to the will or caprice of 
others. The business which had brought 
him to Ireland was effected. It was his 
interest to return immediately to Eng- 
land, and he could give to himself no 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



\5 



plausible cause of delay, but the neces- 
sity, he fancied, or believed himself to 
be under, of waiting an answer to the 
letter he had despatched to Florence 
Macarthy : it would have been more 
consonant to his habitual modes of act- 
ing to have flown himself to her con- 
vent, and sought a personal interview, 
an immediate and decisive sentence : 
but his feelings opposed themselves to 
a conduct so natural ; and he was more 
inclined to defer than to expedite per- 
sonal communication with one, whose 
presence could only awaken ungracious 
association, and who was perhaps the 
only human being in existence before 
whom he would have blushed to pre- 
sent himself. 

After a long slow-paced circuitous rout, 
considerably lengthened in fact, but appa- 
rently shortened in idea by the agitation 
of his thoughts, andthepre-occupationof 
his mind, he at last arrived at the portico 



lfi FLORENCE MACARTH Y, 

of Dunore; and, with the exception of 
old Crawley, who had left Dunore that 
morning for Dublin, and of Lord 
Adelm, who had not yet returned, he 
found the usual party assembled in the 
great hall of the castle, and disposed in 
a manner as ludicrous as it was unex- 
pected. 

Lady Dunore occupied the fore- 
ground. She stood, with a coarse bib 
and apron tied over her superb dinner 
dress of crimson satin, and filled with 
green rushes, w hich she was fastening 
in sheaths. The floor was spread with 
the same materials, which Mr. He- 
neage, Mr. Pottinger, and Miss Craw- 
ley, were engaged in peeling ; while 
Mr. Daly and Conway Crawley were 
reading the papers ; and Lord Ros- 
brin, covered with rushes, was spouting 
" Mad Tom Lord Frederick and 
Lady Georgina, as usual, were lounging 
on an ottoman, and laughing together 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1? 

at the whole party. At the sight 
of General Fitz waiter, Lady Dunore 
sprung delightedly forward, and wel- 
comed him with an ardour, for which, 
even vanity itself, could find no ade- 
quate cause. 

" This is so good of you," she said, 
H so unexpectedly kind ! Fitzadelm en- 
deavoured to persuade me this morn- 
ing that you were bored to death with 
us all ; that we did not in the least 
amuse you ; that you were engaged 
in business, and law, and things ; that, 
in short, you would neither breakfast, 
dine, nor sup with us ; and that, as to 
sleeping, you would as soon take up 
your lodging in Bedlam. You can't 
imagine how this fretted and annoyed 
me, because I wanted you for a par- 
ticular — *' She paused abruptly, and 
added, " that is, I wanted you to, to — 
help me to peel rushes. You see we 
are all occupied with this rush manu- 



18 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

factory. I hope, if you settle in this 
neighbourhood, which perhaps/' she 
added with a significant look, "you 
may, that you will encourage the rush 
manufactory; for the whole misery 
of this country, General Fitzwalter, 
arises out of the want of work, and 
food, and things. Isn't it so, Lady 
Clancare r" 

General Fitzwalter followed the di- 
rection of this question, and not with* 
out emotion perceived Lady Clancare 
seated in the arm chair at the back of 
the hall, which the preceding day had 
been occupied by one of the judges. 
She looked pale and spiritless, as one 
exhausted, and under the reaction of 
over excitement. She coloured, how- 
ever, slightly at Lady Dunore's appeal, 
and returned an affirmative, but silent 
nod of the head. Every one smiled, 
and this smile increased the colour in 
her cheek. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1^ 

" The fact is," continued Lady Du- 
nore, following the general's eyes with 
triumphant satisfaction in her own, 
* no one knows any thing of the real 
state of this country but Lady Clancare. 
She has given me an entirely new 
view of things. It is too dreadful, too 
heart-rending. It is all a tragedy da 
plus beau nuir. I have cried myself 
sick as I drove here." 

Every one tittered ; the Crawleys 
almost audibly ; and Lady Clancare 
coloured deeper than before. " The 
miracle is," said Lady Dunorc, in a ve- 
hement manner, and wholly ingrossed 
with her own sensations, " the mira- 
cle is, that they don't all arise and 
murder us. They will do so soon ; 
and I think they are quite justified. 
I would not bring them to trial if they 
were to murder my whole household. 
I will have no more secret committees, 
no more green bags, and special com- 



20 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



missions ; * employ, not hang* that's 
my inaxim now. It is, however, curious 
enough to see people troubling their 
heads about elections and evangelical 
schools, and private theatricals, and 
chapels and Bible societies, and things, 
when the people to be represented are 
starving ; the people to be edified, 
amused, and instructed, are literally 
perishing for want. Give them some- 
thing to eat first, and then instruct 
them ; teach them to labour, and then 
to read ; give them wants that civilize 
humanity, and that raise them above 
the brute creation, and then edify them: 
for, after all, the first law of nature is 
to exist. People must live, in order 
to live piously ; and it is a fact that 
bread is as necessary as books ; and if 
people will die of the typhus from 
cold, want, and filth, why they cannot 
then read the multitude of evapgelica 
tracts which are written for their use, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 21 

and population will thin, as tracts 
multiply. Is it not so. Lady Clan- 
care ? 

This question, asked with emphatic 
gravity, excited new smiles of ridicule 
or amusement in some, of gratified ma- 
lignity in other ; for all were quite 
aware, that Lady Dunore's inspiration 
and authority came from the same 
fource; a source which now, for the 
moment, ruled the ascendant. Mean- 
time Lady Clancare's downcast, but 
rapidly moving eyes, seemed to take 
in the suffrages of the whole circle. 
She coloured, and only replied to Lady 
Dunore's parrotted details, with another 
oracular nod, while the officiating priest- 
ess went on, under the influence of her 
delphic deity. 

" No one can be more devoted to the 
Irish government than I am, and all 
their measures ; and I think our Irish 
secretary the cleverest little creature in 



22 FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 

the world, as I said to the premier, 
after he made his maiden speech. I 
said he would distance all the rising 
young men, none of whom, by the 
bye, have risen at all ; but disappointed 
us, like the young Roscius, and the boy 
that told the sums and things ; and 
those tiresome musical children, that 
did all by rote. As to the vice-regal 
13 — 's, they happen to be my particu- 
lar friends, and I was quite delighted 
they got such a good thing, poor dears; 
and, in fact, they could not have gotten 
on at all, if they had not been sent over 
here, and got their thirty thousand a 
year. But when it comes to considering 
Ireland in its actual state ; and when 
one hears you, Mr. Pottinger, talk of 
your Lady -Lieutenant s encouraging 
the Irish manufactures, because she 
wears a tabinet gown on St. Patrick's 
night, or St. Patrick's day, or in St. Pa- 
trick's church ; or, what is it, Lord Fre- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



23 



derick, about the kettle-drums and 
things, and Noodle and Doodle ? And 
you, Mr. Conway Crawley, talking of 
the chief secretary's expedients, and 
measures of necessary coercion ; his 
eminent worth, splendid talents, unre- 
mitting zeal, consummate wisdom, and 
transcendent merit,* and that sort of 
thing; when all he can know of Ire-, 
land must be collected from such peo- 
ple as you and your father ; or as he 
whirls through the country in a chaise 
and four, to shoot partridge or grouse, 
or to hunt at Lord Clon — this, or Lord 
Kill — f others; some of your new made 
lords, par exemple, who are excellent 
people, only no one cares much about 
them with us; it's quite too ridiculous! 



* The ready-made addresses of the most 
loyal corporation of Dublin, to all secretaries, 
past, prcsenf, and to come, abonnd in such epi- 
thets of universal eulogiom,. 



24 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Dont you think so, Lady Clancarer and 
when the prettiest rush-work in the 
world might he done, and encouraged 
by them all, as it is done at that very 
ancient ruinous town of Ballydab, the 
Irish Balbec, as one may call it. For 
my part, I shall employ all the poor 
at Dunore at rush-work. I'll have rush 
sofas, rush chairs, rush mats, rush filla- 
gree, rush lights, and rush carpets ; 
every thing, in short, that can be made 
©f rushes." 

u Then/' said Lord Rosbrin, flourish- 
ing about the hall, 

4 Then shall we wantons, light of heart, 
Tickle the senseless rushes with our heels.'* 

Here dinner was announced, and 
Lord Adelm alighted at the door at the 
same moment, and went to dress. The 
rest of the party proceeded to the dining 
room. 

Mr. Daly officiated at the head of 



FLOllENCE 



MACARTHY. 



25 



the tabic, in the place of Lord Fitza- 
delm. Lady Clancare took the seat 
her rank assigned her, on his right 
hand. Lady Dun ore took her's by the 
side of Lady Clancare ; and she con- 
trived to place General Fitz waiter oppo- 
site to both, by directing him to a seat, 
most mal-apropos, between Miss Craw- 
ley and her nephew. There was some- 
thing in the presence of this extraordi * 
nary stranger which had become ex- 
tremely irksome to the Crawleys. They 
had received a sort of half-given con- 
fidence respecting him, from old Craw- 
ley, which had terrified and confounded 
them. He had let fall hints, and sug- 
gested possibilities, which broke upon 
them an event of which they had no 
suspicion ; and though, either in timi- 
dity or distrust, he had never fully and 
explicitly opened his heart to them on a 
subject which began to oppress his con- 
science, in proportion as it awakened his 
vol. iv. r 



26 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

apprehension, they had yet gathered 
enough to inspire considerable alarm ; 
and they had urged the old man to go 
to Dublin, previous to the election for 
Glannacrime, for the purpose of antici- 
pating or frustrating a discovery, which 
could not long be retarded, and was 
pregnant with evil to the character, in- 
fluence, and property, of the whole 
Crawley family. 

Miss Crawley and her nephew now 
sat silent on either side of their ill-bo- 
ding neighbour ; while Lady Dunore, 
with her mouth in Lady Clancare's ear, 
and her eyes fixed on General Fitzwal- 
ter, continued wholly inattentive to the 
rest of her guests. 

Lord Adelm entered the room with 
the second course. 

"How did you get on at Glannacrime, 
Fitzadelm T asked Lady Dunore, care- 
lessly, as soon as he had finished his 
soup. 



FLORENCE MCCARTHY. 27 

u I don't know exactly what your 
ladyship's question points at : but I 
got off as soon as I could." 

" Did you speak to them ?" she re- 
turned, with a look of nausea. " I mean 
to those horrors, the forty shilling free- 
holders ?" 

cc Speak ! oh, yes/ of course, e in 
wholesome manner,' Madam." 

" Indeed ; well, and what did you 
say, my dear Adelm ?*' continued Lady 
Dunore, with a little increasing interest. 

" Ibid them wash their faces, and 
keep clean their teeth, and so troubled 
them no further." 

" That must have surprised them/' 
said Lady Dunore, much pleased with 
what she took very literally ; " but it 
was excellent advice." 

" I think it must have astonished 
them a little/' said Mr. Daly, laughing. 

u Yes," observed Lord Rosbrin, u it 
must: but you might have chosen a 
c 2 



28 FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 



better speech, Fitzadelm. You should 
have said, as I did from the hustings of 
Kilrosbrin, before they got me into the 
upper house: 

* Your voices. For your voices I have fought : 
Watched for your voices : for your voices bear 
Of -wounds two dozen odd. Battles thrice six 
I've seen and heard of. For your voices have 
Done many things, some more, some less.' 

" And did they believe you, my pa- 
trician Coriorosbrin ?" asked Lord Fre- 
derick, languidly. 

" Yes," replied Lord Rosbrin, ab- 
stractedly. " The first citizen said — 

* He has done nobly.' 
The second citizen — 

4 Therefore let him be consul. 

The gods give him joy, and make him friend 

To the people.* 

And all cried — 

" Amen ! amen ! God save the noble consul." 



FLORENCE MACAUTHY. 2$ 

And then exeunt O. P. I speak from 
Covent Garden prompt-book." 

Every one laughed but Lord Rosbrin 
who was beyond the reach of ridicule 
engaged in muttering parts of Coriola 
nus. 

" Had I known of your lordship's 
intention of visiting Glannacrime this 
morning/' said young Crawley, " I 
should have accompanied you.'* 

" It was quite unnecessary/' said 
Lord Adelm, coldly. 

" How were you received, Fitzadelm ?" 
asked Mr. Daly. 

" Not at all ; they did not know me. 
I look upon it as against the freedom of 
election to come forward personally. 
I went, however, to their sessions-house, 
where a committee was sitting in my 
favour. I told them Lord Adelm's opi- 
nion in a few words : that he was 
aware they would elect him if they 
could make any thing of it ; but that 
c3 



30 FLORENCE MACART1IY. 

they would sell him and their votes to- 
gether, if they could make more by 
the bargain." 

" That must have widened the little 
eyes of the yellow buttons and peacock's 
feathers" observed Lord Frederick, 
laughing. 

" It is a new mode of electioneering," 
said Mr. Daly, evidently pleased with 
his grand-nephew. 

" And will doubtless succeed/' said 
Conway Crawley, in a whisper to Mr. 
Pottinger. 

Conversation now took a desultory 
turn; and the ladies retired early. Lady 
Dunore and Lady Clancare walked from 
the dining-room into the court, though 
it was after night-fall. Lady Georgina 
went to sleep, as usual, in order to call 
up her looks for the evening : and Miss 
Crawley retired to brood over her own 
venom, which every hour was increasing 
by the events of the day. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 31 

Mr. Pottinger had scarcely bowed out 
the ladies, and closed the door after 
them, when Lord Adelm beckoned 
General Pi tz waiter to the window. 

" Well/* he said, with a look of 
anxious impatience. 

" Well!" said the general, some- 
thing perplexed. " I have nothing to 
tell you, save that the person to whom 
I alluded this morning is not, cannot 
be, your sylph, your woman" 

He dwelt with a species of invete- 
racy on the latter word ; and Lord 
Adelm, pronouncing with a sigh of dis- 
appointment and a look of mortification, 
" I thought so ; — and I am now as far 
as ever from the ideal presence/* they 
both resumed their seats. 

The gentlemen sat late : conversation 
had taken a wide range. The general 
politics of Europe, the actual and rela- 
tive position of their own country, the 
spirit of the age, and determination of 



32 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

popular opinion, were discussed ably 
and energetically by Mr. Daly, Lord 
Adelm, Lord Frederick, and General 
Fitzwalter. Mr. Pottingcr edged in 
a few feeble common-places, gleaned 
at castle dinners ; Lord Rosbrin quoted 
and spouted where he eould, and as he 
could ; Mr. Heneage said nothing, ex- 
cept that the imperial Arctic Dandy was 
reported to employ a French Schneidei* ; 
and Conway Crawley rather marred 
and thwarted the conversation, than 
joined or promoted it> pouring forth 
an infinite deal of nothings with great 
fluency, and arrogantly contradicting 
what he could not ably controvert. 
When they adjourned to the drawing- 
room, even the most temperate were a 
little animated, if not flushed by Lady 
Dunore's excellent claret ; yet scarcely 
more wine had been taken than served 
to dissipate the apathetic dulness, which, 
in spite of Lady Dunore's own impe- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 33 A 

tuous spirits, and vivacious character, 
habitually presided over the circle at 
Dunore. 

When the men, however, entered 
the drawing-room, they found it only 
occupied by Lady Georgina and Miss 
Crawley ; the former, with her elegantly 
draped figure, lying apparently half 
asleep on a canopied couch; the latter^ 
seated near her, was so occupied in 
some narration she was muttering, that 
the gentleman had advanced into the 
middle of the room before she observed 
them. Lady Georgina, with a pretty 
effected start of- astonishment, opened 
her soft, languid eyes, and made an 
effort to rise. Lord Rosbrin meantime 
hanging over her, exclaimed, — 

" Her body sleeps in Capulet's monument, 
While her immortal part with angels liTes." 

** I think,'* said Lord Frederick, 
taking his coffee, and throwing himself 
c 5 



34 FLORENCE MACARTH-Y. 

on a divan, near Lady Georgina, " we 
all appear to be buried in the tomb of 
the Capulets. I had no idea the divine 
Marchesa meant to consign us all to 
such immortal dulness. The castle of 
Le bois dormant faintly images the 
quietude of our provincial chateau ; and 
one of these fine days we shall all be 
found, by a new generation, fast asleep 
in the costume of the then last century, 
like the court of the Sleeping Beauty. 
We are already almost reduced aux muets 
entrepreteSj and shall gradually fall 
into the eloquent silence of that round- 
eyed, tongue-tied Lady Clancare, who 
par parenthese, looks as if she were 
extracting us all for her common-place 
book, and will doubtless bring us out 
in hot-press, sans dire gar T 

" I doubt she will ever bring out any 
thing half so good," said Conway Craw- 
ley: " as yet, that is not in her line ; 
she has had too few opportunities of 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 35 

studying fashionable life to attempt any 
thing in that way. Her position here, 
at least, is so extremely obscure, that I 
believe the castle of Dunore is the first 
fine house in the country into which 
she was ever admitted/' 

" And," said Miss Crawley, smiling, 
and in spite of her former discomfiture 
unable to contain her acrimonious spirit, 
" and perhaps it may be her last." 

" Her principles," continued young 
Crawley, " as disseminated in her ' Na- 
tional Tales,' as she calls them, are suf- 
ficient to keep her out of good society 
here." 

" I thought I had heard you say, 
Mr. Crawley," observed Mr. Daly, 
'5 that you did not know Lady Clancare 
was an author ¥* 

" I did not till this morning/ ' said 
Crawley, a little confused. " When Lady 
Dunore mentioned the titles of her 
works, and the initials representing the 



36 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



authors name, I recollected having 
looked over those tomes of absurdity 
and vagueness, of daring blasphemy, of 
affectation, of bad taste, bombast, and 
nonsense, blunders, ignorance, jacobi- 
nism and falsehood, licentiousness and 
impiety, which it now seems are the 
effusions of the pseudo Lady Clan- 
care" 

Young Crawley, already flushed with 
w r ine, grew still more red with rage as 
he spoke. 

" Oh, my dear Mr. Crawley/' inter- 
rupted Lord Frederick, with unusual 
vivacity, " say no more, or you will 
make us in love with the author and her 
work together ; for, really, a book that 
could combine all these terrific hetero- 
geneous qualities, and yet be read, must 
be very odd and extraordinary : pour le 
moins." 

" Very extraordinary, indeed," said 
Mr. Daly, " considering* that with all 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 37 



these vices and faults they have been 
so read and bought, as to realize an in- 
dependence for their author, and enable 
her to carry on a suit which has de- 
prived the elder Mr. Crawley of his 
dear Clotnotty-joy. It would at least 
appear, that in spite of professional cri- 
ticism, the public are always with 
her." 

" O, her flippant and arrogant igno- 
rance has its market," returned Conway 
Crawley, hatred and envy of Lady 
Clancare, reanimated by the position 
she now held in a circle from which it 
was his object to have excluded her, 
getting the better of all presence of 
mind, and giving the direct lie to his 
recent declarations of ignorance ; '* and 
the sylphed Miss Macarthy, the elegant 
Lady Clancare, is, in fact, a mere 
bookseller s drudge. Her impudent 
falsehoods j and lies by implication } the 
impious jargon of this mad woman, this 
audacious worm- " 



38 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" Are you speaking of Lady Clancare, 
Sir?" said General Fitzwalter, who 
had been talking to Lord Adelm, but 
who now turned shortly round upon 
young Crawley, with a tone and look 
that stunned the hardy railler ; " are 
you applying such language to a wo- 
man — to any woman ?" 

ce I — I — I was speaking, Sir/' said 
young Crawley, nearly sobered at once, 
and growing pale at this address, " that 
is, I was repeating the criticism of a 
celebrated periodical review, which may, 
perhaps, be deemed severe, but which 
is edited by men of the most " 

" Men ! do you call them," said Ge- 
neral Fitzwalter, with a sharp contemp- 
tuous laugh, and turning on his heel. 
" Men, indeed !" 

A momentary silence ensued. The 
indignant contempt with which General 
Fitzwalter had fixed his eyes on Craw- 
ley was observed by all. Crawley was 
physically timid; he shrunk back and 



♦ FLORENCE MACARTHY, 39 

took up a book ; Miss Crawley changed 
colour; and at that moment the mar- 
chioness entered, leaning on Lady Clan- 
care's arm. They were both wrapped 
in their shawls ; and the freshness of 
the evening air, and the deep colouring 
of exercise, gave a vivid brightness 
to their complexions. 

u We have had a delicious walk of 
some miles ; two or ' three, I believe/' 
said Lady Dunore, sinking into a fau- 
teuil, and calling for coffee ; while Lady 
Clancare modestly took her seat rather 
behind than beside, so as just to raise 
her face over the back of Lady Dunore's 
chair, in a position equally shy and ob- 
serving. For a moment she attracted 
every eye, and all sought to trace in her 
countenance some indication of the 
audacious, lying, profligate, ignorant, 
and pretending jacobin. 

a There is nothing, after all," said 
Lady Dunore, gradually un muffling her- 



40 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



self, " like the security, and moon- 
light, and things of that kind, of Ireland. 
I am so in love with my Irish solitudes, 
that I am not certain I shall not remain 
here through the winter.' ' 

" Then, marchioness of my affec- 
tions," said Lord Frederick, " I must 
beg my bouquet cT adieu; for though I 
agree in the old sentimental tag of 
La solitude est line belle chose, yet—** 

" Oh, sweet love," interrupted Lady 
Georgina, addressing the marchioness, 
and who, as well as Lord Frederick, had 
her reasons for disliking the extreme 
smallness of the petit comitt , in which 
they had lived at Dunore, and which 
placed every one so constantly before 
the eyes of the others—" oh, sweet 
love, you have no idea what an excel- 
lent society you have about you, if you 
would but let in the Aborigines. Miss 
Crawley has been amusing me this 
evening with a description of your 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 41 

neighbours for twenty miles round. I 
dare say they would amuse you great- 
ly. Now do, Miss Crawley, pray 
shew your list to Lady D. Miss Cra Wi- 
ley has made out a list for you, Ma 
Reine." 

" Oh, you may let in who you like," 
said Lady Dunore : " I shall not in the 
least object, if there are cups .and 
saucers and things for the Irish ladies, 
who are monstrously particular I hear ; 
and provided they won't expect me to go 
to them in return, they may come and 
welcome. Who shall we have ? Who 
shall we let in, Lady Clancare ? W ho 
is there really presentable and amusing ? 
But mind, I won t have any circulars ; 
I won't have those Chinese hierogly- 
phics, with their tails in their mouths, 
that is, the serpents. What is it, Lord 
Frederick, about eternity you know ? 
The Chinese Mandarin? You have no 
idea how that word c eternity 1 ennuies 



42 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

me. Now come, Lady Clancare, do 
speak : who shall we have ? Is there no 
one at Balbec, at Ballydab I mean f? 

The Crawleys laughed (aside), but 
were yet heard and seen by all, Lady 
Dunore excepted, who was now arrang- 
ing her dishevelled hair at a mirror over 
the chimney-piece. 

" 1 should like to make you, my dear 
Lady Clancare, my returning officer, as 
old Mr. Crawley says, of the electioneer- 
ing business. Now who shall we hav e?'' 
and she resumed her seat. 

Lady Clancare begged, in her low 
soft voice, to have the office assigned to 
Miss Crawley, who was so much better 
known in the neighbourhood. 

" Oh, dear! no, Ma'am," minced 
Miss Crawley: ft I could not think of 
obtruding on your ladyships province/' 

ce Now pray do as Lady Clancare de- 
sires you, Miss Crawley," said Lady 
Dunore, with her usual inconsequence 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 43 

and peremptory tone. " Rosbrin, draw 
the writing-table near me : you shall be 
secretary to the committee; you shall 
name the persons, Miss Crawley ; and 
then we'll talk them over, and elect ac- 
cordingly." 

Miss Crawley now advanced in im- 
plicit obedience to the commanding flat 
of her future Neophyte ; for the certain 
conversion of the marchioness still ap- 
peared in the perspective, and beckoned 
her on, through every gradation of ser- 
vility, to her grand object. Every one 
gathered round the table placed before 
Lady Dunore, except General Fitz- 
walter and Lord Adelm. The one stood 
aloof, looking, partly in curiosity, and 
partly, perhaps, in contempt, on this 
group of grown children ; the other was 
stretched upon a sofa, occupying a re- 
cess window, and partly shadowed by 
its drapery. 

u Let us see/' said Lady Dunore, 



44 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

taking a paper out of Miss Crawley's 
hand; on which she had written some 
names. " Who is this ? Lady Lisson ! 
Who is she, Miss Crawley?" 

" She is a young widow lady, Madam,, 
of large fortune. They say she has 
more diamonds than the queen ; and is 
niece to our bishop, with whom she i& 
now on a visit.'' 

"Do you know anything of her, 
Lady Clancare?*' said the marchioness, 
turning cooly to her " Cynthea of the 
minute" 

" I have seen her," said Lady Clan- 
care, in her wonted tone and look of 
real or affected simplicity. 

"Is she presentable P What is she 
like?" 

" Like ?" said Lady Clancare, with a 
look of great naivete, as if searching for 
some object of comparison — "Like a 
diamond beetle— small, shining, and in- 
significant. You would find her tire" 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 45 

some for anything exclusive, but she 
might answer for a ball— you might ask 
her to that, on the strength of her dia- 
mond necklace ; it helps to dress a 
room." 

This was the first sentence Lady 
Clancare had uttered aloud since her 
introduction at the castle ; and its oddi- 
ty, contrasted to her naive air and timid 
look, had its due effect. 

" Oh ! put her down, by all means, 
Rosbrin/' cried Lord Frederick, laugh- 
ing. "Down with the diamond beetle, 
with a N. B. the necklace to be in- 
cluded in the invitation/ ' 

" And who is this, my dear Miss 
Crawley? — You write such a very pretty 
precise cramped hand— oh! Mr. and 
Mrs. Wiggins of Fort Wiggins. — That 
sounds bad," added Lady Dunore, 
shaking her head. 

" However it may sound, Madam," 
said Miss Crawley, a little piqued^ 



46 FLORENCE MAC ARTHY. 



and resolved not to be worsted by Lady 
Clancare, to whose talents she now 
believed herself to be purposely op- 
posed in the arena of contest by Lady 
Dunore. " However it may sound, 
Mr. Wiggins holds a distinguished office 
of trust under government; and Mrs. 
Wiggins is supposed to have more titles 
at her parties than any one, except 
Lady Kilgobbin." 

" I wish somebody would kill Lady 
Kilgobbin/' said Lady Dunore, " for I 
am sick of her name. I suppose if these 
Wiggins people are government folk, 
we must have them. I wish particu- 
larly to distinguish the friends and sup- 
porters of the present' ministry. But I 
hope your Mrs. Wiggins is not a quiz, 
Miss Crawley. Do you know her, 
Lady Clancare? ,> 

" I saw her in Dublin, Madam, at a 
few assemblies." 

4( And what is she like? Now do 



/ 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



47 



throw her off for us, d trait de plume. 
Now pray what is she like?" 

" Like — like a scarlet flamingo, lean 
and lank, all legs and neck, in an eter- 
nal red velvet gown." 

" I'll have nothing to do with your 
flamingo, my dear Miss Crawley. The 
eternal red gown would destroy me 
in two nights. I cut the flamingo and 
the velvet gown, positively, legs, neck, 
and all." 

"No, no," interrupted Lord Fre- 
derick, " the flamingo must go in with 
the beetle. Only conceive ; you will 
stand here like your mother Eve, sur- 
rounded by all the birds of the air and 
beasts of the field.— Rosbrin, down with 
the flamingo, as a pendant for the 
beetle: they are charming; and here is," 
he added, looking over Lady Dunore's 
shoulder, " here is Mrs. Randal Roys- 
ton— delicious name! and the three 
Miss Roystons." 



48 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



" There were originally seven Miss 
Flambroughs, with seven China oran- 
ges/' said Lady Clancare, with kindling 
spirits, and now evidently pique e au jeu, 
but Mrs. Randal has married, or rather 
lunched off four." 

" Lunched off! Good God, how 
good!" said Lady Dunore, laughing: 
" but how lunched off, my dear Lady 
Clancare ? ,! 

" Why, when maternal speculation, 
with balls, dinners, and suppers, wholly 
failed, Mrs. Royston advertised sand- 
wiches to morning saunterers, and got 
rid of her Westphalia hams and her 
marriageable daughters together/' 

Everybody laughed. Miss Crawley 
made an effort to speak, but was over- 
powered by the loud shrill voice of 
Lady Dunore. 

" Here, read on, Lord Frederick: do 
you read: go on. This is too amusing." 

" Here is/' - said Lord Frederick, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 4£ 

& General and Mrs. General Jen- 
kins." 

" But not the general Mrs. Jenkins/' 
said Lady Clancare, whose spirits ap- 
parently grew with what they fed on, 
and who gradually came more forward 
on the scene, with increasing confi- 
dence. " Not the general Mrs. Jenkins : 
on the contrary, she is the exclusive 
Mrs. Jenkins, one who discriminates 
by the indices of the Red Book, esti- 
mates qualities by the nobs on coronets, 
and ranges all worth and talent under 
the privilege of walking at a coronation: 
for the rest, she is fussy, fidgetty, and 
fretful, but useful in getting up balls, 
to extract names from a porter's book ; 
and might herself pass the muster-roll 
of gentility unnoticed, but for her idears, 
ivinders, Mariars, Mirandars, and all 
the whole race of rs in the Cockney 
vocabulary of Bow-bell." 

" Now, Lady Dunore/' interrupted^ 

vol. iv. D> 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



Miss Crawley, more annoyed at the 
amusement Lady Clancare was exciting, 
than by the abuse of Mrs. General 
Jenkins, "now I must observe to you, 
that this Mrs. Jenkins, the object of 
Lady Clancare' s ridicule, happens to be 
her own friend; and if her ladyship 
ridicules her own particular friends — " 

" My own particular friends P said 
Lady Clancare, gravely ; " and if I 
don't laugh at my own friends, whose 
friends can I take the liberty of laughing 
at, Miss Crawley?" 

" Really, Madam," said Miss Craw- 
ley, sneering, " I at least do not sec 
the necessity— *' 

" Necessity ! Oh, pardon me, — the 
necessity is obvious, inevitable, plus 
fort que moi, and does not leave a 
shadow of free-will in the case." 

" My aunt, Madam," said young 
Crawley, " must decline all logical dis- 
quisition with you on necessity and free 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 51 

will She is not quite so learned in 
metaphysics, and does not advertize 
her study of Locke for the benefit of 
the public. I believe, and hope, indeed, 
she never read him." 

" Did not she ?" asked Lady Clan- 
care, with simplicity ; " then she must 
not speak of him, Mr. Crawley: for 
there's no getting at Locke by deputy. 
There is no quartering review of him ! 
no opinions to be picked up at second- 
hand, no cut and dry criticisms, neat, 
compact, and portable, made up in 
small parcels, and ready for immediate 
use, as soon as delivered to the pur- 
chaser—you understand, Mr. Crawley. 
To speak of Locke, to criticise hint, one 
must absolutely read him— a gone- by 
sort of practice unknown to the retailers 
of literature of the present day, the 
pedlars and hawkers of the cast-oif ob- 
servations of hireling umpires. But, 5 ' 
she added, with a total change ofcoun- 



52 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

tenance and manner, and a sort of 
fondling voice, opposed to the sharp 
acute accent she had first spoke in, 
u - you must not believe, my dear Lady 
Dunore, that I am the ingrate and can- 
kered Bolinbroke." 

" Henry Fourth, act first, scene 
third," observed Lord Rosbrin, raising 
his eyes from his list to Lady Clancare's 
face, with pleasure and surprise. 

(e I am not," she continued, following 
up her blow on the heart of Lord 
Rosbrin and the temper of the Crawleys 
at the same moment — "I am not guilty 
of this c ungrateful injury,' as Corio- 
lanus has it, against Mrs. General Jen- 
kins. She is not my friend; judge if 
she merits that name. On my coming 
down to this* country, some two years 
back, Mrs. Jenkins, herself then a 
stranger, came to visit me, on the 
strength of my title, and did not get 
into my ruined towers, to view the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 53 

"nakedness of the land;'* so she 
sent me an invitation to her house. I 
went, pour voir ce que cela deviendra, 
and accompanied her to an assize-ball, 
where she suddenly dropped me ; for, 
having found out that I was but a pauper 
peeress, and fitter for the parish books 
than the red bench, she charitably 
consigned me to my destiny ; and now 
meets, stares at, and passes me ; while 
I, with my c good den, Sir Richard,* 
am answered with, c a gad have mercy, 
fellow' But I advise you to ask her to 
your fete, whenever you give any, for 
she twines holly and ivy wreaths for 
garlanding the walls, cuts flowers out 
of turnips and carrots for ornamenting 
supper-tables, and has a recipe for 
making very tolerable letnonade, with- 
out the expensive addition of lemons." 

"No, no; no Mrs. GeneralJenkins," 
was the general cry : while LadyDunore, 
equally delighted with the amusing 
D 3 



54 FLORENCE MACAItTHY. 

powers of the awakened Lady Clancare? 
as with the discomfiture of her ex-la- 
vourites, the Crawleys, who, it was evi- 
dent, were gradually losing ground in her 
changeable opinion, cried out louder than 
all, "Go on, go on, Lord Frederick. Who 
bave we next ? Now, Lady Clancare" 

" Mrs. Wilkinson," pronounced em- 
phatically Lord Frederick. 

" A great favourite of our late lord- 
lieutcnant," said Mr. Pottinger, who 
was on the Crawley side, " quite a 
beauty in the grand style." 

<c Yes/' said Lady Clancare, laugh- 
ing, " a very Mammoth of loveliness, 
ponderously pretty, with no more joints 
than an elephant, and quite as heavy 
and as mischievous withal; for she^ll 
tread the napt>ff your carpet while she 
talks down the character of your friends, 
and never moves or breathes, but to 
injure/' 

" She's mighty pert,' 1 said Mr. Pot- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 55 



linger, in a half whisper to Conway 
Crawley, whose looks replied in the 
affirmative. 

" Yet for all that/' said Lord Fre- 
derick, " we must have the elephant 
to compleat the menagerie. Put her 
down, Rosbrin, with the beetle and the 
Flamingo : so, — here are Mr. and Mrs. 
Twiggle, too: I like the name — it bodes 
well." 

" Mr. Twiggle is one of our great Irish 
financiers/' interrupted Miss Crawley, 
endeavouring to get the pas ; " for our 
rich army agents here answer to the 
financiers of France, as described by 
Marmontel in his sweetly written Me- 
moir es." 

H I shall say nothing of the army 
agents," said Lady Clancare, " till 
there's a peace. 1 ' 

" Scrub ! hem ! " said Lord Rosbrin, 
chuckling. 

" Peace or -war" said young Crawley, 
D 4 



56 FLORENCE It ACARTHY* 

much irritated, " the Twiggles must 
always hold a situation of trust and 
emolument. The government will al- 
ways take care of them: and as to 
Mrs. Twiggle, she's first cousin to that 
distinguished parliamentary leader, and 
will-be minister, who reflects such lus- 
tre upon this country, by his extraor- 
dinary talents and wit ; which family 
endowment indeed she shares. Mrs. 
T wiggle is a woman of first-rate abili- 
ties, and, like her illustrious kinsman, 
one of the best critics, and one of the 
most eloquent persons, I ever listened 
to. She has indeed none of that flip- 
pant smartness, which is rather the 
pertness of pretension, than the ebul- 
lition of genuine ability ; but she has a 
flow of language — 99 

" Flow, do you call it ?" said Lady 
Clancare, in surprise : " a flow, a flood, 
that carries down with it all sorts of 
rubbish. In fact, the eloquent Mrs. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 5JT 

Twiggle is not ill represented by a long- 
necked bottle, shallow and noisy. My 
dear Lady Dunore, you would die of 
it. A windmill is an hermitage to the 
neighbourhood of the eloquent Mrs. 
Twiggle." 

" Away with her, away with her !'* 
cried Lord Rosbrin, theatrically. " No 
Twiggle," was the general cry ; while 
young Crawley, without temper or 
taste to enter into this idle playfulness, 
without art or talent to counteract the 
growing popularity of Lady Clancare, 
who was now triumphantly under 
weigh, and sailing over the prejudices 
excited against her authorship, rudely 
snatched up the paper from Lord Ros- 
brin, and said in a tone of great irrita- 
tion, "I believe, Lady Dunore, my 
aunt will rather decline giving any 
further assistance on this occasion. For 
as she happens to know and visit all the 
persons of distinction who inhabit this 

D 5 



58 FLORENCE MACARTHY, 



neighbourhood, it is rather mortifying 
her to hear calumnies launched against 
all the leading gentry and principal 
people of the province/' 

" Calumny !*' reiterated Lady Clan- 
care, with mock solemnity, and so- 
lemnly spreading her little hand on her 
bosom, " I deny the accusation. I 
deny that the Lissons, and Wiggens, 
and Jenkins, and Roystons, and Tw'tg- 
gles, are the gentry of the province. 
Though some be nieces of embarrassed 
English clergymen, suddenly become 
Irish bishops, who, having dropped 
the birch in their own country, snatch 
the crozier in ours ; though they be 
placemen and pensioners, and army- 
agents and revenue commissioners, yet 
their very names were unheard of in 
this country a few years back ; and I 
therefore deny that they are the genu- 
ine nobility and gentry of this country. 
My dear Lady Dunore, if you would 



FLORENCE MACARTHY* 59 

invite only the Irish aristocracy to your 
castle, you must deliver your cards to 
king's messengers, and send your invi- 
tations to every court in Europe, ex- 
cept our own, where alone the Irish 
nobility are not to be found. But if 
the true gentry of the country will sa- 
tisfy you, the descendants of her brave 
chiefs and princes, the O's, and the 
Mac's, there is no province in Ireland 
can furnish a more national or delight- 
ful circle than Munster. I promise 
you, you will be delighted with them. 
You will, perhaps, find more brogue 
and bows than you would meet with 
in your English assemblies ; but you 
will also find something of the refined 
courtesy, and gay spirit of the Irish" 
cavalier, still extant in the inheritance 
of temperament, when all other inheri- 
tances have been swept away : prompt, 
indeed, to suspect slight, but ardent to 
repay kindness ; for, like the Irish 



60 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

wolf dog, the Irish people are devoted 
when caressed, and fierce only when 
provoked. I propose then, in this great 
election for the independent borough of 
your ladyship's favour, the O's and the 
Macs as worthy candidates." 

" I second the motion," cried Lord 
Frederick. 

"The O's and the Macs/' echoed on 
every side, while Lord Rosbrin, flou- 
rishing his handkerchief, cried out, " a 
mug, a mug, a mug ! ,,# 

Lady Dunore, delighted with the 
noise, because noise always delighted 
her, charmed by the transition in Lady 
Clancare's manner, because all transi- 
tions gave her sensation ; gratified by 
the amusement it had, and still might 
afford her, embraced her new favourite 
a la francoise, and cried out — 

" You are quite charming. I told 



* Mayor of Garret.' 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 6l 



you how popular you would become 
whenever you would shake off your 
mauvaise honte. You shall ask who 
you like to the castle, and nobody but 
whom you like ; for I now constitute 
you mistress of the revels of Dunore." 

" Do you i* said Lady Clancare with 
vivacity ; " then Til make the ' welkin 
dance / or at least Clotnotty-joy ; and 
if I could find out a co-partner in my 
labours, I would get up a series of fes- 
tivities that should last out your banish- 
ment here. We would perform a masque 
for the amusement of the nobles of 
the castle, as in the older times : we 
would have the most lamentable co- 
medy and cruel death of Pyramus and 
Thisbe;'* and her countenance now 
assumed the dull stupidity of Peter 
Quince; " or we would try " 

Lord Rosbrin, as if touched by an 
electric spark, here interrupted her 
with the rejoinder of Bully Boltom,, 



62 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



ce a very good piece of work, and a 
merry — " Then taking her hand, to 
the amusement of all, he added, with 
great gravity, 

" Come, my queen, in silence sad, 
Trip we after the night-shade. 
We the globe can compass soon, 
Swifter than the wand'ring moon ;* 

while she replied significantly, 

" Come, my lord, and in our flight, 
Tell mc how it came this night, 
That I sleeping here was found 
By these mortals. " 

u Sleeping indeed !" said Lady Du- 
nore ; " but you have awakened us all 
now, I trust." 

" Macbeth hath murdered sleep," 
added Lord Rosbrin. " But what 
mirth, what revelry, shall we begin 
with?" 

" A mask presented at Ludlow Cas- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 63 



tie, 1634, on Michaelmas night, before 
the Right Honourable John Earl of 
Bridgewater, Lord President of Wales, 
called Comus," said Lady Clancare, 
looking at Lord Rosbrin ; who replied, 
fluttering about in an ecstasy, 

" Music by Henry Lawes. Here, 
we'll cast it forthwith ;" and he drop- 
ped on his knees and seized the pen. 
" What are the characters ? I have not 
looked into Comus these six months." 

" There is the elder brother," said 
Lady Clancare, dictating gravely. — 
u General Fitzwalter — younger bro- 
ther, Lord Adelm — the lady, by Lady 
Georgina — Comus, your lordship ; and 
the Crew, Mr. and Miss Crawley, Mr. 
Pottinger, Sec/' 

" And Euphrosyne, Lady Clancare," 
said Lord Rosbrin. 

" Now then, said Lady Clancare, 
with all the spirit and sportiveness of . 
the character assigned her, 



64 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



" Welcome song and welcome jest, 
Mid-night shout and revelry, 
Tipsy dance and jollity. 
Braid }Our locks with rosy twine, 
Dropping odours, dropping wine." 

" Brava! brava! " re-echoed on every 
side. 

" For the audience," she continued, 
" Lady Bridgewater, seated under a 
canopy, and dressed in the old English 
habit, shall be represented by the 
marchioness. " 

" I have one," interrupted Lady Du- 
nore, u made for the last opera masque- 
rade." 

" The Lord-President will be admi- 
rably done by Mr. Daly ; and the O's 
and the Macs will look stately and 
quaint in the boxes; while the Wiggins, 
and Twiggles, and Roystons, 

" Will Jill a pit as well as belter men." 

<( To be sure they will," said Lady 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 6j 

Dunore; " we'll parade them all on 
the occasion ; and that wont be the 
least part of the fun." 

" We must have an afterpiece," said 
Lord Rosbrin, gravely, and in a thought- 
ful attitude." 

" Let it be something Spanish," said 
Lady Dunore, " in compliment to Ge- 
neral Fitzwalter." 

General Fitzwalter was leaning over 
the back of a chair, pursuing the varia- 
tions of Lady Clancare, who now was 
light and fantastic. 

<c Like some gay creature of the element, 
That in the colours of the rainbow lives." 

He started at this application to his 
amour propre, and bowed slightly and 
in some confusion, while Lady Dunore, 
her eyes still fixed on him, whispered 
something in Lady Clancare's ear, who 
blushed, threw down her eyes, and 
shook her head incredulously. This 



66 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

was not the first time he had observed 
a mysterious communication between 
these two ladies, of which he was evi- 
dently the object, but he had never been 
struck so forcibly as now ; for the deep 
blush of Lady Clancare gave it no 
trifling effect. 

In the meantime, Lord Rosbrin, puz- 
zling his head for a Spanish American 
piece, could thing of nothing but Pi- 
zarro, which it was impossible to cut 
down into a farce ; and so, as a succe- 
daneum, he proposed the Spanish farce 
of the Padlock, in which Lady Clan- 
care offered to play Mungo to his 
Leander, except Mr. Heneage had a 
preference for that part. Mr. Heneage 
declared that he would not blacken his 
face for any earthly consideration ; and 
Lord Rosbrin observed he should much 
like to try his talent at singing, but that 
he had no wooden leg among his pro- 
perties for Leander. Lady Clancare 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 6j 

suggested that the wooden leg was a 
worn out common-place ; that tying up 
the limb in a handsome blue scarf 
would be a new reading ; and that, 
with the help of a cane, he would ma- 
nage it admirably. 

" Exactly/' said Lord Rosbrin, 
charmed with the idea of a new reading: 
" such a scarf as this/' and he took one 
from off Miss Crawley's shoulders. 
** Here, Heneage, lend me your arm. 
Now, Pottinger, fasten this round my 
ankle, so; and then round my neck, 
so. Thank you, Lady Clancare, for 
your assistance : how well you under- 
stand these things : that's a little too 
tight though ; not quite so many knots. 
Oh, the devil ! your ladyship's tying my 
heel to my head. Stay, I'll tiy a few 
bars of the serenade : 

4 Gh thou whose charms have won my heart.' 

D — n it, this is torture. I — I — " and 
suddenly seized with the cramp, Lord 



f>8 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

Rosbrin now fell to the ground, almost 
screaming with pain, and crying, " By 
the Lord I have got the most intolera- 
ble cramp : loose me, for pity's sake, or 
I shall die of it." 

Every one now hastened to relieve 
him, but Lady Clancare's nimble fin- 
gers had tied a Gordian knot: no one 
could loosen it. Lord Rosbrin roared, 
and Mr. Daly at last cut boldly what 
could not be untied. Every body 
laughed, as if the sufferings of the noble 
amateur were " sport for ladies/' Miss 
Crawley received back her mangled 
scarf with a look of vexation and dis- 
may. Lady Dunore, equally amused 
by the sufferings of one friend, the an- 
noyance of the other, and the espieglerie 
of the third, turned round, after a fit of 
laughter that brought tears to her eyes, 
to reproach Lady Clancare for not assist- 
ing at a denoument she had rendered so 
difficult to effect, but— she was gone. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 6§ 



CHAPTER IL 



But yet I say, 
If imputation and strong circumstance, 
Which lead directly to the door of truth, 
Will give you satisfaction, you may have it. 

Shakespeare. 



General Fitzwalter retired early 
from the circle at the castle, and was 
passing rapidly through the hall to his 
carriage, when the figure of Lord Adelm 
caught his attention, moving under the 
projecting corridor, and tearing some 
paper in a thousand pieces, which he 
had trampled under his feet. His coun- 
tenance was marked by strong traces of 
passion, and his obvious confusion and 
embarrassment, when his eyes metFitz- 



70 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

waiter, almost tempted the latter to 
pass on without addressing him ; sud- 
denly, however, turning back upon his 
steps, under the influence of a prompt 
and ardent sympathy, as easily excited 
as it was uncontrolable, he demanded, 

" What is the matter? You appear 
to suffer. Has any thing happened to 
annoy you ?" 

" Annoy me, indeed ! '* he repeated, 
while the general took his arm, and 
walked for a minute in silence by his 
side. 

u What can have occurred within 
the last hour, when I saw you smiling 
in mockery at the buffoon, Lord Ros- 
brin? Fancies, not facts, I trust: for 
I would rather believe your nymph had 
discovered herself, and so dispelled your 
illusions than " 

" Discovered herself with a ven- 
geance! she has discovered herself.' ' 

" Ha! has she so?" 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 71 

" Oh! with a frankness perfectly ori- 
ginal . For, with an ingenuous confes- 
sion that she has made my vanity and 
credulity the dupes of her devices, and 
the instruments of her own views, she 
absolves me from her spells, restores 
me to my freedom of agency, releases 
me from leading strings, and with a 
mysterious allusion to the convent of 
Nuestra Senora de las Augustias, the 
ruins of the Holy-cross, and my visit 
to Court Fitzadelm, she signs herself 
mine au revoir, Mary Magillicuddy. 
And thus," he added, tearing to atoms 
the fragments of the letter he still held 
— " thus ends a dream I would not 
have exchanged for any real good life 
could have bestowed, which was to me 
as the spirit of the sun-beam to Tasso, 
as the airy voice to Des Cartes, as the 
resplendent light, which hovered over 
the shadow of Cellini." 

" I'm glad of it," replied the general, 



72 FLORENCE M ACARTHV. 

emphatically; and there was a beaming 
•atisfaction in his animated counte- 
nance that ratified the assurance, as if 
he was himself relieved from some un- 
pleasant conjecture, which weighed hea- 
vily on his mind. u All that is mys- 
tery is bad/' he added; w you will now 
be restored to yourself. Passion, ge- 
nuine and correspondent to your ags 
and character, will succeed to dis- 
tempered fancies; realities to visions; 
and the heart will act, where the ima- 
gination has so long exclusively ope- 
rated." 

" You think, then," said LordAdelm, 
"that I am to rest here, to return solemn 
thanks for my delivery, and to sit down 
quietly in the pleasant conviction of 
having been the dupe of some idle or 
wilful person, who construes the enthu- 
siasm and elevation of my character 
into vanity and credulity, and insolently 
laughs at the simplicity with which I 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 73 

nave submitted to the imposition. No, 
by heavens! time, accident, or perse- 
verance in the research, must yet dis- 
cover this arrogant unknown. If it be 
a man, the result is obvious, and if a 

woman " He clenched his hands, 

and ground his teeth. " To be re- 
venged, I would pursue her under every 
form, device, and stratagem, that could 
woo and win; to punish, I would even 
marry . her, and thus make her future 
life the slow-working expiation of her 
momentary insolence." 

Either the general saw the folly of 
contending with the first burst of suf- 
fering of wounded self-love, or his own 
thoughts so deeply ingrossed him, that 
he permitted a long silence to succeed 
to this singular denunciation; then 
starting, as from a profound reverie, he 
said, 

" I shall be detained here a few days 
longer, contrary to my intention. Youf 

VOL. IV. £ 



74 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

election may be determined in the in- 
terim'; and the revelation, which must 

then take place " 

" Yes," interrupted Lord Adelm ; 
c( but it is an object with me that this 
revelation be protracted. Nothing ef- 
fectual can be done till the opening of 
term." 

" Nay, you shall name the time, the 
moment, yourself. I too have my rea- 
sons for prolonging my incognito yet 
a little longer." 

"What!" said Lord Adelm, with a 
bitter smile, " have you too a phantom 
to contend with ?" 

" No: my object of contention, as you 
call it, is, simply, a woman? 

"The betrothed wife to which you 
alluded?" asked Lord Adelm. 

" You shall know all at a future 
moment/' was the reply. 

Here the opening of the drawing- 
room door, and the sound of ap- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 75 

proaching steps and voices, separated 
the friends. Lord Adelm retreated to 
his dressing room, and the general 
threw himself into the Dunore chaise, 
and returned to his tower. 

Solitude, the nurse of genius and en- 
thusiasm, is the true sphere of passion ; 
and silence and meditation communi- 
cate a contagious energy to the feelings 
and fancy, which fades and becomes en- 
feebled in the bustling and noisy com- 
munication of the world. The wild 
shores and mountain headlands, the 
solitary ruins and shadowy glens, which 
diversified the scenery of Dunore, were 
appropriate sites and associations to him 
in whom a sentiment, ardent in propor- 
tion to its novelty, had arisen. This 
sentiment, inspired by one as much an 
object of suspicion as of admiration, 
occupied General Fitzwalter with a des- 
potism, which a sense of honour, and 
of his own peculiar situation, could 



/6 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

alone repress or resist. Still it possessed, 
it ingrossed him : it ehased repose from 
his pillow by night; it agitated and dis- 
turbed the dream of the morning ; and 
it drove him into scenes of solitude, 
wild as his passions, and lonely as his 
existence. 

It was his wish, and might almost be 
called his principle, to avoid the castle 
of Dunore ; yet he had no power to 
accomplish the purpose ; and though 
in the interim which must necessarily 
elapse before the arrival of an answer 
from Florence Macarthv he escaped the 
invitation of the marchioness, by the 
pretence of a visit to the romantic, 
and, locally, celebrated glen and her- 
mitage of the Gougane Barra, yet in 
four days that he had ridden about the 
country, he had seldom lost sight of the 
turrets of Dunore, or the ruined towers 
of Castle Macarthy. 

On the afternoon ot the fifth day, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY, 77 

he found himself on the edge of a wild 
moor, or what in Ireland is called a 
shaking bog, which skirted the heights 
of Clotnotty-joy. He alighted from 
his horse to inquire for a bridle-way 
more safe than that he pursued, from a 
man, who appeared white-washing the 
walls of a wretched hut, which arose 
lonely and desolate amidst the bleak 
and dreary scene. As he advanced, he 
perceived a woman, in a grey cloak and 
straw bonnet, standing near the cabin, 
and seemingly giving directions. The 
sound of his horse's feet caught her 
ear. She took off her bonnet, shook 
back her dark hair, and discovered the 
glowing countenance of the Lady Clan- 
care. 

General Fitzwalter started at this un- 
expected vision, and then advanced and 
moved his hat ; but with her upraised 
hand she beckoned him back, and ex- 
claimed with much earnestness : 

£ ? 



78 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

u No, no, pray don't come here : go 
back, General Fitzwalter, I beseech 
you." 

" For what reason f he demanded 
coolly, and still advancing. u This is 
my road." 

u For a thousand reasons," she re- 
plied, moving rapidly away, and speak- 
ing with her head turned over her 
shoulder. 

" One will suffice," he rejoined, still 
approaching. 

" There is a fever raging in that 
house. Nay, it may not be sale even 
to come in contact with me." 

" In contact with you !" he answered 
with a voice full of emotion, and now 
walking beside her, with his horse fol- 
lowing at bridle's length. " But if a fever 
rages here, why then are you here your- 
self ? M he demanded anxiously. 

" Oh, because I bear a charmed life," 
she returned, laughing, but quickening 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 79 

her pace, as if to get beyond the sphere 
of contagion ; " because if I did not 
come, four wretches who lie there, dy- 
ing for want of proper care, would pe- 
rish. The neighbours hold this typhus 
in such dread, that though they come 
and leave a little drink at the door of 
the cabin, they dare not enter. No, 
no, you shall not speak what you are 
going to say about charity and, a good 
heart; that virtue always ascribed to 
those who have none — the capricious 
and the unregulated. The fact is, these 
poor people are my tenants. I induced 
them to settle in this swampy tract, and 
feel myself in part answerable for their 
existence." 

" But if there is infection here ?" 

" I laugh at the idea of infection ; 
that is, in my own person. The fever 
which sweeps away the poor people is, 
in my mind, the pure result of their 
poverty and its concomitants, filth and 
E 4 



80 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

starvation. Their moral and physical 
ills are closely linked, and arise out of 
the same cause. Repeal the act which 
banished our landlords, and exhausts 
the country of its revenue and resources, 
and then disease will disappear, with the 
want that fosters it. People will die, 
to be sure, and of typhus fever some- 
times ; but it will no longer be to Ire- 
land what the yellow fever is to the 
West Indies, or the plague to Constan- 
tinople." 

" But how is it you warn others of a 
danger you contemn yourself?" 

" The imagination," she returned^ 
smiling, " goes a great way in this bu- 
siness ; and I keep mine exclusively for 
my books. This disease I believe to be 
epidemic, and not infectious. I have 
exposed myself constantly to it these 
two years, and here I am, still directing 
Lawrence Toole how to white-w ash his 
hut. But as I may be singular in my 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 81 

©pinion, I should not be justified in 
exposing others unconsciously, where, 
after all, there may be something like 
danger. But," she added, suddenly 
pausing, and slackening her rapid pace, 
€t is not this rencontre a breach of our 
original stipulation ? We were not, I 
think, to hold any communication till 
the arrival of — " 

" I did not understand that accidental 
rencontres came under the head of your 
prohibitions, which, you perceive, I 
have otherwise religiously observed." 

" You take the advantage of the let- 
ter, and neglect the spirit of the enact- 
ment, I observe, and neither keep the 
promise to the sense, nor the ear." 

" No, in this instance, as through life, 
I merely give myself up to the tide of 
circumstances as they flow ; adapt thent 
to my wishes and my views as I can ; 
render them serviceable to my purposes 
as I may ; turn them to the best account 
E 5 



S2 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

of which they are susceptible : but 
when they become wholly untractable 
and adverse, then I trust I shall stand 
the brunt of their resistance with forti- 
tude, and, with Milton's daemon-hero, 
acknowledge, that 6 to suffer, as to do, 
our strength is equal. 9 I had no hope 
of meeting your ladyship this morning; 
but most assuredly I will not neglect 
the good the 6 gods provide me.' I am 
too selfish, perhaps, to consult your 
wishes ; but still you will not find me 
unprepared to obey your commands. 
Do you desire me to leave you ?" 

" Wishes, obedience, and com- 
mands !" repeated Lady Clancare, sha- 
king her head. " You are resolved to 
leave me no female doubling to escape 
by. You bring me to my purgation at 
once, and put to rout the host of little 
diplomacies with which we habitually 
come at our object, without any visible 
interference on our own part. Suppose 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 83 

now I did not wish you to go, and yet 
thought it right to command your de- 
parture. You see/' she added, with her 
brilliant laugh, " to what you have re- 
duced me, and plenary confession is all 
now that remains." 

" If for one moment," he added, with 
warmth, " I may suppose you do not 
wish me to go, even your commands 
should not banish me. Will you take 
my arm, and permit me to see you 
home ?" 

She declined the offer with a slight 
bow, and after a short pause, observed, 
- " You seem, General Fitzwalter, to have 
lived but little with women ?" 

" So little, Madam, that I fear I am 
scarcely fit to live with them ; and yet 
am unable to live without them. Wo- 
man is to ine, the spring in the desart, 
precious and rare, seldom found in my 
life's wild and dreary track ; but when 
found 



84 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Lady Clancarc looked full in his 
eyes, and laying her forefinger on his 
arm, pronounced emphatically, " Flo- 
rence Macarthy 1" A deep crimson 
rushed over his face. " Since/' he 
said, u you revert, yourself, to that 
strange circumstance, you will allow 
me to enter fully on an explanation of 
conduct, governed only by that inevit- 
able course of events, which in hu- 
man life governs every thing." 

" Not one syllable," she interrupted 
eagerly. " I am one of those legisla- 
tors, the first to break the laws they 
make, but withal, rigid as to the in- 
fringement of others : a perfect Lord 
Angelo. But raise your eyes to the 
right. Do you not see an abrupt conical 
hill ?" His eyes followed the direction 
of her hand. 

" It is called," she continued, " Ca- 
hir Conreagh, the fort of the king, 
and is the scene of much romantic 



FLORENCE MACARTIIT. 



85 



story. It rises, as you see, in a plain, 
open and sunny, like the life-path of 
the prosperous : that is your way : — 
and here, to the left, behold, is a little 
gloomy glen, obscure and cloud-capp'd 
— it is rude and obstructed, and leads 
to solitudes and ruins— that is mine: 
farewell." 

She turned abruptly away, towards 
the spot she had so singularly described, 
and moved on with rapidity : but Fitz- 
walter as rapidly followed, and over- 
took her. 

" Lady Clancare/' he said, impera- 
tively, "you must hear me. I will 
not neglect the opportunity afforded 
me by accident— accident is fate, is 
fortune ; and fools or cowards only 
neglect its favours, or miss its tide. 
I am not much in the habit of go- 
verning myself, or of being governed — 
more practised in command than in 
obedience ; yet I have obeyed you, 



86 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

without reservation, as far as your or- 
ders were directed by prudence, dis- 
cretion, or any other cold, necessary 
quality, which the world takes upon 
trust, in place of better feelings. I am 
prepared to obey you still in the world. 
There, reject and banish me, as you will, 
if it must be so ; but here, in this place, 
so lonely, no eye to watch, no tongue 
to wound, no malice to misrepresent, 
why should you refuse to hear me, on 
a subject connected with the future 
destiny of one whose happiness you 
hold so dear to you ? Hitherto I have 
lived the creature of my own fortunes, 
independent of any human being for 
my conduct, without one object to in- 
terest, one tie to bind me — M 

" Without one tie ?*' interrupted Lady 
Clancare, emphatically, yet obviously 
intimidated by the impetuosity of his 
manner ; for he spoke with vehemence; 
his eye flashing, his cheek glowing. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 87 

" Well then/' he said, " if you per- 
sist in calling that a tie, it is to that 
tie I would allude. I would account 
to you for an act so romantic, that even 
the feelings which led to it can scarcely 
excuse it— my strange, equivocal, un- 
compleated marriage with Florence 
Macarthy." 

" Then, General Fitzwalter," replied 
Lady Clancare, with firmness, " on this 
subject, neither here nor any where 
ought I to hear you, until impowered to 
do so by Florence Macarthy herself. 
A few days must put you in possession 
of her own sentiments and determina- 
tion. But in the interim," she added 
with a smile, " like other diplomatic 
agents, I must neither act nor speak 
without instructions." 

" Then, Madam,'' he replied with 
petulance, " it were, perhaps, best to 
relieve you from your over cautious 
agency. I will fly myself to Florence 



88 FLORENCE M ACARTHY. 

Macarthy ; overtake, perhaps antici- 
pate, a letter, which never should have 
been written before a personal interview 
had taken place ; and learn, viva voce, 
what it is idleness to wait for in dilatory 
suspense/' 

" Are you sure she will receive you r" 
asked Lady Clancare, coolly. 

" She must receive me," was the 
stern reply. 

" True, even a convent's bars yield 
to a husband's intrusion. 5 ' 

t$ Husband !" repeated General Fitz- 
walter. " Husband to a woman I 
scarcely looked upon ! whom I might 
not even again recognize !" 

" Yet so earnestly did she look at 
you," said Lady Clancare, in a voice 
full of softness and reproach; " so well 
are you remembered, that from her de- 
scription alone I should have known 
you among a thousand. Nay, I did 
instantly recognize you, from the pic- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



89 



ture she had drawn, even before you 
were announced in the hall of Dunore. 
So much for the rapidity of a woman's 
perceptions, the fidelity of a woman's 
memory, where the heart is engaged." 

" The heart! the heart engaged?" 
he interrupted, " in one sudden, short, 
agitated interview ! under such cir- 
cumstances too!" 

" The circumstances of that interview 
quickened and deepened the impression, 
and were calculated to affect and influence 
a woman's feelings and imagination. A 
soldier's daughter was well fitted to be 
interested in a soldier's virtues. She 
had long heard of you as a hero, in 
an army of heroes : as one combating 
for, not against, the rights of humanity. 
She beheld you for the first time, flush- 
ed with conquest, soothing a fathers 
death-bed anxieties, for the fate of his 
friendless child, by the offer of all you 
had to bestow, your hand and fortune* 



90 FLORENCE MACAKTHY. 

anc a name destined for immortality: 
and when Florence Macarthy described 
you as bearing her wounded, dying 
parent in your arms, from the field of 
battle to the neighbouring convent, 
from which she herself had beheld the 
fatal conflict, when she painted you as 
generously answering all his parental 
solicitudes, by offering to give his child 
the only protection a man of your age 
could afford a woman of hers, when 
she dwells upon your valour and disin- 
terestedness, your prompt, uncalculat- 
ing, romantic generosity 99 

" Lady Claneare/' said General Fitz- 
walter, in great emotion, and colouring 
deeply, M I cannot hear you out. That 
Miss Macarthy should have received 
such an impression, that you should 
thus recapitulate — " 

u Me!" she replied, carelessly: "you 
don't suppose I was imposed upon by 
the representations of a love-sick girl ? 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 91 

No, I have little respect for military 
heroes. Luck and temperament usually 
form the compound of a hero ; and for 
one Caesar on the list of military im- 
mortality there is many an illiterate 
t Marlborough, without education suffi- 
cient to spell his own despatches, and 
many a brutal Saxe, without intellect 
enough to compose them. O! your heroes 
follow a fearful and an hireling trade, 
at best : sometimes the butchers, some- 
times the gaolers of the species ; rarely 
its advocates or benefactors. Vain- 
glorious abroad, worthless at home, 
despotic in the camp, dull in the circle. 
It has been well, though quaintly said, 

4 Hercules was a fool, and straight grew famous, 
For fool's the stuff of which heaven makes a 
hero." 

" If a man," said Fitzwalter, with a 
bent brow, and a compressed lip, " am- 
bitioned the character of a hero, your 



QQ FLORENCE MACAUTHV. 

ladyship's description would but little 
flatter his passion.' ' 

" I admit exceptions, however, and 
would make one in favour of the La- 
brador, to whom American gratitude 
may yet raise statues ; but I do not 
admit them to Florence Macarthy. It 
has long been my system to oppose her 
fatal, fruitless prepossession in your fa- 
vour, by representations calculated to 
weaken them ; and when she would 
excuse your desertion, by the untoward 
circumstances of a party of the royal 
troops rushing down upon the convent, 
at the moment when the marriage ce- 
remony was performing in its chapel^ 
which obliged you to drop the hand of 
the weeping (and, entre nous)> maudlin 
bride, and to seize the sword — when 
she dwells upon your being forced from 
the altar to the field, upon your bravely 
opposing, repulsing, pursuing, a sangui- 
nary foe, being surrounded, taken pri- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. y.3 

soner, condemned to death, rescued by 
your own devoted troop, then / take up 
the tale, to add — and once more free and 
crowned with fresh laurels, did he re- 
turn to lay them at your feet, to claim 
his half-widowed bride, to ratify his 
imperfect vows P 

She paused, looked under her eyes ; 
and there was a malignant archness in 
her countenance which had its effect. 
In a tone of irritation and impatience, he 
replied : " I was the victim of circum- 
stances. I did, however, return. " 

" When ?" asked Lady Clancare has- 
tily. 

" At the expiration of some months, 
and found the convent, where Miss 
Macarthy had been placed by her fa- 
ther, during the campaign in which 
he fell to save me, razed to the ground 
by the Spanish army.'* 

" And w'th the convent/' continued 
Lady Clancare, laughing, "fell your 



94 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

hopes and wishes , and all the et cetera 
of disappointed love. War was, in fact, 
your mistress, for glory was your pas- 
sion ; and now Florence Macarthy is 
left to find herself the 6 spouse of 
God in vain :' for though, after your 
desertion, she struggled hard in her 
vocation, the human feeling was su- 
perior to the heavenly calling, 6 not on 
the cross her eyes were Jixed, but you :' 
for you were still before her, and al- 
ways under circumstances favourable 
to her unhappy prepossession. She 
followed you through all the public 
events of the day. Every gazette was 
a register of your actions and heroism ; 
every newspaper c prated of your 
whereabouts' The Guerilla chief, II 
Librador, became the hero of her ima- 
gination, that first strong-hold in the 
pregnable garrison of a woman's feel- 
mgs. 

She paused. The general sighed 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 95 

deeply, walked on with a slackened 
pace and folded arms, and lent not a 
pleased but an ardent attention, inter- 
rupted by occasional starts of amaze- 
ment, while she again continued : <c Un- 
wooed, unsought for, forlorn, aban- 
doned, poor, and friendless, the de- 
struction of the convent which had 
afforded her an asylum urged her re- 
turn to Ireland. Since then her life 
has been a blank, with one bright ob- 
ject glittering upon its surface, like the 
brilliant spot, self-formed, in the retina 
of the eye, when all around is darkness. 
You, however, I trust, have come to 
dispel that darkness, and, to give to that 
bright speck a more definite form and 
a steadier lustre ; for I take it for 
granted you are returned in search of 
a wife, 

* Lost or mislaid, 
Stolen or strayed,' 

as the crier of Ballydab has it : though 



96 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

I confess you negotiate the recovery 
with a sang f roid that renders your ar- 
dour in the research very doubtful." 

" I came to this country/' he said, 
thoughtfully, and with a countenance 
marked by painful embarrassment,— 
" upon a very different business ; upon 
a mission less generous, less just, than 
you suppose." He pressed his hand to 
his forehead, and abruptly broke off : 
then, after a few moments silence, in- 
terrupted only by a deep inspiration, 
he added, " I will see Miss Macarthy, 
Madam. I will leave Dunore for her 
convent to-morrow ; and if her feelings 
are disposed as you describe them, if 
her religious, like her marriage vows, 
are still unratified — ' \ 

" If they were ratified," interrupted 
Lady Clancare, eagerly, " with her 
great uncle, a cardinal of considerable 
influence with the pope, and resident at 
Rome, Don DeruiUtio Macarthy, there 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 9/ 

would be no difficulty in procuring a 
dispensation." Then, after a long pause, 
she added, with earnestness, — (e Go 
then, General Fitzwalter, and hear 
your destiny from the lips of her whose 
life and happiness lies, I fear, in your 
decision ; and take with you my prayers 
for your happiness, my hopes that 
whatever may have drawn you to this 
poor country, it will yet benefit by your 
talents and philanthropy ; and the libe- 
rator of the enslaved in other lands may 
become the advocate of the oppressed 
in his own/' 

She spoke with a feeling, an energy 
that was infectious ; and when she pro- 
nounced " farewell/' and extended her 
hand to Fitzwalter, he seized it with a 
grasp, almost painful in its pressure: 
his eyes were fixed upon her as he 
searched, or would have searched, her 
inmost soul ; and the agitation of his 
countenance evinced the conflict of 

VOL. IV. F 



98 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

deep and strongly opposed emotions by 
which his own was torn ; yet he con- 
tinued silent. 

(t Should Miss Macarthy's answer 
arrive in your absence, inclosed to me/' 
demanded Lady Clancare, gently, but 
vainly endeavouring to liberate her 
hand, " where am I to forward it ? " 

" If,'* said he, dropping her hand 
with a deep sigh, and recovering from 
his abstraction, — " if you expect an 
answer so soon — u he paused. 

" I must have one in a day or two 
at furthest," she replied. " I did not 
trust your embassy to our uncertain 
cross-posts : I despatched one of our 
Irish pedestrian couriers, who, if not 
quite as graceful as ' a feathered mer- 
cury,* * are always trust-worthy. He 

* These foot-messengers perform long jour- 
nics with a celerity quite incredible ; and for a 
Tecorepence that marks the poverty of their 
state and the industry of their habits. Thef 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 99 

will return with an answer in the 
shortest possible time, that the sur-r 
prise, I may say joy, of poor Florence 
will permit, in order that she may 
cooly sit down and reply to your un- 
expected proposals ; for be they what 
they may, coming from you, after a si- 
lence of three years, they must surprise 
her, and cannot fail to be unexpected." 

" Then," he said, " I will remain 
here, as I first intended, until this— 
answer — arrives." 

" Perhaps it were best," replied Lady 
Clancare, carelessly ; " but you must 
now leave me. I know not how I 
have been thus led on to enter upon a 
topic forsworn : a woman is always the 
slave of circumstance and her own 
garrulity." 

"But I have still much to say," 

will carry a letter thirty Irish miles (near forty 
English) for siipence, and perform this journey 
two or three times a- week, 
F 2 



100 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

replied Fitzwalter, with earnestness, 
<e much to ask." 

" You must not say it now, not here, 
for we are near the high-road to Dunore. 
I must not be seen walking with you 
by the persons of this neighbourhood, 
who have no quadrant to take the alti- 
tude of my character, and yet affect to 
calculate my conduct. I have set out in 
life with wind and tide against me ; and 
now, that by prudence and circumspec- 
tion I have been enabled to anchor in a 
safe but rude harbour, I would fain 
have no enemy to contend with but 
6 winter and rough weather? Yet, 
even here, calumny has reached me." 

" But if you forbid my intrusion else- 
where, you will at least release me 
from an observance of your orders of re- 
serve at the castle of Dunore. Will 
you permit me to address you there 
when we meet ?" 

" Not tor a wilderness of monkies/' 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 101 



she replied, eagerly, and smiling ; " for 
I hold my tenure in Lady Dunore's fa- 
vour by a clause, in which, somehow or 
other, your not appearing to know me 
makes an item." 

' e Indeed ! but good God, what ob- 
ject can her friendship be to you 
or———" 

" Her friendship! the maniac!" she 
interrupted, with an indignant laugh 
that changed the whole expression of 
her countenance. " She my friend!— 
she is my instrument, my agent, my 
tool, my any thing. You look amazed, 
General Fitz waiter : it will not lessen 
your amazement when I tell you that I 
am playing a part upon which all the 
prosperity and happiness of my life de- 
pends. It was necessary that I should 
get into the castle of Dunore and obtain 
an influence over its mistress. This was 
effected by means as wild and extrava- 
gant as her mind and habits. J was to 
F 3 



102 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

astonish her into prepossession, and se- 
cure her by a series of events which 
should gratify her love of strong excite- 
ments, and keep up the constitutional 
fever of her being ; which should make 
her mine, give me the use of her house, 
the sanction of her authority, and keep 
aloof the idle frivolous circle, which, 
privileged by the charter of society, 
would, out of mere curiosity, without be- 
sieging or beseeching, have gained ad- 
mission to my den, intrude upon the 
time they could neither compensate nor 
occupy, and then have left me to obli- 
vion and neglect. As it is, I counteract 
the pernicious influence of the Crawleys 
on her mind, serve the poor of my 
neighbourhood, by directing the ca- 
prices of Lady Dunore to relieve their 
wants, keep off her train by her own 
prohibitions, and have obtained ample 
€ scope and room enough* for all my 
machinations : for to tell you a secret* 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 103 

at this moment I move more puppets 
by my art than one/' 

As she spoke, she looked like the ma- 
gician she described herself. " I per- 
ceive/' she continued, with a voice and 
glances which became every moment 
more acute and penetrating, " that 
while I gain upon your imagination I 
lose in your esteem ; but I shall recover 
it: 6 Le terns et moi, 9 as Cardinal Maza- 
rine used to say. When you become 
acquainted with the object, you will ad- 
mit the legality of the means, extraor- 
dinary as they are, extraordinary as 
they will appear to you ; for when you 
know that I have imposed myself upon 
Lady Dunore as your wife " 

" My wife!" he exclaimed, starting 
with the look of one thunder-stricken. 

" Yes, your wife," and she laughed, 
but coloured deeply, and turned pale in 
the succeeding moment. u In a word, 
I have assumed the story of Florence 
f 4 



104 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Macarthy; have persuaded Lady Du- 
nore that I have found my renegade 
husband in her circle, without being re- 
cognized by him; for with a little dra- 
matic license, such as being much 
changed in my person, having only been 
dimly seen through the shade of a 
Spanish mantillo by my unknown 
bridegroom, with all those combinations 
which might have existed in T:he in- 
stance of Florence Macarthy, nay, which 
did, according to her own account, I 
have imposed on her by facts extraordi- 
nary beyond the utmost daring of fic- 
tion ; as the events of real life always ex- 
ceed the power of invention. Her ob- 
ject is that I shall win this cold insensi- 
ble husband as Lady Clancare, whom, 
as Florence Macarthy, I could not se- 
cure. While engaged in the perpetra- 
tion of this scheme she is wholly in my 
power. But if you really should fall in 
love with me, General Fitzwalter," she 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 105 

added playfully, " it would be the ruin 
of all my plans, by curtailing the time 
necessary for its accomplishment; that is, 
if you betray your unhappy passion; — for 
a married man, the husband of my own, 
dear, long suffering Florence, must be 
unhappy, you know, for the sake of the 
moral of poetical justice." 

General Fitzwalter, stunned in the 
first instance, continued to listen to her 
with increased emotion; but when he 
would have spoken, she interrupted him, 
and continued ; 

" I am playing a desperate card : I 
have set my all upon the chance. I 
am actuated by the two strongest pas- 
sions of which a woman's heart is ca- 
pable. They have each their object. 
One has already almost succeeded ; the 
other — ." She pressed her hand upon her 
heart, as if to check the violence of its 
throb, suddenly awakened by somfe sin- 
gular association. At that moment 
F 5 



106 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

her quick eye discovered some person 
moving slowly under the stone fence 
which separated the heath on which 
they were walking from a car road ; 
but the figure instantly disappeared, and 
the deep cuts in the bog in the other 
side the road favoured concealment, if 
that were an object. 

" We are observed," said Lady Clan- 
care, anxiously : " no retirement here 
is sacred from observation. There are 
two parties in this country in a conti- 
nual state of espionage on each other, the 
oppressor and the oppressed. Commu- 
nications are conveyed from remote ex- 
tremities with inconceivable rapidity. 
I suppose you are aware that you are 
an object of suspicion aud of attention 
to Mr. Crawley ?" 

u What, now?" said Fitzwalter: * why 
should you suppose it?*' 

" I know it. Many respectable, but 
timid persons in the neighbourhood^ 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 10? 

observing your residence in the country, 
without any ostensible object or occu- 
pation, are anxious to have you removed, 
even although you are received at Du- 
nore, the ordinary criterion of all worth 
and distinction. Your reception there 
is attributed to the predilection of Lord 
Adelm, whose half genius, half mania, 
whose mixture of poetry and paradox, 
has simply set him down with these 
good loyal people as a jacobin outre, 
not to mention his conduct about the 
election, and the speeches he made to 
his committee." 

General Fitzwalter listened with that 
half-lent attention which accompanies 
pre-occupation of mind on other more 
interesting subjects. 

" Lord Adelm," he observed, after a 
pause, " is one whose virtues are over- 
shadowed by his follies. He is noble, 
just, generous, and disinterested. ,, 

" Vain, capricious, fanciful, and 
heartless/' she added. 



108 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" And yet/' said General Fitzwalter, 
turning abruptly his eyes on Lady Clan- 
clare, K he is the star that holds the as- 
cendant, that governs the conduct of 
one, who otherwise seems above all 
human control. Lady Clancare," he 
added, rapidly, " I have now not the 
slightest doubt that he is the object of 
what you have yourself termed your mi- 
chin at ions, of the part you are playing, 
and of the agency so ingeniously, whim- 
sically, and singularly conducted ; so 
singularly conducted,, that it cannot be 
surprising, with his heated imagination, 
and unregulated fancy, he should as- 
cribe it to superhuman influence. All 
that you have so candidly confessed 
deepens and confirms this suspicion ; 
and that he is the object of the passions 
by which you are actuated, the strongest 
of which a woman's heart is suscept- 
ible." 

Lady CI ancare interrupted him: " May 
I beg your assistance," she said, offer- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 10$ 

ing him her hand, for they had now 
reached a stile, at which her cabriolet 
stood, attended by a boy. Then seat- 
ing herself, and taking the reins and- 
whip, she turned her laughing e} 7 es 
full round on Fitzwalter, and nodding 
her head significantly, she said, " Le 
terns et moi" and drove off. 

Fitzwalter stood transfixed to the 
spot on which Lady Clancare had left 
him : his eye still followed the rustic 
carriage that conveyed her, till it de- 
scended into the glen she had pointed 
out to his notice, and was lost in its 
windings. He then turned shortly 
round to mount his horse, and came 
abruptly in contact with some person 
who stood close behind him. It was 
OLeary. There was a shrewd, sly 
glance, lurking in the old man's eyes, 
mingled with the surprise and pleasure 
expressed at the general's appearance, 
which did not escape him at whom it 



110 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

was levelled. He coloured slightly, 
and said, with some coldness, " So, 
O'Leary." 

" Agus cead mille faltra, your honor," 
said O'Leary, moving his hat: " ten 
thousand welcomes, and ten million 
welcomes home, and hopes the Gou- 
gane Barra plazed you, Sir, and Father 
O'Mahonny's hermitage." 

Fitzwalter was never less in a mood 
to withstand the annoyance of unsea- 
sonable intrusion. His thoughts were 
deeply occupied, and beyond the power 
of interest or distraction from any other 
subject. The presence of O'Leary, 
and the peculiar and significant expres- 
sion of his countenance, embarrassed 
and provoked him. He mounted his 
horse in silence ; but the tremulous 
and boggy surface he was treading 
obliged him to walk the spirited ani- 
mal slowly and cautiously over the 
irregular and undulating turf. O'Leary 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. Ill 

walked beside him for a few minutes 
in silence, raising his eyes at intervals 
to his face, with an affectionate and 
apprehensive look, as one who feared 
to have offended ; at last, with a deep 
sigh, he said, 

" I'm afraid I'm not agreeable to 
your honor/' 

" It is certain, O r Leary," said the 
general, with a petulance of temper he 
could not command, " that you do not 
leave me many moments to myself.'' 

" Don't I, gineral, jewel?" said 
OXeary sorrowfully. " Then arnt it 
quite natral, that where the heart is, 
there will the body be also ; troth it 
will." 

" But, my dear O'Leary," said the 
general, in a voice of kindness, "you 
must be aware that there are moments 
when the presence of the dearest friend 
may be felt as intrusion." 

" His dear O'Leary!" murmured the 
schoolmaster to himself. " Why, then, 



112 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



see here, gineral, jewel, sorrow bk 
but I'd throw myself from the top of 
Mangerton, afore I'd be a burthen to 
you, dead or alive ; and axes nothing 
better in life than just to sarve you by 
day and by night, and to be looking 
in your face, when your back's turned, 
not to be unplazing to you ; and wasn't 
thinking of you at all, at all, only won- 
dering when you d be back ; and was 
going on an errand to the Bhan Tierna 
from Father Mulligan, about his dues* 
owed to him by a poor family on Clot- 
notty-joy, that hadn't a scrubal nor a 
crass to buy a station ;* and heard 
from little Ulic Macshane, her boy, 
who was leading round the cabriole by 
the bog road, that she was here con- 
venient at Larry Toole s cabin, a fever 
house," (and he crossed himself). 

* In remote districts, where the Catholic 
chapel is at a considerable distance, the priest 
performs service in some poor man's cabin. 
This ceremony is termed a station. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 113 



u And here is the items I set down 
of Father Mulligan's dues, your honor, 
if you don't give credit to me." 

As he spoke, O'Leary presented the 
- general a bit of dirty paper, on which 
was written 

Shane Gartley, to the Rev. Patrick 
Mulligan, Dr. 

s. d. 

To two Confessions 2 2 

To one Christening 1 8 

To Sundries. 1 6 

5 4* 

* I should like to know what these 
devotional sundries were/' said the 
general, returning this account, furnish- 
ed for salvation. 

u Och ! I 11 in^a^e there was value 
received,'' said O'Leary; " and many a 
sore trot the priest had, by day and 

* See Young's Tour. Their priest's dues 
form the smallest portion of the religious taxes 
paid by these poor people. 



114 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

night, over bog, and moor, and mountain, 
for their sowPs savetie, and to earn that 
trifle. But trifle as it is, Shane Gartly 
wasn't able for it, in respect of great 
sickness, and none to get in his potatoes 
for him, and he on the broad of his 
back, only just for the Bhan Tierna, 
the blessing of God and the Virgin 
Mary light on her, every day she sees 
the sun. When she got Clotnotty-joy 
into her hands, it was a desolate neg- 
lected place, with only a little handful 
of cattle grazing on it in the autumn 
time. The first ever she settled on it 
was this Shane Gartly, whom she found 
big, bare, and ragged, walking the 
world* with a wife and four childre, and 
a blanket and kettle: and says she, if 
you'll settle down here, my lad, and 
labour, I'll give you a taste of land to 



* Walking the world, is wandering without 
a settled habitation. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 115 



be your's for ever, and help you to raise 
a shed, and lend you three pounds to 
stock and begin the world with; and 
so she did. Under God, and her lady- 
ship, Shane was doing bravely, and 
many a one followed his example, and 
Christians were seen now, where only 
bastes thriv before ; but, 

Haud facile emergunt quorum yirtutibus obstaf, 
Res angusta domi, 

as the Roman poet sayeth, and it's true 
for him, for with all the labour and pains 
and industry of the craturs, let them 
work night and day, and let them have 
never such good friends to back them, 
its hard for them to get before the 
•world: and then if any accident hap- 
pens, if the cow dies, or the rood of 
barley fails, its the greatest of distress 
that comes over them, and so it was 
with Shane, when the hard summer 
and the fever overtook him. But I'll 



116 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



ingage with God and the Bhan Tierna 
on his side, he'll fight it on yet." 

" From your account, O'Leary," said 
the general, interested in a conversation 
that took for its topic the object which 
exclusively ingrossed him — " from your 
account, Lady Clancare is the tutelar 
genius of the soil and its inhabitants. " 

" Why then its just that she is, the 
lares and the penates of the poor man's 
cabin, long life to her; and if there 
were many of the likes of her, plaze 
your honor, who would be after stay- 
ing at home with us; why then the re- 
formed and civil sort would be cherish- 
ed, and the poor and the ignorant would 
be instructed and well exampled; and 
sorrow one of us would be beholding to 
them Crawley pirates, bad luck to 
them, and their likes, who, by polling 
and piliing the poor to make good their 
own fortunes, and carrying on many 
fake and cautelous practices, ruin the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 117 

land, like the escheators, and under- 
takers, and grantees of Elizabeth's, and 
Charles's, and James's days. For its 
all one in Ireland, gineral, dear, ould 
times or new : the men changes, but the 
measures never: and so, if your honor 
don't believe me, being myself Irish 
mere, and thinks me a party man, only 
look in a taste to the Desiderata ca- 
riosa Hebernica, and then see the De- 
claration, anno 156o, secundo Eliz. 
N and see Lee's brief declaration of the 
Irish government, opening many cor- 
ruptions in the same, discovering the 
discords of the Irishry, and the causes 
moving those troubles, anno Regni 
Reginae 37; and if that won't contint 
your lordship, being English by des- 
cent, and of Norman blood, why then 
dip into the English lords' remonstran- 
ces and appeals, see the " Humble Apo- 
logy °f l' ae Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, 
and other inhabitants of the English 



118 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Pale, for taking up arms in their own 
defence, 1 64 1 ; and Curry's Civil Wars. 
Oc'h! Musha! it was all the same, 
English or Irish, Catholic, Protestant, 
or Presbyterian, when once their hearts 
warmed to the soil, and their spirits rose 
in its defence ; then they were marked 
men, and sowld. But though they send 
strangers to rule us,* strangers I mane 
to our history, our natures, and our 
ways, that neither know, nor read, nor 
study us, and though, as Sir Henry 
Sydney said to the Queen, they pound 
us as in a mortar: though they perish us 
with want, and burn us with fire, still 
the Irish spirit is to the fore; and until 
the sword of extermination passes over 
us, as was once proposed, it is not in 
the breath of the English to blow it out, 
or extinguish it.'* 

" I doubt, however, the existence of 
this Irish spirit? returned the general, 

* See Note (1) at the end of the volume. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 119 

gratified to observe that the mind of 
O'Leary was becoming hourly more 
collected, as the cause of its derange- 
ment was removed. " The result of 
this misrule and oppression of ages, of 
this religious disqualification, of this ar- 
raying one-half the people against the 
other, by fanaticism and jealousy, is to 
extinguish what you call Irish spirit, 
by which, assuredly, you do not mean 
the spirit of idle unfounded discontent." 

" Unfounded ! ! Bachal Essu ! ' in- 
terrupted O'Leary, vehemently: " when 
ould Elizabeth herself said of the go- 
vernment of Ireland, it will be objected 
to us, as to Tiberius by Bato, concarn- 
ing the Dalmatians, * you it is that be 
in fault, who commit your flocks, not 
to shepherds, but to wolves.' Un- 
founded ! when three-fourths of the 
people are, as it were, branded on the 
forehead, like the descendants of Cain, 
Mid wandering in foreign lands, because 



120 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

they profess the faith of their forefa- 
thers. For, as I said to Lord Adelm 
Fitzadelm when he scoffed at Butler's 
Lives of the Saints this morning, when 
I found him seated his lone in your 
chamber, gineral, and the blessed and 
holy book in his hands 

" Lord Adelm ! was he at the Friary 
to-day ?" 

" He was, gineral, and yesterday — 
and did not much like his turning espial 
on you, like Jemmy Bryan, who 
watches your very shadow." 

" Indeed ! But did Lord Adelm 
leave no message forme r" 

" None in life, plaze your honor. 
Only hearing you might be expected 
this morning, sat him down, and took 
up Fra Dennis O'Sullivan's books, one 
by one, and held a disputation with 
me, wherein he shewed more wit thar 
faith, until Madam Florence Macarthy's 
handkerchief caught his eye, ying on 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 121 

the table, where you left it, gineral, 
and forthwith he put me on my trial." 

" What do you mean by that ?" asked 
the general, impatiently. 

" Crass examining me all about it# 
gineral, how it came there, and mar- 
velling that it should belong to Madam 
Macarthy, and she not in it." 

" And did he take it away F 

" No, plaze your honor, gineral, 
he did nat ; and minded me of the ho- 
nourable Gerald with his curling auburn 
hair, and toss back of the head, as if 
the world was made to be bis slaves, — 
the very moral of the father of him ; a 
great calabalero * in his time." 

At this moment, a turn in the path 
brought them upon the high road to 
Dunore, by a causeway formed over a 
bog dike by branches of trees and sods 
of turf : and Lord Adelm himself ap- 



* Quere. cavalier. 
VOL. IV. G 



122 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

peared, followed by a groom, and rode 
up to them. He looked somewhat con- 
fused, as if the rencontre was neither 
pleasant nor expected. It was, how- 
ever, inevitable, and he drew up as the 
general approached him. To his ab- 
rupt inquiry of whither Lord Adelm 
was going, he replied, carelessly, 

" To follow your example : change 
the scene for a day or two, get rid of 
time, myself, and of the society with 
which I have, for my sins, been for 
some days shut up ; in a word, pro- 
menermes ennuis ailleurs" 

The general threw his eyes over the 
valize strapped behind the groom ; and 
Lord Adelm, as if to avoid all further 
interrogation, came close to him, and 
continued, in a low voice, — 

" I congratulate you on your escape 
these few days back. Those who were 
fools before, are now mad, stark-staring 
mad; bitten by Rosbrin, and that artful 



FLORENCE M AC ART fl Y. 



123 



little adventuress, Lady Clancare, who 
has now brought them all round to her 
side, even Lady Georgina and Lord 
Frederick, and who is taking the short 
cut to Rosbrin's heart, by flattering his 
stage-struck vanity." 

" Lady Clancare !- -adventuress ! — 
Lord Rosbrin r s heart!" repeated Fitz- 
w f alter, breathlessly. 

" Did you not observe it the other 
night, when she debuted in that way, 
that he was the Prometheus that 
awakened the statue ? that it was for 
him she kindled, sparkled, and blazed 
forth ? All her words were addressed to 
him, and all her dramatic airs and ci- 
tations, and setting my mother afloat, 
on the article of private theatricals, her 
flippant cast of the characters of Comus, 
her assigning the daudling parts of the 
prosing brothers to us, and giving the 
hero to him ; all go to the same tune of 



124 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Kilrosbrin, and the great house in Port- 
man Square." 

" I perceived her kindling, as you call 
it; but that Lord Rosbrin was her inspi- 
ration, 'tis preposterous to suppose." 

u Why had she ears or eyes but for 
him?" 

u She certainly did not do the ho- 
nours by your self-love, or by mine, for 
she noticed neither/' said Fitzwalter, 
endeavouring to smile through the air 
of though tfulness which had taken pos- 
session of his features. 

a Yes," said Lord Adelm, biting his 
lips: " as she tied up Rosbrin^s leg I 
heard her call us ' the two gentlemen of 
Verona; and the fool laughed as if she 
had said the cleverest things in the 
world: the sobriquet too has stuck to us 
ever since ; for when you were missed 
you were inquired for by the title of 
* Sweet Valentine; and I was addressed 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 125 



as < Gentle Proteus* You will find them 
all in the paroxysm of the dramatic 
mania at Dunore, at least they have 
been so these four days ; and Lady 
Clancare will keep up the epidemic till 
she is secure of exchanging her castle 
of Ballydab for the mansion of Kil- 
rosbrin, while to those who do not 
see, dessous ies cartes, she is merely 
prima donna of the troop so saying, 
he gallopped off, followed by his groom, 
who had been talking to O'Leary; and 
the general, as one who had undergone 
a sudden revulsion of ideas and feelings, 
heaved a deep sigh, and continued his 
route to the Friary. 

By a few indirect questions he dis- 
covered that O'Leary had given Lord 
Adelm sufficient notices on the pro- 
prietorship of the handkerchief to in- 
duce him to learn the address, situation, 
and story of its supposed owner ; and 
he entertained no doubt that his friend 
g 3 



126 FLORENCE MACARTHI , 

was now engaged in a pursuit of erran- 
try, in the supposition of having dis- 
covered the unknown spell which had 
governed his recent life. But nothing 
could come of nothing. If Lady Clan- 
care, the frank, though mysterious, un- 
accountable, incomprehensible, Lady 
Clancare, could be depended upon, the 
devotion of Florence Macarthy to him- 
self, ideal and romantic as it appeared, 
would sufficiently frustrate the hopes of 
Lord Adelm, whether they sprang from 
vengeance or from love. If, however, 
contrary to all expectation, preposses- 
sion yielded to ambition, he would him- 
self stand released from an engagement 
to which honour alone now bound him. 
In either case the pursuit and absence 
of Lord Adelm boded him no ill; it was, 
indeed, a subject dwelt upon but for a 
moment, and rapidly forgotten, for one 
which gradually possessed itself of hi3 
mind with an uncontrolable influence. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 12^ 

Lady Clancare's views on Lord Ros- 
brin, as detailed to him by Lord Adelm, 
he could neither credit nor disbelieve, 
for he had not yet been a witness of the 
operations upon which Lord Adelm's 
inferences were founded. He saw at. 
once, that like all vain persons, Fitz- 
adelm was easily piqued by the sem- 
blance of neglect, even in women, who 
neither interested nor attracted him ; 
and that his suspicions might have 
originated in the discolouring source 
of wounded self-love. He resolved, 
therefore, to judge for himself; and 
for this purpose once more join the 
circle at Dunore, painful as it was, 
to become involved in Lady Clan- 
care's strange intrigue, and to support 
the character assumed by her direc- 
tion. 

An object of romantic fondness to one 
woman, to whom he was perfectly unat- 
tached, and of indifference to another to 
g 4 



128 FLORENCE MACAKTHY. 

whom he was ardently devoted, bound 
by ties of honour to the one, and by 
consequence, to avoid all intercourse 
with the other; his position new, singu- 
lar, and uncalculable, left him no 
thought for any other subject of reflec- 
tion. In the conflict of passions and 
principles, thus opposite and contradic- 
tory, and wrapped in reverie, he was still 
seated before the untasted dinner which 
O'Leary had provided for him, when a 
note from Lady Clancare increased the 
pulsation of his heart, and propelled 
the blood with a violence that induced 
O'Leary to observe, as he stood watch- 
ing him: 

" No bad news, I hope, gineral, Sir? 
It was a bit of a gassoon, give old 
Morraigh that missive, your honor, 
while I was attending on you, Sir ; and 
hope the Crawley s have no hand in it. 
Devil speed the whole hish of them, I 
pray Jasus !" 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 129 

tc Inquire if the messenger waits/' 
said Fitzwalter; and when O'Leary had 
left the room he re-perused the note, al- 
ready hastily read. It ran as follows : 

" General Fitzwalter's letter has been 
received and acknowledged. The strug- 
gle of contending feelings prevents an 
immediate decision; and an interval 
for reflection is consequently required. 
Love and pride, hope and fear, are all 
at variance. Meantime it is expected 
General F. will not present himself at 
the Convent of the Annunciation with- 
out special invitation. Should Lady 
Clancare have the honour of meeting 
General Fitzwalter this evening at Du- 
nore Castle, she may find some moment, 
d la derobee, for being more explicit." 

Castle Macarthy, 
Monday, Six o' Clock. 

In the calendar of love, the moment 
of receiving the first line traced by the 
G 5 



130 FLORENCE M ACARTHY. 

object of adoration is a memorable 
epoch. It is a festival of the heart, 
always commemorated with transport so 
long as that object holds its empire. 
The hand-writing of Lady Clancare, 
the paper folded by her, fluttered the 
pulse of him to whom it was addressed, 
and for a moment even the nature of the 
communication was forgotten. When 
at last reverted to, the contents of the 
note came like a reprieve : he believed 
that there was now a necessity for re- 
maining where he was, to receive the 
sentence by which he was resolved to 
abide. He had arisen from the table, 
and was about to replace the note in its 
envelope, when the seal caught hi< 
attention ; its motto was 

u Sou utile aindatjue bricando." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 131 



CHAPTER III. 



Su, svegliateTi da bravi, 
Su, corraggio o buona gente. 
Vogliam star allegramente 
Vogliam rid ere e scherzar. 

1l Don Giovanni. 

I know you all — and will awhile uphold 
The unyok'd humour of your idleness. 

Shakespeare. 



In the brief sketch which Lord 
Adelm had made of the social eco- 
nomy of the castle of Dunore, he had 
scarcely exaggerated the epidemic in- 
fluence of the reigning folly of the 
day. The dramatic mania which had 
seized the marchioness, indirectly or 
directly, favoured the views, interests, 
or vanity, of every member of her 



132 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

circle. It broke through the spell of 
that all pervading demon, ennui, and 
provided that something to do or to 
discuss, so essential to those who are. 
habitually dependent upon external 
circumstances for occupation and in- 
terest, and who, from their elevated 
position in society, are unpractised in 
the exercise of their own resources. 
It removed likewise the prying eye of 
concentrated observation from those 
who wished to elude its glances ; and 
by opening the door to strangers, it 
enlarged a circle whose members had 
long become weary of each other. Even 
Conway Crawley and his aunt, the only 
persons of that family then at the cas- 
tle, found their account in an event, 
which afforded to the poetical vanity 
of one an opportunity of writing an 
opening address, while it left him a 
more undisputed management of the 
Glannacrime election, in which Lord 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 133 

Ad elm took no interest; and to the 
other it held out means of operating 
the conversion of Lady Dunore, which 
overcame her conscientious aversion to 
theatricals, private or public, and re- 
conciled her to the sin as the instrument 
of contingent good. It is a dogma of 
the sect to which Miss Crawley be- 
longed, that the deeper the sinner, the 
greater the saint ; — that there is a ne- 
cessary probation of iniquity to qualify 
for the expected grace, and to render 
the dispensing power of mercy the more 
manifest upon earth. In Miss Craw- 
ley's eyes private theatricals now stood 
high in the calendar of offences ; and 
according to, her system of recular pour 
mieux sauter, she was satisfied that in 
proportion as Lady Dunore risked the 
little virtue time and the world had 
left her, she would more perfectly fit 
herself for that state, in which the 
" nothingness of good works*' is but 
as a sounding brass and tinkling cym- 



134 FLORENCE MACARTH Y. 

bal. Meantime her own little frippery 
tastes and paste-board talents had 
ample scope in planning decorations 
for the proscenium of the new theatre, 
in assisting Lord Rosbrin in the getting 
up of stage properties, and in suggest- 
ing devices and mottos to ornament 
the frontispiece. She disapproved, it 
is true, and spoke against the whole 
business with edifying eloquence ; but 
she seized not the less willingly the 
scissars and the pencil at the command 
of Lady Dunore, domineering over the 
dress-makers of the theatrical ward- 
robe, as over the sempstresses of the 
cheap repository, dictating to. machin- 
ists as she had done to Neophytes, 
and flattering herself that she was 
forming a balance to the preponder- 
ating influence of Lady Clancare, who 
had so nearly turned the vaccilating 
scale of her patroness's favour against 
her. 

From the night of the first dramatic 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



135 



discussion, every circumstance and sub- 
ject had yielded to the important in- 
terests of the private theatricals. Ex- 
presses were despatched by Lord Ros- 
brin for the histrionic amateurs in the 
neighbourhood of Kilrosbrin, whom he 
had drilled to the exercise of the art ; 
dress-makers, mechanists, and carpen- 
ters, arrived with incredible rapidity ; 
and the few English and Irish families 
of rank resident in the country were 
invited to the castle, and readily obeyed 
the summons. 

The difficulties, obstacles, and con- 
trarieties, which were to be overcome 
or reconciled, made up the whole charm 
of the arrangement to Lady Dunore, 
who, in her capacity of manageress, 
had to contend with that inordinate 
vanity, that overweening amour propre, 
usually attributed to actors, public or pri- 
vate, which, though it wearied, fatigued, 
and fevered her, was not less a source 
of gratification than of annoyance. 



136 FLORENCE AiACARTHY. 

It was in vain that plays were se- 
lected, proportionate to what Lord 
Rosbrin technically called " the 
strength of the company" and that 
parts were judiciously cast, according 
to the talents of the respective actors. 

The corps dramatique of Dunore 
was a company of first-rates ; all stars, 
all chiefs, either of the sock or buskin, 
or of both : none were subalterns ; and, 
with a profusion of supernumerary Ro- 
meos and I)oricourts, Macbeths and 
Macheaths, there were none to take the 
inferior characters. 

A young lady from Cork, introduced 
by Miss Crawley, an Irish gentlewoman 
bred and born, but who was soon to 
come forward on the Dublin boards, 
and by the stamp of private opinion, 
was already superior to the Barries and 
Siddonses of other times, took posses- 
sion at once of the tragic heroines, with 
a spirit of monopoly that was not with- 
out opposition. Not content with the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 13/ 

natural importance of Desdemona, she 
refused to perform the part, unless she 
was allowed to double it with some of 
the best speeches of Othello. To this, 
the Othello (Lord Rosbrin) solemnly ob- 
jected, declaring, that so far from giv- 
ing up the ghost of a letter of his own 
part, he meant to restore to it some lines 
from the part of Iago, according to an 
old edition, of which no one had heard 
but himself. Iago's resistance to thig 
restoration was unvanquishable ; and 
he conceived that his own scenes stood 
so little prominent, that he proposed 
ekeing it out with the best speeches of 
Zanga, in the tragedy of the Revenge. 

Contentions ran so high on the sub- 
ject of Othello, that at last it was laid 
aside, and three tragedies were placed 
in the stock list, in which each of the 
tragedians were in turn to play the prin- 
cipal part, and ingross exclusively the 
attention of the audience. 



13S FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



Lady Dunore, meanwhile, far from 
reconciling these dramatic disputes, en- 
deavoured by every species of tracas- 
serie to nourish and perpetuate them. 

Alternately chosen by the contending 
parties as referee and umpire in these 
" fierce vanities," she became the very 
genius of discord; and before the first 
rehearsal, one half the company had 
sent the other to Coventry, and held no 
communication, but in their assumed 
characters of heroes and heroines. 

In this floating capital of vanity and 
exhibition, the largest portion of stock 
seemed to have been contributed by 
Lady Clancare. The first line in co- 
medy had been assigned to her by Lord 
Rosbrin ; and the oddity, whim, and 
originality, with which she delivered 
certain passages in the Rosalinds, Bea- 
trices and Roxalanas, whether they were 
or were not true to the author s concep- 
tion, obtained universal admiration. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 139 

A countenance, whose extraordinary 
mobility was susceptible of every ex- 
pression, a certain sly simple solemnity 
of look and air, which possessed itself of 
every feature, and ranged every muscle 
on the side of humour, and a taste for 
mimickry, with a keen sensibility to ab- 
surdity, naturally capacitated her for 
being a good comic actress. 

The influence, however, which she 
had obtained, was not exclusively 
through her histrionic talent. She had 
made herself necessary to the amuse- 
ment of those so difficult to amuse, and 
she consequently assumed an overween- 
ing importance, which never fails to 
succeed with indolence or mediocrity in 
all ranks. She now affected to consider 
acting as the first of talents : she spoke, 
as if a great tragedian or comedian, 
male or female, was of more conse- 
quence to society than the philosopher 
who instructs, the genius who en- 



140 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



lightens, or the artist who improves it : 
and she, who as an author, an inventor, 
or an originator, as one who took life 
and nature for her guides, rejecting con- 
ventional rules and assumed tastes, had 
appeared in this bon-ton circle, modest, 
nervous, timid, and unpretending; now, 
in her newly assumed character of an 
actress, an imitator, a detailer of other 
person's ideas, became imposing, self- 
sufficient, and inconsequent; taking, 
without hesitation, the place which 
the new prepossessions of the frivolous 
society in which she lived had assigned 
her, and giving that boundless fling 
to whim and caprice, in which the 
spoiled of every class indulge, at the 
expense of those who make them what 
they are. Always surprising or disap- 
pointing, she set calculation at defiance ; 
and the certainty that the corps drama- 
tique could not do without her, rendered 
them submissive to all her oddities. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 14! 

She still refused to sleep at Dunore; 
and a carriage, horses, and servants, 
were kept in continued requisition to go 
between that mansion and Castle Ma- 
carthy, a journey which they performed 
a dozen times a-day. Not unfrequently 
she was superintending her turf clamps, 
while her Solyman the magnificent 
fretted his hour upon the stage in ex- 
pectation of his Sultana, or was busied 
with literary composition, or in getting 
in her potatoes, while Orlando stood in 
the forest of Arden in vain attendance 
on his whimsical Rosalind : but while 
she thus illtreated her co-partners, for 
authors she had no. mercy. Seemingly 
occupied with the idea that she alone 
could amuse or interest the audience, 
her efforts to stand supereminently for- 
ward, to secure the leading points, and 
' clap traps/ as Lord Rosbrin called 
them, were incessant and extravagant. 
She cut, interpolated, subjoined, trans- 



142 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

posed, and changed the text of her part, 
until scarcely an original intention of 
the mangled author remained: and in 
this sacrifice to her monopolizing 
ambition, Shakespeare and (XKeefe, 
Ben Jonson, and Moreton, the author 
of the day, or the poet of ages, were 
treated with equal severity, or rather 
with equal indifference. Still, however, 
dissatisfied with all she could effect by 
efforts, naturally opposed by the con- 
tending selfishness of rival candidates, 
she finally resolved (and her versatile 
talents forwarded the intention) to write 
a monologue for herself, in which, 
uniting various characters, she would 
alone occupy the stage and the audi- 
ence. The sketch she gave of her in- 
terlude, then new and original, met 
with general approbation. Even the 
literary talent expended upon its com- 
position was forgiven, in favour of the 
more highly prized ability which was 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 143 



requisite to enact it : and they, who 
would have scarcely inquired the name 
of the person who produced the clever 
thing, were wild in praise of the actress 
who only realized the conceptions. 

" But, good heavens! my dear Lady 
Clancare," observed the Marchioness, 
as Lady Clancare, the centre of a cir- 
cle of listeners, concluded the reading 
of the rough sketch of her monologue; 
" why don't you write plays instead of 
those romantic tales about your own 
country, which every body reads, and 
nobody believe?" 

" Aye, why indeed ?" said Lord Ros- 
brin. 

" Because/' replied Lady Clancare, 
" if I wrote plays, I am afraid I must 
draw characters." 

"To be sure," said Lady Dunore; 
u and what then? Is there anything so 
delightful as characters?" 

" Provided they resemble nobody " 
said Lady Clancare* 



144 FLORENCE MACARIHY. 

" How do you mean?" asked the 
Marchioness. 

" Simply, that should I ever abandon 
my high strain of romance by the ad- 
vice and supplication of my dear friends, 
les belles et bonnes dames de par le 
monde, and hold the mirror up to life* 
you would all fancy you detected in it 
your own reflection, and each 

* Would cry, that was levelled at m$." 

" Certainly,*' said Lady Georgina, 
ts if one saw one's self shewn up, one 
would feel and resent it, and so too I 
hope would all one's friends, at least I 
should expect it." 

" But what is the genre of charac- 
ter," said Lady Clancare, " which, if 
in true keeping to life and manners, 
should not be found to resemble any 
body ? There is no beau ideal in human 
life : combine qualities as you may, to 
the very verge of extravagance, th* 
world will furnish models, trace like- 



FLORENCE MACARTII V. 145 



nesses, and assign originals— let your 
conceptions be as general as they car — 
paint classes and describe genera :— 
classes and genera are still made up of 
individuals ; and even vanity will find 
out resemblances where satire could not 
trace similitude. There, indeed, my 
patience quite fails me. Conscious vice, 
conscious absurdity, and apprehensive 
eccentricity, when combined with mas- 
culine energies and decided volitions, 
may be excused for indulging in such 
fanciful appropriations ; but that the 
walking no-characters of every-day life, 
the dear, dull, 

* Unfinish'd things one knows not what te 
call, 

Their generation's so equivocal,' 

should imagine themselves fit subjects 
for indignant reprehension or sportive 
caricature, and live in fear of authors, lest 
they should put them in their books! — 
put them in our books! who then would 
read us? or who would review us? — 

VOL. IV. H 



146 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Which of the worthy we's, the weekly , 
the monthly, the quarterly drudges, 
would e let loose their dogs of war' on 
works safe from the world's notice and 
applause.— No, they war not with dul- 
ness and the dead ; it is living, buoyant, 
and, above all, prosperous merit, ani- 
mates their zeal ; and their malice is 
worth courting: for, next to the sponta- 
neous burst of public applause, an au- 
thor s ambition should be the unquali- 
fied, unmanly, ungentlemanlike attacks of 
some party, hired anonymous reviewer. 
I speak with warmth, for I speak from 
experience. I have not the vanity to 
think you have all read me, ' pour les 
beaux yeux de mon merited No, I have 
been lashed into note by these c wasp- 
stung and impatient critics:* their at- 
tacks have been patronage, their malice 
kindness ; and it must be allowed they 
have been 

4 Very, very, very kind indeed." 

"But why write at all?" exclaimed 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 14f 

Lord Rosbrin, who was now considered 
as the professed admirer of Lady Clan- 
care, and who took an interest in all she 
said or did. 

cc Simply/' she replied with naivete, 
Cc to live — you may perhaps add, quelle 
necessite : and, perhaps also," she added 
significantly, " you are right." 

" No," answered Lord Rosbrin, " I 
should reply no such thing. I would 
have you live to be the first actress of 
the day ; which you would, should 
you ever be tempted to go on the 
stage." 

" One never did see a peeress on the 
stage," said Lady Dunore, delighted 
with the new idea — " it would be quite 
curious, charming." 

" So it would," said Lady Clancare, 
as if suddenly struck with the proposal, 
and inclined to adopt it. 

" You would have made the first 
actress in the world," continued Lord 
h 2 



148 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



Rosbrin, " and; perhaps, would net ten 
or twenty thousand pounds in a year or 
two." 

u More than you could make in a 
long life by Writing/' observed Lady 
Dunore, " the best book that ever was 
read." 

" A great deal more," replied Lady 
Clancare. 

" Besides/' continued Lord Rosbrin, 
" so far from derogating from your 
rank, it would probably promote it. — 
The green-room is now the shortest road 
to the red bench." 

u Exactly so," replied Lady Clan- 
care. 

" And many English peers," conti- 
nued Lord Rosbrin, with meaning in 
his looks, " who would not think of you 
as a gentlewoman, or a genius, would 
be happy to lay their honours and their 
fortunes at your feet, as a celebrated 
and popular actress." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 14$ 

* On pent se rapporter d vous par 
exemple" said Lord Frederick. 

" Then/' said Lady Dunore, " you 
would be so much more Jetee as an 
actress than as a genius." 

H Besides/' said Lord Rosbrin, " who 
cares when an author dies 

" Nobody," said LadyClancare, shak- 
ing her head. 

" What is there in the death of 
twenty celebrated writers to the so- 
lemnity of one great tragedian taking 
leave of the stage ? Handkerchiefs 
streaming, eyes winking, sobs heaving, 
laurels flying, awful pauses, broken 
sentences, and hysterical screams. I'd 
rather be a great actor taking leave of 
the stage than die the greatest hero of 
the age. Then when you do die," con- 
tinued Lord Rosbrin, heated by his 
subject, cc what honours await you! 
dukes hold the pal], earls chief mourners, 
dead march in Saul, monument in West- 
H 3 



150 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

minster, dust mingled with kings and 
conquerors." 

Here a sort of Irish howl, bursting 
from the lips of Lady Clancare, pro- 
duced a shout of laughter from all pre- 
sent, save Lord Rosbrin, to whom she 
replied, shaking her head, and wiping 
her tearless eyes — " No, never did I 
think I should weep so much at my 
own funeral ; for I am now determined 
to adopt your lordship's advice, and, 
like other dramatis persona?, ' to that 
complexion must I come at last." 

" Then," said Lord Rosbrin, * I pro- 
mise you complete success," and he 
added, in a low whisper, " more than 
that." 

" In that case," said Mr. Pottinger 
(who, since Lady Clancare 's popularity 
with the people of quality, had taken 
her into special consideration), u in 
that case I fear your ladyship cannot go 
to the castle, that is, on public days. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 151 

You could not well take your place on 
the red bench as an actress, although 
you are a peeress." 

" That, indeed/' said Lady Clancare ; 
as if suddenly struck with the mortify- 
ing conviction, u that makes all the dif- 
ference.' 5 # 

" But," said Lord Rosbrin, u in that 
case you will not come to Ireland, ex- 
cept as a star, in the after season, w r hen 
Covent Garden is shut ; and I'll answer 
for it, the vice-regals will be enchanted 
to give you les petites entrees at the 
Phoenix. I remember when the arrival 
of an Italian opera singer in Dublin 
turned the heads of the court, and of 
all the officials, major and minor. Ima- 
gine then how another Farren, another 
Abingdon, would be received." 

" I wish, Lady Clancare," said Lady 
Georgina, with her usual supercilious 
high-dame-of-quality air, " I wish you 
would raconter a little of your history: 
H 4 



152 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



I dare say it would be very amusing 
and odd." 

" A mourtr de plaisir, no doubt," 
said Lord Frederick, raising his glass to 
her face. 

ih No," said Lady Clancarc, conceit- 
edly throwing herself into an arm chair, 
" I am not equal to details to-night: 
besides, should my story be serious, 
you would yawn over it ; should it be 
romantic, you would quiz it ; if philo- 
sophical, you would not understand it ; 
if common-place, you would abuse it ; 
if extraordinary, you would doubt it. 
Now it happens to be all this, and I 
should thus unite every species of criti- 
cism against me." 

" I have not a doubt," said Lord 
Rosbrin, " that your life would be quite 
as amusing as George Anne Bellamy's 
apology, or Mrs. Baddely's memoirs." 

" And as edifying too?" asked Lady 
daycare. " But I appeal to Lady Dti- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 153 



nore, if it be possible for me to reveal 
all the circumstances of my life?" 

" By no means/' said Lady Dunore, 
with a mysterious air, and throwing her 
eyes to that part of the room where 
General Fitz waiter stood, and she in- 
stantly gave the conversation another 
turn. 

After a short struggle, Fitzwalter had 
yielded to the temptation of Lady 
Clancare's indirect appointment, and 
had joined the evening circle at Dunore, 
where he was received with courtesy by 
the marchioness, but with indifference 
by all the rest. Mr. Daly, the only per- 
son capable of appreciating him, had 
departed ; driven away by the noise, 
confusion, and discomfort, the bustle 
and contentions of the private theatri- 
cals. The little society that had been 
enjoyed at Dunore Castle was now 
quite broken up ; conversation was at 
an end; and even cards and billiards 
H 5 



154 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

were suspended, the whole intercourse 
being confined to criticisms on the 
drama, compliments between the actors 
on their respective merits, or complaints 
of rival monopolists : for, as Touchstone 
says, they u quarrelled in print by the 
book; and retorts courteous, quips mo- 
dest, replies churlish, reproofs valiant, 
and counter-checks quarrelsome" were 
echoed and re-echoed in every quarter. 

The hope which had led General 
Fitzwalter to the castle was wholly 
frustrated. Lady Clancare had afforded 
him no opportunity of addressing her. 
On entering the saloon he beheld her 
the primum mobile of the circle which 
surrounded her. During the evening 
she scarcely noticed him by a look ; 
and when she retired, which she did 
early, Lord Rosbrin led her to the car- 
riage, and took her willing hand, with 
the air of Henry the Eighth handing out 
Anne Bulleyn at Cardinal Wolsey's 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 155 

banquet^ and murmuring as they passed 
Fitzwalter, 

u The fairest hand I ever touched. Oh, beauty, 
Till now I never knew thee." 

While she, humouring his folly, re- 
plied : 

u I do not know 
What kind of my obedience I should tender, 
More, than my all is nothing. 
Beseech your lordship, &c. &c." 

The words were lost as she disap- 
peared ; and a conviction of the truth 
of Lord Adelm's observation struck 
forcibly on Fitzwalter s mind. He 
turned away in indignant irritation, 
while Lady Dunore, with her eyes 
fixed expressively on his, observed : 

" Is not Lady Clancare an excellent 
actress ?" 

W Excellent I" he replied, in a tone 
of ironical significance. 



156 FLORENCE; MAC ART HY. 

" Lord Rosbrin is amazingly in love 
with her/' added Lady Dunore, em- 
phatically. 

" It is a proof of his taste/' replied 
the general, coldly. 

"What do you think of her?" de- 
manded Lady Dunore, with an inqui- 
sitorial look. 

Aware of the object of all these re- 
marks and questions, General Fitzwalter 
felt confused, and indignant at the strange 
situation into which Lady Clancare's 
embroglio 'had thrown him. Lady 
Dunore evidently enjoyed his confu- 
sion ; but without reiterating the ques- 
tion, added, "she is extremely clever, 
but by no means does the honours by 
her own talents ; and until we hit on 
these delightful theatricals, had no suc- 
cess whatever with my set. Since then, 
she has come out wonderfully. She is 
the most delightful Beatrice I ever saw, 
and capable of making a benedict of 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 157 

the most obdurate wife hater/' With 
these words, uttered with a mysterious 
air, she fluttered away, and joined in 
a conversation in another part of the 
room. 

General Fitzwalter, governed by pas- 
sions, over which neither reason nor 
will held any influence, found himself 
for two or three successive evenings in 
the saloon of the castle, a spectator ra- 
ther than a member of its society, 
where there were none to communicate 
with him since the absence of Mr. Daly 
and of Lord Fitzadelm. His visits, 
however, were apparitions. He came 
and disappeared abruptly, as if in search 
of some object never obtained, yet still 
pursued. His character was more than 
usually energized ; and though he com- 
monly stood wrapped in silent but acute 
observation, in sullen and marked ab- 
straction, yet he occasionally came for- 
ward in conversation, with a boldness 



158 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

and originality, that chequered the mo- 
notonous flow of some modish opinion, 
and startled common-place remark from 
its wonted track. His first appearance 
at Dunore as a guerilla chief insured 
him that species of favourable recep- 
tion, given equally to learned pigs, and 
French conjurers, Esquimeaux war- 
riors, and Irish giants: but first prepos- 
sessions faded away in proportion as it 
became known that he was engaged 
in a cause wholly inimical to the 
sentiments of the greater part of Lady 
Dunore's circle, who took their opi- 
nions from graver parrots than them- 
selves. Upon the subject of public 
affairs they held no discussion ; and the 
manner and matter of his conversation 
were equally out of their beaten track ; 
for the law of bon-ton enforced the ne- 
cessity of never being energetic upon 
any subject, of never deserting that half 
dead-alive suavity which simpers its 



FLORENCE MACARTHY, 15Q 

flat medium between pleasure and pain, 
the gentlemanlike and melancholy ha- 
bit of ennui and self-sufficiency. On 
subjects of lighter moment there was 
still no reciprocity, for he was ignorant 
of the philosophy of dandyism, un. 
practised in the cold routine of fashion- 
able gallantry, and unstudied in the 
dull memoirs of fashionable characters. 
A patriot warrior combating for the 
rights of humanity, for the emancipa- 
tion of a long debased and enslaved 
people, and opposing a bigotted, fero- 
cious, and imbecile tyranny, he had upon 
the whole, after the first surprise occa- 
sioned by his abrupt and splendid ap- 
pearance, become an object of some- 
what less consequence than Thady 
Windham Crawley, with his peninsu- 
lar honours, bivouacks, wigwams, and 
the Ragent's levee. 

The absence of Lord Adelm had 
been noticed by all, though not com- 



160 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

merited upon by any. To bis mother 
it was in fact a relief rather than a 
privation. To the other women lie 
was cold and brusque ; to the men, 
haughty and supercilious. He stood 
aloof from all ; and his refined tastes, 
singular habits, and his powerful vanity, 
found no account in the private thea- 
tricals, which, as he neither could nor 
would take a part, he openly ridiculed 
with a wit and an asperity that could 
neither be rebutted nor retaliated. His 
immediate return (for the election drew 
near) was therefore expected with ap- 
prehension rather than hope ; and his 
mother was not among the last to pray 
for its prorogation. 

The night of the first representation 
was now arrived. The play of " As 
you like it" was to be performed ; and 
a crowded audience, furnished from the 
guests of the castle and the neighbour- 
hood of Dunore, had already assem- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1 6 1 



bled, when a note from Lady Clancarc, 
returned by the carriage which had 
been sent for her, informed the mar- 
chioness that she could not play Rosa- 
lind that night, and hinting that she 
ha,d been seized with a typhus fever. 

The confusion which this unexpected 
circumstance created was excessive. 
Persons had arrived from immense 
distances ; expectation was at its height. 
The first music was over, and all was 
consternation. Lady Dunore stamped 
her feet and wrung her hands, as if the 
most dreadful affliction had befallen 
her: she abused Lady Clancare, as if 
her misfortune was her fault; and would 
have set off for Castle Macarthy, but 
for the apprehension of the infection, 
so long the object of her terror. Iu 
the midst of this dilemma Lord Ros 
brin, already dressed for Orlando, pro- 
posed to undertake the part of Rosa- 
lind; while the second Amoureux. who 



162 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

was to have performed Sylvius, should 
assume Orlando. The second Amou- 
reux declared that Orlando wa3 the 
part he had originally intended for 
himself, and that he was perfect it it. 
One of the foresters engaged to per- 
form Sylvius, delighted to escape from 
the mortification of enacting a mute. 
Lord Rosbrin's proposed arrangement 
was accepted with transport by Lady 
Dunore. If he played the part with 
propriety, Lady Clancare would not 
be missed : if he did it ridiculously, 
her place would be still better supplied. 

The place was still better supplied ; 
and the shouts of laughter, which hailed 
the entrances and exits of Rosalind, 
were testimonies that the audience 
were satisfied and amused up to their 
bent. The play went off brilliantly : 
bravoes and archi-bravoes marked every 
speech ; and the original Rosalind was 
left extended on her bed of sickness 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. l63 

without one thought of her situation, 
and given to instant oblivion. The 
disappointment she had occasioned 
Lady Dunore in the first instance had 
overthrown the frail structure of her 
prepossession at a blow ; and the crea- 
ture who could no longer amuse, no 
longer interested or lived in the me- 
mory of her soi-disant friends and 
admirers. 



164 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



CHAPTER IV. 

Stand not amaz'd — here is no remedy. 

Shakespeare. 



I speak not this in estimation 
As what I think might be, but what 1 know 
Is ruminated, plotted, and set down, 
And only stays but to behold the face 
Of that occasion which shall bring it on. 

Sfl A RES TEA RE. 



Lady Dunore, wearied and ex- 
hausted, was the last to quit the scene 
of festivity, and the most anxious to 
prolong* it. She had presided at a 
splendid supper after the play, and had 
reluctantly bowed out her guests, and 
bestowed her usual embrassades on her 



FLORENCE MAt'ARTHY. l6*5 

dear friend, Lady Georgina : she was 
now taking one lingering look at the 
silent and deserted theatre in her pas- 
sage to her own apartment, when the 
sound of a footstep closely following her 
own, alarmed her, she knew not why. 
Without " casting a look behind/' she 
was hastily ascending the stairs, when 
a voice called after her, " Aisy, aisy, 
my lady, if you plaze. I'd just beg a 
word with your ladyship incornuto for 
a moment/ ' 

At the well-known voice and accent 
of Darby Crawley, Lady Dunore turned 
round. "Good God !" she said, " Mr. 
Crawley, is it you? When did you arrive 
from Dublin? Were you at our play?— 
Conceive my not seeing you." 

" I was not, my lady; but came 
here a few hours back, and has been 
lying — " he whispered — " per dor in 
Anne Clotworthy's room till the play 
was over, and the company gone, not 



166 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

wishing to shew myself for raisim 
of state. Would your ladyship just 
turn in here for a moment, and grant 
me an hearing on very particular bu- 
siness?" 

" Certainly," said Lady Dunore, fol- 
lowing him into the dark spacious 
dining-room. Crawley shut the door 
cautiously, took the chamber candle- 
stick out of Lady Dunore' s hand, and 
placed it on a table ; then drew forward 
a chair for her, and another for himself, 
picked up her ridicule, and presented it 
with a bow, and drawing his hand over 
his face, as if at a loss how to begin, he 
at last abruptly inquired, 

" Does your ladyship know any thing 
of Lord Adelm Fitzadclm, for he is not 
here it seems ?" 

" Gracious heavens!'' exclaimed Lady 
Dunore, suddenly alarmed : " if any 
thing has happened let me know it at 
once and she started from her chair. 



Florence macarthy. x 167 

Where is Fitzadelm, and what do 
you know of him ¥' 

" Nothing in life, I give you my 
honour, Lady Dunore ; and wouldn't 
keep you in suspince half a minute if I 
did : only just axed out of curiosity, if 
he's at a distance ; that's all, I give you 
my honour." 

" I don't know where he is," said 
Lady Dunore, between the hope and 
the fear of having some cause for alarm 
and agitation " he is upon one of his 
wild rambles." 

" Tom-Mew, as the French says, 
Lady Dunore ; for he has a mighty 
odd quick way with him, and isn't al- 
ways inclined to hear raison." 

" Nor I neither," yawned his dis- 
appointed auditress. " At two in the 
morning, my dear Mr. Crawley! Surely 
your coming at so unseasonable an hour 
must have some extraordinary motive," 
and she took up her candlestick* 



l6S FLORENCE MACARTH*. 

<( No ways extraordinary at all, at all, 
Madam ; for such things happen every 
day ; for what brings me here to your 
ladyship, masquerading at this hour of 
the night, is about a hitch in the elec- 
tion. I suppose Conway has tould your 
ladyship that the sheriffs precept for 
the election is issued, and the polling 
will begin to-morrow.*' 

" I believe he did ; but really," £nd 
she yawned again, " I have been so 
deeply engaged -of late ; and Fitza- 
delm's absence, and my dependence on 
you, and your son, and things, that I 
did not particularly think about it; 
but-" 

" But," continued Crawley, gently 
taking the light out of her hand, " he 
did not tell you, and how could he, and 
he never near Glannacrime this fort- 
night, that, contrary to our expectation, 
there will be a violent opposition ; and 
that isn't no ways impossible but the 



FLORENCE M AC AUTli Y. \6§ 

Dunore interest will be trodden down 
hy those O'Mahonny whigs." 

" Trodden down !" interrupted Lady 
Dunore, indignantly, and reseating her- 
self — u The Dunore interest trodden 
down!" 

" Except, in addition to the thousands 
already distributed, there is a couple of 
thousand pounds more, to carry on the 
war during the polling/' added old 
Crawley, with some hesitation. 

u And is that all ?'* asked Lady Du- 
nore, languidly. 

" All Y* repeated Crawley, with a 
look of pleased surprise. 

" Oh ! if that does not shoot (suit) 
you, Ma'am, your ladyship may follow 
the bend of your generosity, and make 
it doable or quits. But the murthur of 
it is, Lady Dunore, that after you have 
expended thousands upon thousands, 
and after Lord Adelm is elected, which 
he will be as sure as eggs is eggs, and n* 

VOL. IV. 1 



lfO FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

thanks to them, it seems his opponent 
manes to petition against him in parlia- 
ment, on the score of what they, the 
spalpeens, call his bribery and corrup- 
tion, his trates and his presents, and 
other illegal practices to which lie has 
had recourse ; that's if you 11 believe 
the likes of them, the rebelly thieves." 

" Bribery and corruption ! illegal 
practices ! My son, Lord Adelm Fitza- 
delm guilty of this, Mr. Crawley/* in- 
terrupted Lady Dunore, with a mingled 
expression of anger and surprise. 
" What does all this mean, Mr. Craw- 
ley r 

" Why it manes, my lady, plain 
enough, that in Ireland, as throughout 
the world, a little bribery goes a great 
way. The people, Ma'am, are used to 
it. It's the way of the place, time im- 
memorial, and will be evermore. The 
voters and freeholders, and corporation 
of Glannacrime, require a taste of a 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 171 

Uewshure as well as their betters, why 
wouldn't they ; and nothing has been 
done here, that hasn't been done since 
the beginning of the Europayan world, 
at all elections ; and would pass muster 
any where, only for them jacobin whigs, 
the O'Mahonneys, that are just ready 
like drownded men to catch at a straw. 
It's only them and the likes of them 
that is always open mouthed against 
loyal men, or would go to call a little 
trifle of a prisent made to the burgesses 
of Glannacrime a bribe. " 

" I don't care what they call it," said 
Lady Dunore, rising in violent emotion, 
as the high honour and lofty spirit of 
her son started to her recollection, 
coupled with these accusations— " I 
don't care what your Irish creatures, 
call it; but what will my son say? What 
will Lord Adelm Fitzadelm say to this 
imputation on his honour and princi* 
pies?" 

! % 



172 FLORENCE M ACARTHY. 

"What can he say, Madam ?'* re- 
turned Crawley, endeavouring to keep 
pace with Lady Dunore, who was now 
walking in agitation up and down the 
room: u What can his lordship say, 
but that while he was star-gazing in 
Lisburn, the capital of Spain, among 
them Papists, his friends at home was 
working for his interests, like gallows 
slaves, sparing neither time, money, 
nor labour, to keep out the ould ene- 
mies of his family, and get in himself?'* 

u lie will murder you, Mr. Crawley; 
I promise you that,'* said Lady Du- 
nore, cooly, and stopping short in her 
quick pacing. 

<e The Lord save us!" ejaculated 
Crawley, looking round him fearfully. 

" You know/* she continued, " he 
already holds you and all your family, 
enfranche et belle aversion.'* 

" He does!" said old Crawley, guess- 
ing rather than understanding the pur- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1?3 

port of this sincere assurance. Then 
with a low, half insolent, half mysterious 
tone, he added, "Why then, in spite 
of all that, Lady Dunore, ife me and 
my family can be the saving of him and 
his yet." 

" Indeed !" said Lady Dunore, with 
a laugh of irony. 

" Indeed V repeated Crawley, unin- 
timidated ; " and, Lady Dunore, will 
you just hear me for a minute, and 
then I'll never spake more, if I don't 
contint you to your heart's desire." 

There was something imposing m 
the manner of Crawley, which induced 
the Marchioness to resume her seat, 
and to grant him (what she so rarely 
granted any one) a patient hearing. 

" Now, Lady Dunore/' he continued, 
"it will tell ill for' the greatness and 
grandeur and honour of the Fitzadelm 
and Dunore families, that him, who 
may be said to be their representative, 
I 3 



174 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

should be little better than a rogue and 
a rapparee, and give handle to the 
whigs in the house of commons, to be 
talking of the corruptionists and Irish 
electioneering bribery, and the likes. 
But as sure as Lord Adelm is returned, 
all this will come to pass. He'll be 
petitioned against in the House of Com- 
mons, to the intire satisfaction of the 
whigs." 

" I would not for a thousand worlds," 
interrupted Lady Dunore : " I should 
never stand London, and the insolence 
of the opposition women." 

" Then, my lady, sorrow thing there 
is to be d«,ne at all, at all, in the busi- 
ness but to withdraw Lord Adelm alto- 
gether for the present, who takes no 
pleasure in the election, and instead of 
being canvassing, is at this moment 
philandering it, like a beau maison, after 
some skittish young fawn of a famale. 
Just, you see, consint to set him fairly 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. IfB 

aside ; and then, you see, Lady Dunorc, 
we'll get another person agraiable to 
all parties, to set up in his stead, who 
will be elected forthwith, and sorrow 
word you'll hear of corruption or bri- 
bery, or the likes, I'll engage." 

(e And so save our honour," said Lady 
Dunore, " and lose all our money." 

"No, but save both," interrupted 
Crawley, "for we'd take care to set up 
a person that would be a follower of 
the family, and just keep the sate open 
for the real member till the desolution, 
which will soon come, for all the 
world as your ladyship's footman keeps 
your box for you at the theatre till you 
arrive yourself." 

" This all sounds plausibly, Mr. 
Crawley ; and you certainly are a very 
long-headed person, in spite of your 
teinture de ridiculite, which renders 
you very amusing. But where could 
we get a person to take Fitzadelm's 
I 4 



17 6 FLORENCE A1ACARTHY. 

place, in whom we could rely, in whom 
we could confide, who would act for 
the time being as our deputy, and vote, 
as we bid him." 

"Why then, Fd offer myself with 
all the veins,* Lady Dunore, only that 
crossing the fay just fairly kills me." 

u You !" said Lady Dunore, bursting 
into a fit of laughter. 

" And what would ail me ?" he an- 
swered^ in a tone of mortification. 

" Sure, many a man as isn't fit to 
hold a candle to me, Lady Dunore, has 
been sent over from this country a 
ready cut and dried parliament man : 
and what is in it after all, only just to 
take your cue, and know when to cry 
aye, and when to say no, according to 
order. And if you let out a blunder, 
or cut a joke, don't you carry the day? 
And pales of laughter from the treasury 



* i. e. veins of my heart. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1 77 

bench, as the papers say, and hear him! 
hear him ! from the whigs. I give you 
my honour, I'd do as well as the best of 
them if I was in it, and make them split 
there sides laughing, which is all the 
go now. But if it's eloquence and 
poethry you want, and one ready made 
to their hands, and just in their own 
way, quite ministarial, isn't there Con, 
Counseller Con, the darlint of the cor- 
poration, and would prefar him ' bove 
the world. I'll engage he'd be returned 
as soon as nominated, and has been 
merely known, as law agent for the 
election, and has nothing to do with 
what the whigs calls bribery, but stands 
with clane hands; ancj would lay down 
his life for the Dunores, though Lord 
Adelm trates him de ho-on haw as the 
French says." 

Here Crawley paused, looking from 
under his shrewd little eyes on Lady 
Dunore, and puckered up his mouth, in 
I 5 



178 FLORENCE MACARTHY, 

silent expectation of her answer to this 
hazardous proposition. 

Lady Dunore, after a few moments 
silent cogitation, exhausted alike in 
body and spirit, and already weary of a 
subject which now ceased to agitate 
her, at last observed, " Well, Mr. Craw- 
fey* y ou have hitherto conducted this 
business your own way. I am quite 
ignorant of the details; but all I know 
is this, the deputy member for Glanna- 
crime must be a staunch thorough-go- 
ing friend to the present ministry. 

" Lave him alone for that," inter- 
rupted Crawley : " sure isn't he after 
their own heart?*' 

" And the honour and intentions of 
my son must never even be called in 
question." 

" How can it, when there will be no 
petition against him if he is not 
elected.' 5 

" As to Lord Adelm," continued 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1 79 

Lady Dunore, " the borough of Glan- 
nacrime is evidently an object of indif- 
ference to him, pour le moins, and 
I now despair of his ever setting up 
again for any borough while things re- 
main as they are. I shall be the less 
anxious, as I shall command the voice 
of your son, in addition to my other 
voices in the house ; for Conway is, 
after all, and notwithstanding what peo- 
ple call his vulgar effrontery, a very 
clever, and, as you observe, eloquent 
creature." 

" Why, then, he is that same every 
taste of it ; and without wishing to 
alarm your ladyship, or give you 
unaisy drames to-night, I must just say 
that the time may not be far off — " 
here he paused, looked cautiously round, 
advanced to the door to see if it was 
fast, and then returning on tip-toe, con- 
tinued — " when you can't have too 
many voices in the house, nor too many 
friends in court, as the saying goes.'' 



180 FLORENCE MACARTIIV. 



" What do you mean?*' demanded 
Lady Dunore, startled, and amazed 
more by his manner than his words. 

" Och ! it's no matter what I mane 
now," said old Crawley, coolly : ' an 
times uncertain date eternal hours de- 
fends ; but I won't now detain your 
ladyship another moment." 

The clock at this instant struck three. 

" I shall not leave this room now, be 
the hour what it may," said Lady Du- 
nore, throwing herself back in a chair, 
and putting her feet on another, to mark 
her determination, " until you explain 
to me the mysterious words you have 
just uttered, Mr. Crawley." 

" Why then, see here the dilemia I 
have reduced myself to," said Crawley, 
with an air of perplexity. " I give you 
my honour, Lady Dunore, I would ra- 
ther walk with paize (peas) in my 
shoes than annoy your fine feelings ; 
and it three in the morning and you 
tired." 



FLORENCE MACARTI1Y. 181 



Ci I am not in the very least tired, 
Mr. Crawley. I am equal, at least I 
fancy I am, to any communication you 
have to make to me ; so pray go on." 

Old Crawley, with hesitation, and a 
marked reluctance, either affected or 
felt, began and broke oft' several sen- 
tences, hemmed, cleared his voice, and; 
cried — "Well, to be sure:" at last he 
began with : "Of course my late noble 
friend and patron, your ladyship's late, 
dear, and ever to be lamented concert, 
has often mentioned to you an idle 
story, set about by his enemies, in re- 
gard of a claimant of the title of Fitz- 
adelm, for there was then nothing else 
to claim ; and who — 

" Not a word," interrupted Dunore, 
impatiently. 

" Not a word!" repeated Crawley, 
with surprise. " Ar.d never tould your 
ladyship that his elder brother, Walter, 



182 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Lord Fitzadelm, commonly called the 
Black Baron, had a son, an only son?" 
" Never." 

" Who was drowned; but about 
whom there were some mighty ugly re- 
ports ?" 

" What reports f" 

" Oh ! just that his uncle and his 
father connived to put him out of the 
way to raise money ; that, at one time, 
his uncle thought to bastardize him, 
by proving him the son of a nurse who 
first suckled the young Fitzadelm; 
that this attempt failed ; and that 
after his brothers death he had the 
boy kidnapped, and sent no one knew 
where, among the black negers, and 
then trumped up a story of his drown- 
ing. 

<: 'Tis a most curious romance!" said 
Lady Dunore, interested in the story in 
proportion to its wildness, and forgetting 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 183 

the part her husband had been accused 
of playing, or how deeply it affected her 
own sons. 

u Oh, mighty interesting/' said old 
Crawley, ironically. 

f* But no one ever believed a word of 
it, only the enemies of the Fitzadelms. 
But I suppose my lord tould your lady- 
ship that the herald's office in Dublin 
refused him for a long time the style, 
title, and arms of Baron Fitzadelm?" 

" Never a syllable." 

" Nor of the conversation he had 
with the Ulster, king at arms, whom 
he knocked down, and stood his trial for 
it afterwards in Dublin ; my brother, 
the serjeant, acting as counsel, and I 
the attorney, and brought him off ili- 
gently ?" 

" Never,' ' said Lady Dunore, with 
increasing amazement and interest: " he 
never would allow me to accompany him 
to Ireland. It was a subject of eternal 



184 FLORENCE MACARTHY; 

contest with many others." (she sighed.) 
" I led a most miserable life with poor, 
dear, Lord Fitzadelm, Mr. Crawley ; 
yet upon the whole I have known no 
happiness since his death : but go on ; 
your story is a most extraordinary one." 

" The most extraordinary part is to 
come, Lady Dunore : for after all had 
died away, and poor Lord Fitzadelm 
dead with the rest, and your son Mar- 
quis of Dunore, and every thing going 
on fair and aisy, at the end of three 
and twenty years, and when people 
were thinking of nothing at all at all, 
the story is revived again ; and go which 
way you will, there is nothing but whis- 
pering and coshering, more particularly 
among the lower orders, that the son 
of Walter Lord Fitzadelm has re-ap- 
peared to several persons, with the 
intent of making good his claims to 
the Dunore estate and title, and of 
throwing out your ladyship's sons, the 



FLORENCE MACARTflY. 185 

most noble the marquis, and his bro- 
ther, Lord Adelm Fitzadelm." 

To this observation a silence of many 
minutes succeeded. Lady Dunore sat 
thunderstruck, with a succession of 
strange and contradictory emotions flit- 
ting over her strongly working coun- 
tenance. There was something in this 
wild and romantic tale that harmo- 
nized with her unregulated imagination, 
with her love for the marvellous, and 
her passion for excessive sensation : for 
there was a probability at least of the 
story being true, and a chance of con- 
flict and vicissitude, of defeat or suc- 
cess, which flattered her feverish ne- 
cessity for excitement, exertion, and 
occupation ; but there yet remained a 
sufficient source of annoyance, appre- 
hension, and anxiety, to counteract 
emotions of a more fanciful nature. 
Old Crawley sat deliberately gazing 
on her, his hands folded, his thumbs 



186 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

twirling, his round vulgar bronzed face 
in strong relief from the light of the 
taper; while the pale and haggard 
countenance of Lady Dunore, half 
thrown in shade by the surrounding 
darkness of the spacious and gloomy 
apartment, stood opposed in picturesque 
contrast. 

At last, after a long-drawn inspira- 
tion, Lady Dunore again exclaimed, 
" This is a most extraordinary tale, Mr. 
Crawley." 

" It is indeed, Lady Dunore, mighty 
extraordinary, if it is true." 

" You do not believe that it is so ?*' 

" Believe! the Lord forbid! If it 
was true, my lady, what would become 
of the marquis your son ? What good 
would there be in all the mortgages-, 
bargains, leases, and purchases, made 
under the Black Baron and your lady- 
ship's dear late lord, and the present 
marquis? Why, if it was proved to 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 18/ 

be true, Lady Dunore, wouldn't it be 
the murther of the worlds the ruin of 
us all ? Sure we must prove it isrit 
true, if we spend the last tinpenny we 
have in the world." 

" Prove ! then you really think claims 
will be made— pretensions urged ?*' 

" I think, and is certain sure of it. 
All kinds of maneuvering and checa- 
nerys going on at this present mo- 
ment to prove it." 

u But where — how — who is the pre* 
tender r" 

Old Crawley passed his hand over 
his face ; then looked round, as if he 
feared a witness of what he was going 
to say. He drew his chair closer to 
Lady Dunore, and continued in a low 
tone, " Where is he ! Why then, for 
all I know, Lady Dunore, he's under 
your roof at this moment. Any how he 
was in it this evening." 

Lady Dunore's exclamation almost 



188 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

amounted to a scream ; and Crawley, 
terrified at the vivacity of her emotions, 
cried, 

" Hush ! hush ! for the love of the 
Lord. Keep down your fine feelings, 
Lady Dunore, dear, and smell your 
Ode Lucy, or your Sally Volatile;*' 
and he searched her ridicule for a 
smelling bottle, which he had often 
seen her use under any agitation. 
Holding the salts to her nose (for 
Lady Dunore, like all hysterical per- 
sons, became violent in proportion at 
she was noticed), he continued,— 

" Aisy now, aisy, Lady Dunore, 
honey ; what will I do if you give way 
to your asterisks, and nobody up in 
the house to get you as much as a 
sup of water, or a thimble full of harts- 
horn T 

The effect of the sal volatile, which 
he poured up her nostrils, was so pow- 
erful as to absorb for a moment everv; 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1 8 J) 

other sensation; and when she could 
speak, which she did between laughter 
and sobs, she observed, " Under my 
roof, Mr. Crawley ? The kindnapped 
injured son of Lord Walter Fitzadelm 
under my roof, did you say ?" 

" Not at all, Lady Dunore, not the 
ra'al son of Baron Walter, but an im- 
posture, a vagrant, a rebel, who came and 
bullied me in my own house, in my sate 
of Mount Crawley, and wanted to force 
Court Fkzadelm from me, and refused 
to drink the ' Glorious and immortal,' 
and snapped at Conway, and put his 
(wmmether upon Clotty, and passed on 
her for a Methodist preacher, as he did 
afterwards upon your ladyship for a 
great officer from the Yankies ; and is 
neither more nor less than the bastard, 
saving your ladyship's presence, of Judy 
Laffan, who was first nurse to the young 
Master Fitzadelm that was drownded. 
A little bit of a bye-blow of my lord*, 



1C)0 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

a jew d esprit, as the French says ; 
which was the raison why Lady Fitz- 
Adelm turned her away, when she 
found she was a forepaw of my lord's, 
and she gave the child to that rebelly 
thief O'Leary's wife. And now, after 
every body has lost sight of him, that's 
Micky Laffan, for he turned out a va- 
gabond, was transported, and said to 
have died in Botany-Bay, he comes to 
pass himself for the ra'al young lord 
that was drownded, and he goes about 
chicaning the lower orders, and buying 
them over ; and conniving with Lady 
Clancare, his great crony, though he 
daren't let on to know her here, gal- 
K> wanting her in the bogs, and getting 
in with her into every cabin in the ba- 
rony, and shewing himself as the raal 
Marquis of Dunore. Isn't he here, 
playing the great don with your lady* 
ship, and calling himself General Fitz- 
walter, and laying down the law to yez? 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. lgi 

all as one as if he was the king of the 
place already: and what's more, my 
lady, Lady Clancare is no more sick 
than I am ; and as soon as the curtain 
was up and the play begun, the gineral 
was off like a shot, and Jemmy Bryan, 
who never loses sight of him, followed 
him to Castle Macarthy. ' Oh, troth, 
it's little of your ladyship's play she's 
thinking ; no, but of her own : and was 
humming you all the time, for the 
Devil is not able, for that one, the 
Lord pardon me!" 

This information, so extraordinary, 
so out of all calculation, had the ef- 
fect of sobering Lady Dunore, and of 
giving, for the moment, a tinge almost 
of rationality to her ideas ; for wounded 
self-love effected more than reason or 
even self-interest could have produced. 
That she had been duped, deceived, 
played upon, was the predominant 
feeling of her mind ; deceived by Lady 



192 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Clancare, at the moment when she 
was endeavouring to serve her, and to 
forward her views, and who now turned 
out to be the agent of an adventurer, 
who had come under her roof for the 
purpose of defrauding and dispossessing 
her children of their rank and property. 

" I see your ladyship is a little 
amazed said Crawley. 

" Amazed!" she returned, collect- 
edly, " yes, a little, but not confounded, 
not overcome, as you shall find, Mr. 
Crawley : you shall see that I can 
shuffle and cut and deal my cards as 
well as another : you shall find that 
neither the villainy of an impostor, nor 
the arts of an adventuress, shall be too 
much for me. It is not the first time, 
my good Mr. Crawley, that I have been 
placed in situations where a little po- 
licy, a little management, disguise, and 
intrigue were necessary. I have al- 
ready made up my mind to the event. 



TLORENCE MACARTHY. 193 

The conspiracy of this hero and heroine 
is, I suppose, a fair subject for legal 
prosecution ; but that's not enough. 
They must be shewn up, upon their 
own scene of action, and it will go 
hard with me if I don't make exam- 
ples of them/ Her eye$ darkened 
with expected vengeance, as she spoke. 

" Why then, see here, Lady Dunore, 
Divil a bit, but I give you credit for 
shewing a proper spirit ; for hasn't that 
fellow made you the talk of the country 
round, for letting him into the castle, 
when not a house would let him crass 
the threshold, and was obliged to take 
up his lodgings with that marked man, 
O'Leary, because the Dunore Arms 
thought him a suspicious character?'' 

" I wish we had your son Conway 
here," said the marchioness, musing. 

" Och! there's no occasion in life for 
him. Haven*t he and I been holding: a 
council of war in Clotty's room, while 

VOL, IV. X 



194« FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the play was going on, and every thing 
settled and planned between him and I 
and only waiting your ladyship's veto, 
as the Papists say? I haven't come 
from Dublin without my credentials, 
I'll ingage." 

" What do you mean, my dear Mr. 
Crawley r* 

" Why I mane, that I have a war- 
rant to bring the body of this young 
gineral, who is an ould soger, to Dublin, 
afore the Lord Chief Justice/' 

u Oh ! but remember your last war- 
rant, Mr. Crawley. You do not briller 
par Id. You must not again involve us 
in your ridiculous mistakes and conspi- 
racies, and things in Queen Elizabeth's 
days." 

" I'll ingage there is no fear, Lady 
Dunore, and Judge Aubrey not in the 
country to back his jacobin friends; 
and has my charges made out in due 
form, and sworn to." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1$5 

" What charges, par exemple ?" 
" Only for a trifle of murther, that's 
all." 

" Murder !" 

" Aye, faith, ra'al and undoubted 
murther. Did'nt your ladyship hear 
Conway read out of th* Hibernian 
journal, one morning at breakfast, of a 
rising in the mountains about a still- 
hunting party, and of a fight between 
the country people and the sogers, and 
a stranger on horseback, getting among 
them to settle the difference, as it was 
to appear, and taking part in the dis- 
turbance, and a shot fired, and a soger 
killed, and nobody ever able to tell by 
whom, until a lad turned king's evi- 
dence th* other day, and is ready to 
swear that this gineral was the mur- 
therer; that he was seen going into a 
cabin before the fight, and drinking with 
the people, and saying he was the r \ d\ 
Lord Dunore ; and that on going away, 
K 2 



1()6 FLORENCE M ACARTHY. 

under pretence of relieving the people, 
who were very poor, he gave them, -as 
he thought, a golden guinea, which 
turned out to be a Spanish coin, the 
very same that the gineral gave your 
ladyship a prisint for card counters; 
and here it is, and a great evidence it 
will be on the trial." 

So saying, he produced the coin. 
" This is most extraordinary ! Thii 
is a special intervention of provi- 
dence. It is indeed the same," said 
Lady Dunore, "that this murderer 
gave me/' 

" Now," said old Crawley, " a maa 
who is convicted of murder, and I be- 
lieve we have witnesses enough to 
prove that, will have but a poor chance 
of proving his claims to a title and pro- 
perty in the possession of a noble fa- 
mily, as is hand and glove with the mi- 
nistry." 

u But you have not got him yet," 



FLORENCE MAtARTHY. 197 

said Lady Dunore, impatiently: "he 
may still elude us all." 

" He is now, I believe, quietly asleep 
in O'Leary's lodgings. Jemmy Bryan 
saw him safe home at half past ten, 
from Lady Clancare's, and then came 
here to inform Conway of it. But 
what would ail your ladyship but to 
write him a line in the morning to 
beg he would step down to you, as 
you are unaisy about Lord Adelm, 
whom he flatters himself he's bit 
fairly:' 

" And then?" said Lady Dunore, red- 
dening with the ardour of her newly 
awakened feelings. 

" And then, my lady, we'll just nab 
him nately as he stands all alone by 
himself in your ladyship's dressing- 
room ; for he has become so populous 
with the lower orders, that if he were 
arrested at O'Leary's, that is the ring- 
leader of the country, there would be a 



198 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

rising of every riband man and every 
functionary in the place round. But 
here, sorrow a taste of any mortal will 
know about it ; and we'll have a po- 
shay at the little posture gate, under the 
tower on the strand, and a military 
escort." 

• No/' said Lady Dunore, whose feel- 
ings, all personal, had nothing but pri- 
vate vengeance in view, " that will 
never do, I will have him arrested and 
exposed in the presence of the party as- 
sembled in the castle (whom he has im- 
posed upon), and confronted with that 
artful adventuress, Lady Clancare, who 
I now see, while she was serving her 
paramour, was upon the point of taking 
in poor dear Lord Rosbrin, persuading 
me, the little wretch, that she did it to 
pique that Fitz waiter; but don t talk of 
ber— it maddens me to think how I 
have been duped, laughed at, played 
upon ; and that — " 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 199 

%v Now keep yourself cool. Lady Du- 
nore, honey," interrupted Crawley, fear- 
ful of a return of her hysteric paroxysm. 
" and just go to bed and — " 

" I will not go to bed till I write 
a note of invitation to the general, whom 
we shall out-general in the end, and 
leave it to be sent early in the morn- 
ing; and as to the Countess of Clan- 
care/' and she laughed hysterically, 
a countess, indeed ! a gypsy countess ! 
with her typhus fever ; I will have the 
honour of going for her myself, and 
bringing her, vi et armis, to the 
castle." 

Cheered by this resolution, Lady 
Dunore now took up her candle, and 
with her cheek colourless, her eyes 
inflamed and staring, and her head 
wrapped in a lace veil, she not in- 
aptly imaged the sleep-walking and con- 
science-stricken Lady Macbeth. Old 
Crawley meantime, with a tip-toe step, 
K 4 



s 



200 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

groped his way by the moonlight to 
the bed-room of his son, who had sat 
up to receive him, and learn the re- 
sult of his extraordinary interview with 
the lady of the castle. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 201 



CHAPTER V. 



How could'st thou find this dark sequestered 
nook ? Milton. 

Now does my project gather to a head ; 

My charms crack not; my spirits obey; and 

time 

Goes upright with his carriage. 

Shakes fears. 



The solemn consequence given to 
every thing connected with the drama, 
by Lord Rosbrin, had rendered the dis- 
appointment occasioned by the illness 
or caprice of Lady Clancare an event 
of the most important and mortifying 
nature ; and he insisted on announcing 
it to the public in all the set form and 
phrase usual upon such occasions in the 
K 5 



202 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

public theatres. He came forward, 
therefore, with a countenance in which 
he hoped " men would read strange 
things ;" and, after a long pause, he 
commenced an apology for the non-ap- 
pearance of Lady Clancare, put forth 
his own claims to indulgence, in assum- 
ing, by particular desire, and for that 
night only, the part of Rosalind ; and 
concluded by reading aloud the letter of 
the comic heroine, to whom he had un- 
dertaken to act as double. It ran as 
follows : 

My dear Lady Dunore, 

I am obliged to decline the 
pretty part of the fantastic Rosalind 
this evening for one of a less agree- 
able nature ; and I trust you will not 
think I am playing the Malade Ima- 
ginaire, when I assign indisposition 
as an excuse for my absence from the 
castle. I would, perhaps, ask you to 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 203 

come and judge for yourself of my situa- 
tion, but that the nature of my feelings 
at this moment, and my recent visits to 
a house where the typhus fever rages, 
might render it as unsafe for you, as em- 
barrassing to me, to receive you at 
Castle Macarthy. 

I am, my dear Lady Dunore, &c. 

F. Clancare. 

The apology was received with plau- 
dits ; the audience, better pleased with 
the Rosalind which chance and folly 
had given them, than with the Rosalind 
of which a dangerous malady had de- 
prived them, u bound up each corporeal 
faculty" to expected mirth and laugh- 
ter. 

Miss Crawley declared the excuse of 
Lady Clancare was all affectation and 
assumed importance ; and Lord Frede- 
rick observed to Lady Georgina that he 
saw la petite personne was, from the be- 



-04 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

ginning to the end, playing another 
part than that assigned her, and that it 
was very clear her intention had never 
been to play at all. 

Contrary to his first intentions, Ge- 
neral Fitzwalter found himself in the 
theatre of Dunore; but upon the reading 
of Lady Clancare's letter, he suddenly 
disappeared. The carriage in which he 
had arrived had returned to the Dunore 
Arms, and, notwithstanding the rough- 
ness of a singularly inclement night, he 
wrapped himself up in a long travelling 
cloak, lent him by one of the grooms of 
the chamber, and proceeded on foot to 
-Castle Macarthy. 

As he walked forth from the illumi- 
nated hall of Dunore, and lost the glit- 
ter of the sparkling lights that gleamed 
from its casements, the rude savage 
scene through which he proceeded 
seemed to scowl a gloomy contrast. 
The night was unusually dark, but the 



Florence macarthy. 205 

roar of the waves indicated their agita- 
tion ; and in the pauses of the shrill 
gusts of wind which whistled among 
the rocks, under whose shadow he was 
moving, the rain fell heavy, cold, and 
penetrating. Opposed to the brilliant 
images and mirthful scenes he had 
quitted, those he now occupied became 
marked by a character of supernatural 
horror and desolation. He found and 
aseended with difficulty the little defile 
in the cliffs through which Lady Clan- 
care's maid had formerly led him to 
the strand ; and when he stood before 
the gates of Castle Macarthy, he felt 
that there also was the silence of dreary 
sequestration, and of desolate privacy. 
A faint stream of light issued from the 
half open portals of the hall. He en- 
tered, without finding any human being 
to impede his steps or to announce his 
arriyal. 

A flickering rush-light stood upon 



206 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the old stone table, and its expiring ray 
flashed upon the skeleton wolf's head 
that hung suspended above it, and then 
sunk and died into utter darkness. 
Fitzvvalter stood for a moment, his hand 
resting on the table, on which the rain, 
dropping through the roof, fell with 
heavy plashes. Unable to proceed, his 
feelings all tumult, his spirits depressed, 
one image, gloomy, painful, and affect- 
ing, still occupied his mind. The 
young, friendless mistress of this silent 
and dreary dwelling, she who so late 
had appeared beyond the reach of suf- 
fering, so brilliant, so wooed and won 
by adulation and attention, now neg- 
lected, abandoned, unpitied, left on a 
bed of sickness by those to whom her 
spirit and talents had recently afforded 
occupation, and supplied amusement- 
no eye to watch her, no tongue to sooth 
her, no hand to seek the feverish pres- 
sure of her s. All her follies, all her 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 20/ 

faults (if the conduct which had thwart- 
ed his passion could be so construed) 
were forgotten, and nothing was now 
remembered, not even her talents, her 
charms, save the unpitied situation to 
which her too intrepid benevolence had 
reduced her. 

Almost suffocating from excess of 
emotion, still struggling with himself, 
in the midst of darkness and of silence, 
he hesitated as to the manner in which 
he should seek to announce himself, 
when the heavy creaking of a door, 
slowly shut, footsteps approaching^ 
and a faint flash of light, proceeding 
from the narrow dark stone passage, 
which led to the sitting-room he had 
once occupied, caught his attention. 
A man advanced, holding a dark lan- 
tern ; the light, turned on himself, 
burnished his face and figure with it's 
yellow rays, and threw them into strong 
relief. He was humming an old melan- 
choly Irish cronan, and proceeded cau- 



208 FLORENCE MCCARTHY. 



tiously across the hall to the door, with- 
out perceiving the general, whose dark 
figure and garb were confounded with 
the profound shadows of the place. The 
full and strongly lighted view of his 
person instantly awakened a perfect re- 
cognition in the general's mind. It 
was the Rubra gli. 

" Owny P he exclaimed, advancing 
eagerly, and seizing his arm. Owny 
dropped his lantern from one hand, 
and a letier which he carried from the 
other, and clasping both, mingled a 
broken aue-maria and mea-culpa, in ut- 
ter consternation and superstitious fear, 
the only fear by which his hardy spirit 
was assailable. 

" Do you not remember ?" asked the 
general, in an impatient tone, and letting 
go his arm. " You cannot have forgot- 
ten the traveller whom you drove from 
Casiiel, bewildered in the Gal ties, and 
imprisoned in Court Fitzadelm." 

The habitual gaiety of the Rabragh's 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 20^ 

countenance, and the natural ruddiness 
of his complexion, returned together ; 
and picking up his lantern, and turn- 
ing it full on the apparition which had 
scared him into the belief that he stood 
in the unearthly presence of the fa- 
mous Macarthy-More> he replied, with a 
smile : — 

" Know your honor, is it, Sir ? May 
be I don't; and never will forget yez, 
till the hour of my death, if I was to a 
live a thousand years and more ; and 
took you now for ould Fogh-na-gael, in 
regard of the surprise, Sir, and the 
place, and the ould shanaos, Sir. And 
sure wasn't I going to your honor this 
very minute, with a letter for you from 
the Bhan Tierna, long life to her lady- 
ship ! and if I didn t find you at O'Lea- 
ry's was to follow you to the castle, and 
lurk about till you came out, Sir, and 
slip this into your hand, Sir; and thinks 
k great luck, plaze Gad, to find you in 



210 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

it here, in regard of not caring to crass 
the church-yard of Monaster-ny-oriel, 
and the night dark and stormy, only in 
respect of the Bhan Tierna, who has a 
right to my life, Sir, if she chooses, and 
am bound to serve her till death, and 
more." 

During this speech, the general had 
opened the letter alluded to, and read as 
follows. 

" You stand accused of murder. De- 
positions to this effect have been laid 
against you, by one, who, in betraying 
the circumstance to his comrade, the 
noted Padreen Gar, persists in its vera- 
city. Officers of justice are furnished 
with a warrant to take you. Though 
your conscience be at rest, confide not 
in your innocence, for you are power- 
fully beset. A chaise with a driver, on 
whom you may depend, will be ready 
to receive you at three in the morning, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



211 



and conduct you to a port from whence 
you may sail. Announce your arrival 
and future intentions to Lady Clancare, 
they will then securely and speedily 
reach your wife, 

Florence Macarthy. 
" This for the present is all the an- 
swer I can return to your letter, and its 
general proposal/ 3 

Fitzwalter read this letter twice, with 
a confusion of ideas and feelings that 
scarcely left him power to comprehend 
its contents. The increasing paleness 
of his cheek, the rolling of his eye, the 
tremulous motion of his under lip, fixed 
the shrewd but sympathizing gaze of 
the Rabragh, as he held up the lan- 
tern before him ; and as the general 
stood silent and motionless, he observed, 
significantly : — 

" Hasn't your honor better step into 
the dining-parlour, Sir, and see the 



212 FLORENCE MACARTHT. 

Countess herself? and ingages, if she 
backs you, Sir, sorrow taste there is to 
fear. And didn't she save my life, Sir, 
entirely, when I fell into trouble, and 
-none to take my part against the Craw- 
leys, only God and her ladyship, Sir. 
Shall I shew your honor the way ?" and 
he stepped lightly on before. Fitz- 
walter followed mechanically, and, as 
the door stood half open, Owny pointed 
to it, and retired. 

The unexpected visitant paused at 
the threshold, and the interior of the 
apartment was exposed to his view. 
It was dimly lighted by a rude lamp 
which stood on the table, before which 
Lady Clancare sat writing. Her ap- 
pearance almost justified the account 
she had given of herself ; for her un- 
usual paleness of complexion was ac- 
companied by the worn, anxious, and 
exhausted look of one who suffered 
much. One hand was spread and 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 213 



pressed upon the forehead it supported; 
the other was guiding her pen with 
the rapidity of lightning ; while at 
intervals she raised her head, address- 
ing the interrogatory of " well," to a 
person who appeared dictating to her 
in Irish. He presented a gaunt tall 
figure, and fearful aspect ; but he stood 
with his head uncovered at a respectful 
distance, and traces of a reverential 
feeling softened the harsh lines of hi* 
wild and marked countenance. It was 
Padreen Gar. In another part of the 
room Lady Clancare s youthful attend- 
ant, assisted by an old woman, was 
engaged in packing up a small travel- 
ling trunk. Struck by a combination 
so extraordinary, by the peculiar situa- 
tion of Lady Clancare, and by the pre- 
sence of her singular associates, Fitz- 
walter stood for a moment unnoticed, 
and wrapt in profound observation ; 
when the eyes of Lady Clancare suel- 



214 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

denly and accidentally turning to the 
spot where he stood, with his dark pale 
countenance just visible above the 
cloak which wrapped his figure ; she 
uttered a faint exclamation, smiled, 
attempted to rise, and would have sunk 
to the earth, but that the arms of Fitz- 
walter received her, with a clasp that 
seemed almost indissoluble. Her efforts 
to rally back her fading spirits and de- 
clining strength were instantaneously 
successful. She resumed her seat, 
affected to laugh away her weakness, 
ascribed it to exhaustion and surprise; 
and then having abruptly observed, 
that General Fitzwalter could not yet 
have received the letter she had dis- 
patched to him, she turned to her attend- 
ants, desired her maid to wait in the 
adjoining room, and dismissed Padreen 
Gar and the old woman till they should 
be called for. All this was done rapidly 
but collectedly, and was observed by 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 215 

Fitzwalter with silent amazement ; for 
the feverish hectic that burnt in a 
red spot on one of her cheeks con- 
vinced him that the excuse she had 
made for her non-appearance at the 
castle of Dunore was not without founda- 
tion. He took her hand in emotion; 
and as he applied his fingers to its 
throbbing pulse, she gaily observed, 
while she struggled to release it, " Oh, 
you are not to believe a word it tells 
you. I have no leisure to be ill now, 
nor shall I have time to die these twenty 
years : then, indeed, having retired 
from the world, with the first wrinkle, 
and moped through a few years of age 
and ugliness, I may some day or other 
be found here dead of the sullens, like 
an old bird in its cage." 

" But you arc ill," he replied, anxi- 
ously : " your hand burns, your com- 
plexion varies. Where is there a physi- 
cian? Have you not sent for assistance?" 



216 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

f< What!" she said laughing, « my 
equivoque of the typhus fever suc- 
ceeded with you as well as the rest? 
But in that case, if I am indeed ima- 
gined ill, where are all my i friends fast 
sworn,' my admirers, my Orlandos, my 
Solymans! Ha! not even I'amie d*hon- 
neur ! My dear Lady Dunore! Then 
have / touched the highest point of all 
my greatness, 

' And from the full meridian of my glory 
I haste now to my setting 

so sit down, General Fitzwalter, and tell 
me how it comes, that ' left and aban- 
doned by my velvet friends,' you, who 
never ranged yourself among their num- 
ber, have deserted the festive hall of 
pleasure to seek the supposed infectious 
air of these ruined towers ?" 

" You suffer and are here," he re- 
plied eagerly, and taking a hand, which 
she now struggled not to withdraw— 



FLORENCE MAC ART HY. 



air 



You did not then, of course, receive 
the letter which I have just despatched 
to you from your guardian angel, from 
Florence Macarthy ?" 

Fitzwalter let fall her hand, and after 
a moment's pause, replied, tc Yes; but 
that is not the question now. Will you 
permit me to go to Dunore for such 
medical advice as I can procure: or, if 
you prefer sending your mysterious 
agent, Owny, whom I left in your hall, 
and who has been employed in the ser- 
vice of a life much less valuable than 
your own—" 

" No, no/' she interrupted, u I am 
not ill. I do not deceive you. I am 
harassed, anxious, a little exhausted, 
and burning more with indignation than 
fever. With your life, the life of any 
human being at stake; with the hap- 
piness, the existence of Florence Ma- 
carthy in my hands, — is her name, 
then, so abhorrent to your ears that 
you turn thus in disgust away ?* 

VOL. IV. I. 



218 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" You have not chosen your mo- 
ment wisely ; but I am ready to fulfil 
my engagement to that lady/ inter- 
rupted Fitz waiter , vehemently, and 
starting from his chair. a I will marry 
her, protect her, and while I live, 
live with her. What more does she 
require, or do you demand, Lady Clan- 
care 

He paused, and fixed his stern eyes 
on a countenance marked by the pro- 
foundest agitation. 

" I require! I have no right to re- 
quire any thing. I speak in her be- 
half, not in my own. Oh ! you know 
not," she continued, with a supplicating 
earnestness, " the devotion with which 
she has pursued you — silently, unobtru- 
sively pursued you. You know not 
what zeal she has displayed, what in- 
genuity she has exerted, to keep you 
within her view; to behold you, to 
listen to you, to study you, to obtain 
you." 



t 

FLORENCE MACARTHY. 219 

u Well/* said Fitzwalter, throwing 
himself back in his chair, " she has 
succeeded — I am her s. I acknowledge 
her worth: in time I trust I shall feel 
it,"— and he sighed profoundly. 

" Her worth !" replied Lady Clan- 
care : " 'tis of her love I speak, and of 
all the romantic energy which has ac- 
companied it. It was her determina- 
tion, when she heard of your captivity, 
to return to South America, to endea- 
vour to effect your escape, or to share 
your dungeon ; for the woman is un- 
worthy of the sacred name of wife who 
is not prepared to follow the husband 
of her choice and her affections to 
slavery, to death; oh! more than all, to 
follow, to cling to him even in shame, 
in ignominy. Nay, hear me out, and 
look not thus on me. The report of 
your escape had reached her when she 
was on the point of embarking from 
England, to share, or offer to share 
i, 2 



220 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



your destiny. Then she lost sight of 
you until you presented yourself to her 
eyes in Ireland, breathing the same air, 
inhabiting the same room, exchanging 
glances, yet still instinctively shrinking 
from her. Ha ! you start. It will not 
lessen your surprise to learn that Flo- 
rence Macarthy was the rejected, the 
formidable Mrs. Magillicuddy, some- 
thing disguised, indeed, and changed. 
You laugh incredulously. But love 
would have recognized its object even 
under that concealment. Young, well 
looking, and unprotected, she has often 
sought safety in the assumption of age 
and ugliness, during her inevitable wan- 
derings. Her flexibility of voice, and 
mobility of countenance and gesture, 
her powers of imitation, and acquaint- 
ance with the character she assumed, 
favoured her disguise. But your in- 
tercourse stopped not here. It was 
she who contrived to play upon the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



221 



vanity and credulity of Lord Adelm, 
whom she had once seen in Spain, 
whom she had afterwards seen in Eng- 
land, though unnoticed by one so self- 
occupied and self-involved— it was she 
who summoned him from Portugal— *- 
at once avenging a friend she had dearly 
loved, whom he had sacrificed, and 
making him an instrument in her own 
schemes. Her's was the irrepressible 
sigh, the malignant laugh in the ruinp 
of Holy-cross. It was she who placed 
you in the Fitzadelm chaise, under the 
guidance of her agent, the Rabragh, 
had you carried to Lis-na-sleugh, where 
her knowledge of the Spanish language 
put her in possession of your views and 
intentions. Thus she anticipated you 
at Court Fitzadelm, imprisoned you to 
afford herself time for escape, and pro* 
Tided you a lodging at O'Learv's, by 
an equivoque of which he was the 
dupe. From that moment you became 
L 3 



222 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

my charge. The proximity of your 
residence favoured the trust I embraced. 
Acquainted with your departure for 
Cork, your intended return to Dunore, 
and with the arrest which waited you 
there, I was enabled to forward the 
views of Florence Macarthy, by wit- 
nessing your first appearance in the 
castle of Dunore; to effect which, as 
much as to surprise the favour of Lady 
Dunore, I suffered myself to be taken 
prisoner by Mr. Costello, and even paid 
him for his trouble. It was I who kept 
your friend Lord Adelm in play, by 
dropping the handkerchief, whose ini- 
tials first discovered to you the resi- 
dence of Florence Macarthy in Ireland, 
and again brought on a negotiation by 
means scarcely calculated on. I see 
you are amazed, confounded, stunned, 
because the omnipotence which belongs 
to the affections of a devoted woman is 
unknown to your sex : still less can you 



FLORENCE MACARTHY* 223 

judge of its disinterestedness, of its 
power to abnegate self, to confound its 
identity with the object beloved. It is 
you, you alone, Florence Macarthy 
prizes. It is for yourself you are esti- 
mated: and now, ignorant of all con- 
cerning you, save the part you recently 
played in America, beholding you in 
this remote place, wrapped in mystery, 
suspected, accused, your life in danger, 
whatever may be your innocence or 
fate, that fate she is ready to share with 

you." 

. a I cannot, dare not hear you on,'* in- 
terrupted Fitzwalter, in a burst of pas- 
sion amounting to agony. " Why 
should I deceive her, you, myself? 'Tis 
not on Florence Macarthy my thoughts 
arc bent, admirable and wonderful as 
you paint her. 'Tis on you my exist- 
ence at this moment depends ; my soul, 
my senses, my life, are your s. 'Tis on 
your, eloquence I hang, on your countc- 
L 4 



224 



FLORENCE MACARTHT. 



nance I gaze, on your eyes I look. I 
confound you with her, and become 
unworthy of both. Were you this de- 
voted creature, whose cause you plead — 
spoke you, looked you thus for your- 
self, the struggle would be at once 
decided. Florence Macarthy should 

not be deceived, nor I . In a word, 

Lady Clancare, I love you to madness, 
to folly, to- dishonour; you, only you, 
against my better reason, my happiness 
and sense of right. Now then, know- 
ing my state of feeling, speak on, if you 
will; but remember, I do not answer 
for myself. Every word you utter, 
every sigh you breath, every glance you 
emanate in another's cause, confirms my 
crime, and devotes me to yourself. 
Were you the creature you paint ano- 
ther, were you capable of this devotion, 

this zeal, and for me " 

€€ I am capable of it,'' interrupted 
Lady Clancare, breathlessly, and clasp- 



FLORENCE MACARTUY. 



225 



i'ng her hands in passionate emotion, 
w hile she half averted her face to con- 
ceal its expression. " Could I thus 
describe if I had not felt? In pleading 
the cause of Florence Macarthy, see 
you not that I but delineated my own 
feelings, my own strong, tender, and 
indestructible emotions. You say you 
love me, and I dare not doubt it. You 
deny not your danger; I am ready to 
share it : this is no moment for details : 
let it suffice to know that she who thus 
throws herself on you, is — " she paused, 
turned away her head, while Fitzwalter 
encircled her half retreating form with 
his arms, and hung wildly over her, ee is 
— Florence Macarthy !" 

His arms lost their pow er of support- 
ing her, and he sunk motionless upon 
the chair from which she had just 
arisen ; while Lady Clancarc, after a 
moment s struggle, turning full round, 
iixed her eyes on him with that expres- 
L 5 



226 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

sion of triumph with which she had 
first received him where she now stood, 
and gently putting her hand on his 
shoulder, said, " Now, hifidel, I have 
you on the hip,. 

The story of Florence Macarthy, 
Countess of Clancare, the daughter of 
Colonel Macarthy-More, whose life had 
been sacrificed in the South American 
cause, had already been gradually de- 
tailed, and little was left to reveal. The 
story of her kinswoman, Florence Ma- 
carthy Reagh, a Spanish nun, resident 
in the Convent of our Lady of the An- 
nunciation, as partly related by O'Leary, 
had given rise to that qui pro quo which 
had enabled Lady Clancare to follow 
up her innocent schemes on the heart 
of him she considered as her husband, 
while apparently acting as the agent of 
another. 

Florence Macarthy Reagh was the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 22J 



young novice of Nuestra Senora de las 
Angustias, to whom the eccentric Lord 
Fitzadelm had addressed his love, 

<c Stealing her soul with many vows of faith, 
And never a true one ; w 

and who had since expiated her credu- 
lity by years of religious sacrifice. 
^Misled by the embroidered handker- 
chief, and by O'Leary's description of 
its owner, Lord Adelm had flown to 
her convent, and, in the person of the 
mistress he had abandoned, sought the 
invisible torment who had so long 
eluded him. He arrived at the convent 
the day preceding that on which his 
supposed sylph was to take the veil; 
and the certainty of not obtaining her 
increased his ideal and romantic passion 
to the desperate height of proposing^ 
unknown, unseen, to marry her. The 
answer to this proposition revealed the 
name and story of the person he ad* 



228 FLORENCE MAC ART II Y. 

dressed, and inclosed a drawing of a ot- 
Rotaph, on which was inscribed 

c< Sic me Phoebus atrial." 

For the rest, he was informed that his 
proposal should be forwarded to Mrs. 
Mary Magillicuddy, the person whose 
invisible, but ardent attentions, had in- 
duced him to make it. 

Florence Macarthy Rcagh, though 
much of the saint, was more of the wo- 
man ; and in spite of herself, secretly 
rejoiced in the innocent vengeance pro- 
cured her by the playful agency of her 
cousin, who, like the rest of her sex, 
made common cause, and conceived an 
injury done to one woman a slight to 
all. 

The town clock of Dunore had struck 
eleven, as General Fitz waiter, dogged 
by Jemmy Bryan, reached his tower of 
Monaster-ny-Oriel ; and O'Leary, who 
had been watching his return, expressed 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

his amazement at his doing so on foot 
in so dreary a night, and informed him, 
with a mysterious air, that things were 
getting wind, and that Lord Adelm was 
just arrived at Monaster-ny-Oriel a few 
moments before, and awaited his return 
in his chamber. Fra Denis O 'Sullivan 
was also, he said, returned, to his utter 
amazement, to his lodgment in the 
tower, and was now solus cum solo with 
the young lord. 



230 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



CHAPTER VI. 



Yea, even that which mischief meant most harm 
Shall, in the happy trial, prove most goodly. 
Evil on itself shall back recoil. 

Milton. 



The following morning, an hour after 
sun-rise, the ruined chapel of Monas- 
ter-ny-oriel exhibited a singular and 
unusual scene : for before the high al- 
tar, at whose feet reposed the ashes of 
the great chief, Macarthy-More, the 
young descendant and inheritor of his 
title and name gave her hand to the 
representative of his hereditary ene- 
mies. The ceremony was performed 
by the Reverend Denis O'Sullivan, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 231 

titular Dean of Dunore, assisted by the 
parish priest. 

The protestant rector, who was to 
repeat the rites, according to the forms 
of the protestant church (the parties 
being of different persuasions), also at- 
tended, at Lady Clancare's particular 
request, to represent her grandfather, 
to whom he had been a fast firm friend, 
and to give her away. The only per- 
sons present upon the occasion were 
O'Leary, who, between every response, 
muttered some part of Friar Con's pro- 
phecy ; ^and Lady Clancare's maid, 
who was her foster sister. Lord Adelm, 
who had passed the night in a confer- 
ence with General Fitzwalter, to which 
Mr. O'Sullivan was latterly admitted, 
had left O'Leary's before day-light, in- 
formed of the event which was about 
to take place, but declining being pre- 
sent, from feelings originating in his ac- 
tual state of mind, the mortification he 



232 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

had recently undergone, and some well- 
grounded suspicions of the share Lady 
Clancare had contributed to it. 

The celebration of the wedding of 
the Bhan Tierna in the chapel of Mo- 
naster-ny-oriel, some vague reports that 
the distinguished stranger on whom 
she was bestowing her hand was the 
real and long-lost Marquis of Dunore, 
had circulated with incredible celerity^ 
and the old Fitzadelm chaise, with four 
horses in attendance at the gates of the 
cemetery, the white cockade mounted 
in the Rabragh's hat, who rode proudly 
on the coach-box, a similar distinction 
in the caubeen of Padreen Gar, who 
had forcibly dismounted the ragged 
postillion, and thrown his huge limbs 
over the back of the leader, and a chaise 
and pair in attendance for the countess's 
maid and O'Leary, all served to con- 
firm the hints 

4 Loud rumour spokt. 1 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



233 



By the time, therefore, that the bridal 
party issued from amidst the grey ruins 
of the abbey, a multitude of persons, 
with the whole population of Clot- 
notty-joy, had assembled round the 
gates, and shouts of joyous emotion, 
mingled with the cry of the Macarthies 
and Fitzadelms, rent the air. 

Ladv Clancare, as she ascended the 
carriage, addressed a few words to those 
nearest to her : she said she was about 
to leave them for a short time, but she 
trusted it was only to return, with the 
power as well as the will she had al- 
ways felt to be of use to them; — sh^ 
recommended sobriety, industry, and 
peaceable conduct ; and amidst fresh 
ihouts of approbation and joy was 
-placed in the carriage by the catholic 
dean and protestant rector. The caval- 
cade was now taking the road to 
Cork, still followed by the multitude, 
when a party of military, led on by 



234 FLORENCE M AC ARTHV. 

several officers of the civil power, com- 
manded the drivers to stop ; and Gene* 
ral Fitzwalter was arrested in the name 
and on behalf of his majesty the king. 
The arrest was instantly observed by 
the peasantry, who prepared to resist 
it with their usual uncalculating 
warmth, while Padreen Gar, still 
mounted on the foremost horse, rose 
his gaunt figure from the stirrups, and 
cast round a significant look, which 
operated like electricity. In a moment 
the scattered multitude, contracted into 
a close phalanx, rushed with one im- 
pulsion through the military party* 
and environed the chaise : stones and 
turf sods, suddenly torn up, flails and 
scythes brandished in the air, and 
countenances fixed, stern, resolute, and 
ferocious, declared the event of an in- 
tended rescue. In a momentary pause, 
Fitzwalter, sternly, as one accustomed 
to command — Mr. O'Sullivan, mildly, 



FLORENCE ilACARTHY. 



23 b 



as one accustomed to conciliate, en- 
deavoured to address the mob, and 
induce them to return quietly to their 
work or their homes: both were only 
answered by shrill wild shouts, which 
convinced them of the inefficiency of 
their interference. 

The military loaded their pieces, but 
behaved with great moderation, till 
urged by the interference of the civil 
officers, who ordered them to disperse 
the mob, vi et armis ; and a general 
engagement was about to take place, 
when the voice and interference of Lady 
Clancare produced an effect, as unex- 
pected as singular. She addressed 
them in Irish ; but it was evident 
neither in command nor supplication. 
Whatever she said produced bursts of 
laughter and applause ; every eye, flash- 
ing humour and derision, were turned 
on the constables and their satellites. 
A new impulse seemed to be given to 



236 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



the susceptible feelings of the auditory 
she addressed. Rage was turned to 
contempt ; anticipated triumph shone 
in every eye. They drew back, suf- 
fered the military to close round the 
carriage, dropped their missiles, and 
followed in regular order the track of 
the carriages, as they now proceeded 
to the castle of Dunore. 

u There are two, and but two short 
roads," (said Lady Clancare smiling) 
" to Irish feelings,— -pathos or humour : 
you may weep or laugh them out of 
any thing." 

N< vweh standing the earliness of the 
hour, every window, every loop-hole^ 
in the castle of Dunore, was crowded,, 
when the bridal carriage and its sin- 
gular cavalcade wound up its gloomy 
court: and when the party (evidently 
expected), alighted in the hall, and were 
received and conducted by the grooms 
©f the chamber to the saloon, Lord 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 23^ 

Adelm stood at the door : he appeared 
pale, and much worn in his appearance; 
but he came anxiously forward, and 
observed in a low voice to Fitzwalter, 
<£ It is unnecessary to say I am unpre- 
pared for this. I knew nothing of it. 
I have had a few minutes conference 
with my mother. Reports of your story 
have reached her through the Craw- 
leys, distorted however and vague : act 
now as you please, but spare the me- 
mory of my father for my sake." 

Fitzwalter wrung his hand in ex- 
pressive silence, and the whole party 
entered the saloon together. Lady 
Clancare, supported by her husband's 
arm, and partly veiled by the Spanish 
mantillo, which fell from her head over 
her whole person, excited evident 
amazement by her presence. 

The titular Dean of Dunore followed^ 
accompanied by the rector; and the 
wildly expressive countenance of the 



238 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

agitated O'Leary, agitated almost to the 
return of his former malady, and the 
black rough head and grim visage of 
Padreen Gar, were seen among the ma- 
ny curious faces which filled up the 
door. The saloon was already occu- 
pied by all the guests of- the castle, with 
the exception of Lord Rosbrin, and 
some of the corps dramatique, who 
were either wearied beyond the power 
of being roused at so unseasonable an 
hour, or had no inclination to appear on 
a scene in which they were not .to act 
the principal part themselves. The 
summonses, however, of Lady Dunore 
had been given to all, and were for the 
most part punctually obeyed ; for La- 
dy Dunore had personally solicited the 
attendance of the ladies, and despatched 
Mr. Pottinger to the gentlemen to re- 
quest they would be present on an oc- 
casion which involved some of the 
dearest interests of hej being. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 239 

Lady Georgina, in a wrapper of In- 
dia muslin, and a drapery of Brussels 
lace shading her face, yawning and pee- 
vish at being disturbed, when the dear- 
est interests of her dearest friend were 
concerned, reclined on a sofa, on 
which Lord Frederick, in a robe de 
chambre, and embroidered Turkey slip- 
pers, had taken his wonted place be- 
side her. 

Mr. Heneage and Miss Crawley had 
descended in such a hurry that the one 
appeared without his stays, and the 
other without her frizette. Mr. Pot- 
tinger was habited in a yellow silk ban- 
yan, presented him by an ex-lady-lieu- 
tenant. Old Crawley, ghastly and agi- 
tated, stood in a remote window, taking 
snuff and pulling down his wig. His 
son had left the castle before day-light, 
under the excuse of attending the elect- 
ion ; and Lady Dunore, pale and flush ■ 
ing alternately, moved about in restless 



240 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

agitation, till on the entrance of her 
son she seized his arm, and, with a 
countenance charged with irony, and 
malicious, yet doubtful triumph, stood 
observing the entrance of General Fitz- 
waiter, Lady Clancare, and their two 
clerical friends. A pause ensued, 
which Lady Dunore at last inter- 
rupted, and dropping her son's arm, 
she came forward, and addressing Lady 
Clancare with a sort of half ironical? 
half hysterical laugh, she said, " If 
there be any truth in the report which 
has just reached us, that your ladyslrip 
has this morning bestowed your fair 

hand on , the gentleman whom 

you now accompany, may I hope I 
am among the first to congratulate you 
on the event, and to wish you all the 
ioy it is likely eventually to produce ?'* 
Lady Clancare, who stood the image 
of her own first appearance in the 
hall of Dunore, the same shy, sly ex- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 241 

pression of countenance, and bashful 
embarrassment of air, replied to this 
ironical congratulation by a low re- 
spectful courtesy, as one who took this 
mock civility tout de bon> and was 
grateful for it. 

Provoked at this unlooked for in- 
terpretation, Lady Dunore, wholly over- 
come by her ungovernable temper, 
went on with increasing acrimony: 
" Had I, Madam, known the extent and 
cast of your ladyship's theatrical abi- 
lities, I should have undoubtedly in- 
duced you to undertake the part of 
Estifania, and we should have had no 
difficulty, it now appears, in providing 
a copper captain." She laughed con- 
vulsively ; and then yielding gradually 
to the violent impetuosity of her tem- 
per, provoked by the modest self- 
satisfied air of Lady Clancare (who 
seemed scarcely to attend to her rav- 
ings), she added in a loud shrill voice: 

VOL. IV. M 



242 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

"Mr. Crawley, why don't you come 
forward ?" 

Crawley, with an air of timid per- 
plexity obeyed. 

" I turn over those two adventurers, 
those conspirators to you, and to the 
laws they have violated ; and I now 
thus publicly acknowledge my impru- 
dence in receiving them under my roof, 
and beg forgiveness of the friends into 
whose society I obtruded them. Lady 
Georgina, Miss Crawley, we will if 
you please, now retire. Mr. Craw- 
ley, the officers ©f justice may do 
their duty. Fitzadelm, give me your 
arm." 

" No, Madam," said Lord Fitzadelm, 
firmly, and leading her back forcibly 
to her seat, " you must not go. Nei- 
ther shall I, until the defamation you 
have indulged in is either substan- 
tiated or disproved ; until my friend, 
General Fitzwalter, is afforded (and in 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 243 

the presence of these, before whom he 
has been so grossly insulted) an op- 
portunity of clearing himself of the 
aspersions with which* y.ou have blasted 
his gallant character." 

66 Your friend ! your friend T % re- 
peated Lady Dunore, bursting into a 
fit of hysterical tears. 6C Are your 
Jriends then to be always my enemies ? 
Am I always to find an adversary in 
my son; or is it only to thwart, oppose, 
and distract me, that you now involve 
yourself in the guilt of an impostor and 
a murderer, by publicly acknowledging 
him as your friend t* — A general mur- 
mur of amazement and consternation 
arose. Lord Fitzadelm, with the air 
of one whose feelings seemed to find 
their own level in the extraordinary and 
unprecedented part he was now called 
on to play, turned to General Fitz- 
walter, and said : " now then is your 
moment — I hold myself answerable 
m 2 



544 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

for the truth of all you shall as- 
sert." 

Fitzwalter gently released himself 
from Lady J^ammm^ s arm ; while Lord <^£r^ 
Frederick, in good-natured considera- 
tion of the anxiety and emotion painted 
in her countenance, led her to a chair, 
and took his place beside her. A si- 
lence of a moment ensued, and Fitz- 
walter advancing, with his wonted dis- 
engaged and elevated air, towards Lady 
Dunore, placed himself before her, and, 
leaning his hand on the back of a chair, 
addressed her with his usual rapid 
energy of utterance. 

" Making a journey on horseback, 
Madam, a short time back on business 
of emergency, I was overtaken in the 
Kilworth mountains by a storm, which 
induced me to take shelter in a mise- 
rable hut. I found it occupied by men, 
whose countenance and appearance 
were of that wild resolute cast which 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 24 5 

in such scenes induces suspicion. The 
poverty of the mistress of this hut, and 
of her naked children, led me to an 
act of perhaps imprudent liberality at 
such a moment ; I meant to have given 
her a guinea. I gave her by mistake a 
golden coin. Proceeding on my jour- 
ney. I fell in with a small military 
party: they stopt and questioned me. 
While thus engaged, the men I had 
left, accompanied by a hundred others^ 
well mounted, and rudely armed, over- 
took the soldiers, who were employed 
in the service of the revenue, or, in the 
language of the country, still-hunting. 
The conflict was desperate. I endea- 
voured to interfere, failed, and rode 
on. 

"The papers have since announced the 
death of one of the military party : the 
murderer remained for a time unknown, 
and after the expiration of some weeks, 
it appears that I stand accused of this 
murder ; of joining the party who op- 
M 3 



246 FLORENCE M ACARTHY. 



posed the military, for the purposes 
of canvassing popularity, and obtaining 
false witnesses to prove, or credulous per- 
sons to believe, that I am the son of the 
elder baron of Fitzadelm, whose death 
was supposed to have occurred three- 
and-twenty years back. This, I believe, 
Mr. Crawley, is the spirit of your in- 
dictment." 

" Ton my credit, Sir, I can't take 
upon me to say just in a moment, but be- 
lieves it is," returned old Crawley. 

" And now/* continued Fitzvvalter, 
" having been brought forward for the 
purpose of being exposed to shame, ob- 
loquy, and ridicule; a refinement upon 
the severity of the law, a propitiatory 
sacrifice to the distinguished persons on 
whose indignant nobility a murderer 
and a conspirator has been unwillingly 
obtruded, may I beg to know from you, 
Mr. Crawley, (who seem the acting and 
active agent in this prosecution) where 
I am now to proceed ?" 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 24/ 

Old Crawley, gradually edging him- 
self out of his way as he approached him, 
sidled towards one of the officers of 
justice, who stood at the door, and 
twitching him by the sleeve, whispered 
him a few words in his ear : the man 
respectfully approached his prisoner, 
and bowed. 

" I suppose," said Fitzwalter, " Lady 
Clancare, as whose husband I have the 
honour to announce myself, may be 
allowed to accompany me. — Is it not 
so, Mr. Crawley?" 

u Give you my honour, Sir, I don't 
know: if it's in the warrant, and Mr. 
Lynch has no objection/' replied Craw- 
ley, gradually taking shelter behind 
Lady Dunore's chair, and directing 
many significant looks to the constable, 
while Miss Crawley whispered Lady 
Dunore, 

4 Sure such a pair were never seen 1 

A pause of a moment ensued: every 
m 4 



248 FLORENCE MACARTHn 

countenance was marked either by cu- 
riosity, amazement, or anxiety; when 
Mr. O'Sullivan advanced into the room, 
and was presented to the marchioness 
by the rector, as the Catholic dean of 
Dunore, and superior of the friary of 
St. John's, as a gentleman to whom, in 
the course of his professional duties, a 
wicked and black conspiracy had dis- 
covered itself, which he was desirous 
of revealing before the gentleman who 
stood there accused of murder should 
be dismissed from her ladyship's pre- 
sence. 

Lady Dunore's countenance bright- 
ened into triumph. She cast a look of 
reproach and indignation at her son ; 
old Crawley, on the contrary, turned 
deadly pale, and sunk on a seat beside 
his sister, whose whispers and sneers 
were all directed at Lady Clancare, 
though addressed to Lady Dunore. 

"Pray sit down, Mr. Dean," cx- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 24$ 

claimed Lady Dunore. t( I am happy 
to make your acquaintance. Georgy, 
love, move a little, and make room for 
the dean. " Pray speak, I am all at- 
tention. Mr. O Sullivan declining the 
honour of the seat intended him, briefly 
entered on the business which had 
brought him to the country., at some 
personal inconvenience, and read from 
a paper, which was afterwards handed 
about, the dying declaration of a man of 
the name of Teague Connor. This per- 
son had been two days before wounded 
to death in a riot, and had sought to 
purchase remission of his crimes under 
the influence of a death-bed remorse, 
by confessing his recent conspiracy 
against the life of an innocent man, a 
stranger, of whom he knew nothing, 
hut that he had seen him give money 
to a poor woman in a cabin. To the 
crime he had confessed, he had been 
instigated by the arts of the notorious 
M 5 



250 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



Jemmy Bryan, who purchased his ac- 
quiescence by the sum of fifty pounds, 
and the protection of a great gentleman 
in the country.' ' 

" The name of this gentleman? con- 
tinued Mr. O'Sullivan, " is in my 
possession; and this declaration is 
signed by three magistrates, who were 
present when it was made, and who 
were persons of the highest respecta- 
bility and consideration. The unfor- 
tunate man who made it still lives; and 
the woman who received the golden 
coin from General Fitzwalter has de- 
posed that she sold it, a few days back, 
for forty shillings, to the said Mr. 
Jemmy Bryan, who has escaped the 
vigilance of the most active research ; 
and except Mr. Crawley can give us 
some assistance in the pursuit, man 
finally elude the grasp of justice." 

The triumph which had flashed from 
Lady Dunore's eyes now r gave way to 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 251 

a look of deep mortification and disap- 
pointment, while the appeal of Mr. 
O'Sullivan turned every eye on old 
Crawley, who, during the singular de- 
nouement, had nearly crept to the door : 
there he was stopped by Lord Frederick, 
who springing after him, and catching 
him by the arm, led him back into the 
room. 

" Stay, my Ching-foo," he cried: " it 
is now very evident we cannot get on 
without you, my mirror of magistrates. 
We cannot yet dispense with your pre- 
sence/' 

" Give you my honour, was only 
just stepping out for a little thieves 9 vi- 
negar in respect of the hate" replied 
old Crawley, as he took his seat, mut- 
tering, as he passed his sister, in a tone 
of agony — " and Con to desert me in 
this dilemia, and think only of himself 
and his election !" 

" I have only to add," continued Mr. 



252 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

O'Sullivan, " that it is my firm belief 
that this conspiracy against the cha- 
racter and life of a brave and high- 
spirited gentleman has been contrived 
for the sole purpose of preventing his 
making claims to a title and property of 
which he has been long deprived by the 
most iniquitous proceedings ; and I am 
also ready to declare upon oath, in a 
court of justice, that I believe the per- 
son who now has the title and name of 
General Fitzwalter is Walter de Monte- 
nay Fitzadelm, son and heir to the late 
Baron Walter Fitzwalter, and that he is 
the true Marquis of Dunore" 

" And / declare," exclaimed old 
Crawley, worked up by the exigency of 
the moment, while universal emotion 
and amazement were pictured in every 
countenance ; " I declare, that the gen- 
tleman, if its gentleman you call him, 
Mr, O'Sullivan, is Micky LafFan, a bit 
of a bye-blow of my Lord Fitzadelm., 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 253 

by one Judy Laffan ; and if I don't prove 
it, and many respectable witnesses 
along with me, I'll just give my head 
for a Cronobane halfpenny." 

" How can that be P exclaimed a 
voice from the door, " and I, Micky 
Laffan, here to the fore." 

The gaunt figure of Padreen Gar 
strided forward, and he continued : 

" And you thought, Mr. Crawley, 
I'd never come back from transporta- 
tion; but I tould you I would, Sir, 
when you laste expected me, and am 
here, you see, to make good my word/' 
As he spoke, he wiped off the yellow 
stain that covered his face, and remov- 
ing the black hairs which concealed 
a handsome auburn head, he asked, 
with his wonted air of resolute intrepi- 
dity, * do you know me now, Mr. 
Crawley, Sir ? Isn't that the coolin of 
the family all the world over ?" and he 
run his coarse fingers through locks 



254 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

curled and burnished as Lord Adelm'g 
own : " and hopes I have too much of a 
gentleman in me, Mr. Crawley, and too 
much of the blood of my father in my 
veins, to do the unhandsome thing, or 
save myself from trouble by bringing 
ruination on the head of an innocent 
man and a fine gentleman ; and you 
may sind me back to Botany mow, if 
you plaze, Mr. Crawley, for another 
ruction at Ballydab, as yez did before, 
but defies the world to say I ever in- 
jured man or baste, barring a tythe 
proctor, or a bit of an exciseman, or 
cropping a taste off Jemmy Bryan's odd 
ear, just for fun, and carries my mark 
with him to this day ; and if you don't 
believe what I say, there's the certificate 
of my birth, and there's the gentleman, 
God bless him, that signed it, and was 
minister at Fitzadelm church the day I 
was born." 

Padreen Gar presented a piece of 



FLORENCE MACARTIIT. 25 £ 



dirty paper to the rector, who acknow- 
ledged the signature, and recollected 
the baptism of an* illegitimate son of 
Lord Walter Fitzadelm, at the period 
of the date, whom, like many others 
of the offspring of that lord's illicit 
loves, he had abandoned to the want 
and misery which eventually led to a 
life of lawlessness and desperation. 

Old Crawley sunk back in his chair, 
and either was unable or unwilling to 
make any further effort. Lady Dunore 
was motionless and silent from fear, 
doubt, and consternation ; her eyes, al- 
most starting from their inflamed soc- 
kets, wandered alternately from the 
face of her son to Fitzwalter and Pad- 
reen Gar ; and, differing as they all 
did in personal appearance, she beheld, 
or fancied she could trace, a resem- 
blance, such as is often seen in members 
of the same family, however vague or 
indefinite. 



255 FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 

The rest of the company were silent 
from amazement and anxious expecta- 
tion, while eager curiosity was apparent 
in the looks of those even least interested 
in the results of this curious scene. 

Pi tz waiter turned his eyes on Lord 
Adelm, as if, before he himself occupied 
attention, he wished to give him an op 
portunityof playing a part, distinguished 
in proportion to its singularity and dis- 
interestedness. Lord Adelm, though 
languid, and occasionally abstracted 
as one self-involved and distressingly 
preoccupied, understood the appeal 
made to all his better feelings, and came 
or ward to reply to it. 

" It may," he said, addressing hig 
mother, " it may tend to put a speedy 
termination to a scene naturally cal- 
culated to distress and agitate you, 
Madam, if, without further discus- 
sions, at a moment when they are 
scarcely available, I, who have been so 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 257 

long supposed the presumptive heir of 
the Dunore estates and titles, come for- 
ward to assert my solemn belief in the 
actual existence of my uncle's only son, 
De Montenay Fitzadelm : further, it is 
my belief, that the celebrated and dis- 
tinguished man, who now stands before 
me, is that person; and I am proud to 
confess, that I have been possessed of 
the secret of his existence, and of the 
efforts he has been making to establish 
his just claims since he first arrived in 
this country — claims which it would be 
impolitic as vain to oppose or resist. The 
perilous confidence his noble and gener- 
ous nature thus placed in me has been 
the purchase of my everlasting esteem 
and gratitude. I will not say I am 
happy, that is not in human nature; but 
I am proud to be enabled to welcome 
the long injured Marquis of Dunore to 
the possessions of his ancestors." He 
held out his hand to Fitzwalter, and the 



258 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

embrace of the distinguished cousins 
was a signal to the prompt feelings of 
O'Leary and Padreen Gar. Their cry 
of long live Walter de Montenay 
Fitzadelm, Marquis of Dunore, and 
GaLReadh-Aboe, was echoed by per- 
sons who had forced their way into the 
hall, and re-echoed by the multitude 
who occupied the court without. 

Lady Dunore, now agitated t€ up to 
her bent," wrung her hands in con- 
vulsive emotion, exclaiming, that Lord 
Adclm sought only to oppose and 
distract her, calling on Mr. Crawley to 
come forward, and intreating her friends 
to stand by her to secure the conspira- 
tors, and to discredit a tale in which 
there was not, there could not be, a sha- 
dow of truth. 

Every eye was turned on the hero of 
the scene, who waited evidently for the 
first burst of Lady Dunore's passion to 
exhaust itself before he addressed her. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 259 



He then said — " that a story so extraor- 
dinary, so strongly opposed to your 
ladyship's maternal interests and ambi- 
tion, should startle your belief, is na- 
tural and excusable ; of its truth, how- 
ever, there is one witness in this room, 
whose testimony you cannot doubt ; I 
mean Mr. Crawley." 

Old Crawley, faint, ghastly, the vic- 
tim of his constitutional timidity, and of 
facts which were bearing all before 
them, shrunk back, and seemed almost 
to diminish to the eye, as every feature, 
every limb, yielded to gradual contrac- 
tion. General Fitzwalter, however, ad 
vanced, drew him forward, and led him 
for a few minutes on one side. What- 
ever had been the subject of their 
conference, when old Crawley turned 
round, though still agitated and trem- 
bling, the colour had returned to his 
livid cheek ; and when he was led 
forward to his patroness, who was weep- 



250 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

ing on his sister's shoulder, Lady Geor- 
gina being too much amused to lend 
her friend any assistance, he endea- 
voured to address her. 

" Lady Emily Fitzadelm," he began; 
but the wild start of the person he thu9 
addressed, the flash of indignation which 
sparkled in her haughty eyes, again an- 
nihilated his returning courage ; and 
uttering an inarticulate — u The Lord 
save us F he hastily retreated. 

" Mr. Crawley, Madam," said thr 
Marquis of Dunore, " would have 
sought your ladyship's forgiveness for 
having so long concealed an event in 
which you are so deeply interested. 
He would plead in excuse, that zeal 
for you and your children, which origi- 
nated his acquiescence in a crime, it is 
now his intention to expiate by a full 
and complete discovery. His testimony, 
however, may be dispensed with : the 
evidences in my favour are sufficiently 



TLORENCE MACARTHY. 26 1 

numerous and strong to leave me inde- 
pendent of his assistance. His liberty, 
perhaps his life, was in my power— 
they are so no more. I have pledged 
my honour for their safety, on certain 
Conditions. His reputation, his ill ac- 
quired property, I cannot save. I have 
now little to add. It will depend upon 
the prudence and discretion of your 
ladyship's counsellors, whether in act- 
ing as the representative of your suf- 
fering son, Robert Fitzadelm, com- 
monly called Marquis of Dunore, you 
shall bring our mutual claims before a 
court ; when it is for the honour of our 
family that they should be referred to 
private decision. 

" For what purposes, and at whose 
instigation, I was in my boyhood torn 
from my country and my birth-right, 
and sold to slavery, Mr. Crawley can 
best tell you ; for the rest, my story 
may be briefly related. 



2^2 FLORENCE M AC ARTHY. 

u The generous person into whose 
hands I fell rescued me from the hor- 
rors of a condition which still exists 
among the professors of Christianity, to 
the shame of humanity. The precosity 
of intellect, which had been nourished 
by the lessons of my good and learned 
fosterer and preceptor, O'Leary, told 
powerfully in my favour with him 
whose property I became. I was soon 
made the companion and instructor of 
his only son, saved the boy's life in a 
surprise attempted by some native In- 
dians, who surrounded us in a dis- 
tant sporting journey ; received my 
manumission as a rccompence ; grew 
unconsciously on the father's affections ; 
became the child of his adoption on 
the premature death of his only son, 
and succeeded to his property on his 
demise. 

" The cause of liberty was my natural 
vocation, and I hastened to the South 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 26"S 



American continent, to join its stand- 
ard, then slowly beginning to unfurl 
in the land of oppression. My own 
story lay rankling in secret at the bot- 
tom of my heart; and I had almost 
learnt to abhor the name and title 
which had been the cause of -my 
being reduced below the state of man. 
When I arrived in England, how- 
ever, with Don Narino, in my inquiries 
after my own family, I found there 
only existed an empty title, without 
property, rank, or consideration, and 
a representative whom my re -appearance 
would blast with eternal infamy. There 
was nothing to be gained by a discovery, 
but the destruction of those nearest to 
me by blood. I returned to South 
America without reclaiming a name I 
almost blushed to own, that I might 
make one I should glory in wearing. 
" In justice to myself, I must observe, 



264 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

that the protector of my infancy, the 
instructor of my youth, was never for- 
gotten — my dear foster-father 0* Leary ' 
He paused, and a smile of mingled 
emotion and beneficence threw its ra- 
diance over his splendid countenance. 
O'Leary hustled forward, and passing 
the tears from his swimming eyelids, 
he stood with a look of proud triumph 
beside him, swinging his hat, and 
humming away his emotion. 

" Of the persons of respectability in 
my father s service, I could only re- 
member the son of our land steward 
Darby Crawley, an attorney in the 
neighbourhood of Court Fitzadelm. 
To this person I wrote, requesting him 
to forward an inclosed letter to Ter- 
rence O'Leary, (whose wife had been 
in the service of the Baroness Fitz- 
adelm), containing five hundred pounds; 
but in case of his death to return it 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 265 

to my banker in London. In my letter 
to O'Leary, I entrusted the secret of my 
existence, and my intention of coming 
forward to claim my right and title on 
the death of my uncle. '* 

u The murthuring pirate !'* inter- 
rupted O'Leary, shaking his hand at 
old Crawley, who sat behind the chair 
of his trembling and now agitated sis- 
ter. " And never gave me a scrubal of 
it, as I tould youi lordship before ; but 
had me flogged in the rebellion for a 
latin note he found in my pocket — the 
Ignoramus!" 

" The event of my captivity in the 
Caraccas," continued Lord Dunore, " is 
already before the public. One inci- 
dent arose from this event, which it 
is curious to mention, as bearing forci- 
bly on the circumstances of the moment. 
The keeper of my dungeon was a Spa- 
niard, who spoke a little English. He 
had occasionally addressed me in that 

VOL. IV. N 



266 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



language, and eyed me with a curio- 
sity which indicated an interest beyond 
that of our present relation — it was the 
interest of recognition : and inquiries, 
mutually made and answered, disco- 
vered in the person of the keeper of my 
dungeon a sailor, one of the crew who 
had assisted in kidnapping me in my 
boyhood from the Irish coast. 

"This man had suffered much in the 
interval which had elapsed : he had 
been taken by Barbary pirates — sold to 
slavery, and, in the vicissitudes of his 
life, had entered into the service of 
Spain, been wounded, disabled, and 
made one of the keepers of a royal 
prison in Spanish America. He had 
considered his sufferings as retributions 
for the crimes he had assisted in com- 
mitting on the Irish shores; and in the 
hope that he was now about to be re- 
conciled with heaven, he effected my 
escape from prison, accompanied me in 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 267 

my flight, and is at present my mate, 
and on board my own vessel, which 
Jies in harbour near Cork. In confirma- 
tion of these facts, he can produce a 
letter, dropped on the deck by one of 
the disguised persons who had brought 
me out to the vessel, whieh he had pre- 
served, in the hope of one day expiating 
his crime by being of use to me. The 
signature of this letter I have shewn to 
Lord Fitzadelm. Its address is to Mr. 
Crawley, from Court Fitzadelm, twen- 
ty-three years back, and the post-mark 
Is a town in the neighbourhood. Wit- 
nesses, no less efficient than this letter, 
are — a groom of my father's who car- 
ried me in the chaise, which now awaits 
at the door of this castle, and who. has 
been reduced to beggary, under the 
Irish epithet of the Baccah ; Terence 
Oge O'Leary, my foster-father ; the 
JJcverend Denis O'Sullivan, my mo- 
thers kinsman and confessor, to whom 
N 2 



265 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



she bequeathed the certificate of my 
birth and her own marriage (urged to 
this cautionary proceeding by the in- 
trigues of which she died the broken- 
hearted victim) ; — the miniatures of 
both my parents in their youth in 
his possession, to both of which I 
bear a strong resemblance ; — and the 
Reverend the Rector of Dunore, who 
remembered me in my childhood, 
when he was himself a young man, just 
gone into orders, and made curate of 
the parish of Court Fitzadelm. I have 
nothing more to add, but that my story, 
strange and improbable as it may ap- 
pear, belongs to the history of a long 
disorganized country, where, under the 
influence of political misrule, the moral 
relations of society too often sit loosely: 
and where the demoralization of the peo- 
ple is a necessary dogma in the code of 
those who rule by national debasement 
and disunion. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 269 

" Happily, the national spirit and na- 
tional virtues, founded in strong and 
warm affections, and in that animal 
courage which rarely allies itself to 
baseness, has always formed a barrier 
to systematic degradation : but it is 
melancholy to add that my story is 
not without its parallel in the private 
history of the land."* 

Then, after a brief silence, preserved 
by the amazement of some, and the 
still eager curiosity of others, he added, 
in a voice full of conciliation and respect, 
and more especially addressing himself 
to the weeping and exhausted Lady Du- 
nore, " This is not a moment to press 
upon your ladyship's credence the facts 
of a story it can neither be your interest 
or inclination to admit. But I would at 
least induce you to believe that the 



* See the great ^p^ley trial for the titles and 
estates of Althams and Anglesey. 

M 3 



270 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

mother of Lord Adelm Fitzadelm must 
always be to me an object of respect, 
of interest, and consideration 3 and that 
whether you persist to refuse, or yield 
to the claims I have now briefly stated, 
you will, at least, I trust, remain mis- 
tress of this castle, so long as it may 
be your convenience or pleasure to 
continue in Ireland. 

" And now, Mr. Crawley," he added, 
with his radiant smile, u if you insist orj 
the execution of your warrant, I must 
obey, and accompany your officers of 
justice to Dublin. I confess, however, 
I had planned a journey of a very dif- 
ferent description." He coloured deep- 
ly, and threw his eyes on Lady Clan- 
care, who, down-cast and blushing, was 
deserted in this moment of prosperous 
triumph by that gaiety and elasticity 
of spirit which in less fortunate hours 
had borne her above the adverse 
circumstances of her forlorn destiny. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 2?1 

The bashfulness of a bride, fresh from 
the altar, and the powerful emotions 
incidental to her peculiar position, 
as she now stood, the mistress of the 
superb mansion, where she had first 
appeared a prisoner, where she had 
lately stood accused of conspiracy and 
imposture, left her confused, silent, and 
shrinking from the glances which the 
slight allusion of the Marquis of Du- 
nore to their respective situations had 
drawn to her. person. A few words 
having passed between the agitated 
Crawley and Lord Fitzadelm, the latter 
addressing his cousin, observed aloud, 
that Mr. Crawley had referred every 
thing to him for the present. 

" Then, in that case," observed Lord 
Dunore, stepping back, and drawing 
the arm of the new and bridal mar- 
chioness through his, " w T c shall pur- 
sue our route according to our original 
intention.' ' 

N4 



2/2 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Lady Clancare, now letting go his 
arm, advanced timidly to Lady Dunore, 
and took her hand with that fondling 
and playful manner which had once 
such charms for her capricious friend. 

u No/' said Lady Dunore, snatching 
it hastily from her, and in a tone of 
angry indignation; " whatever may 
happen, I shall always consider your 
conduct as false and deceptive." 

u How !" said Lady Clancare, all 
her wonted spirit rallying to her eyes 
and countenance. u False! Was it false 
to confide to you the sole important 
secret of my life ? Was it deceptive to 
confess to you the motives which led 
me to your castle to seek and to ac- 
cept your hospitality? If I have de- 
ceived you y Madam, it was by the frank 
relation of facts, calculated indeed by 
their improbability to win on your at- 
tention, but yet confided to you at 
some risk, because, though I may have 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 2/3 

availed myself of some mysterious 
truths, I disdained falsehood even for 
the purpose of effecting my dearest in- 
terests — and now," she added, with a 
sudden burst of gaiety flashing over her 
whole countenance, and animating every 
gesture, " I would fain, like one of my 
own heroines, wind up the denoue- 
ment of my story with some touch of 
humour or pathos — some appeal to the 
feelings I address, which should enable 
me to retire with applause : but hither- 
to adversity has been >.iy muse, and 
now, placing her hand in Lord Du- 
nore's, " she deserts me. 

" What remains, therefore, to say of 
myself, must be deferred to calmer 
moments, when as ennuyte, as other 
great personages with the 1 toujour* 
Perdrixy I shall seek to diversify the 
calm of my dull prosperity by a re- 
currence to the vicissitudes of my early 
life:— then seated by my Irish turf tire, 
> 5 



274 FLORENCE MACAHTHY. 

with my own amusement for my ob- 
ject, and my husband for my critical 
reviewer, I shall take the liberty of put- 
ting myself in my own book, and shall 
record the events of this last month of 
my life under the title of —Florence. 
Macarthy" 



FLOHLNCE 



MACARTHY. 



275 



CHAPTER VII. 



And thus the whirligig of time 
Brings in its revenges. 

Milton. 



CONCLUSION. 

Turn eccentric and visionary, but 
high-minded Lord Adelm Fitzadelm, 
had just remained in Ireland long 
enough to lcam that his law agent, 
Conway Crawley, had been elected 
member in his stead for Glannacrime ; 
and the papers soon after announced 
his departure for the North Pole. 

Meantime, his mother, backed by 
powerful friends, and urged by interest- 
ed counsellors, refused, on her return to 
England, to acknowledge the claims 



276 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

made by the gallant guerilla chief to 
the title and property in possession 
of her insane son : a suit was com- 
menced, which ended in her defeat, 
and only served to expose the infamy 
of her late husband to " the glarish eye 
of day" The trial, however, had occu- 
pied, amused, and agitated her ; and the 
overthrow of her hopes furnished her 
new sources of real affliction and com- 
plaint, in place of the ideal sorrows she 
had loved to create and to deplore. 

As Miss Crawley had prudently sepa- 
rated herself from her brother Darby, 
with the desertion of his success and 
fortunes, and had accompanied Lady 
Dunore to England, she availed herself 
of the depression of mind to which 
that lady, for a time, resigned her va- 
riable feelings ; and, to her infinite 
triumph, she had the happiness of 
seeing rouge, Al macks, and (i Georgy 
love," sacrificed to round- eared cap*, 



FLORENCE MAC ART HY, 277 



religious conversaziones, and the so- 
ciety of the elect and hungry in the 
Lord, who eat their way to their pa- 
tronesses' conversion with true gastro- 
nomic, as well as polemic zeal ; while 
Miss Crawley, the directress of her 
conscience and her house, gradually as- 
sumed a power over both, to which the 
unregulated imagination of Lady Du- 
nore, easily worked on by terror and 
mysticism, made no resistance. 

The leases and mortgages, inevitably 
rendered unavailable by the unexpected 
re-appearance of the real Marquis of 
Dunore, with the loss of his agency, 
nearly reduced old Crawley to a state of 
ruin, which an investigation of the 
commissioners of' enquiry into his offi- 
cial emoluments finally completed. 
His military son had been ordered 
abroad. His eldest son, under an accu- 
mulation of gambling debts, occupied 
an apartment in a prison over which he 



278 FLOKKNCE MACARTHY. 

had once presided ; and old Crawley, 
in his extreme distress, was reduced to 
applying for relief to his favourite son, 
Conway, who had, however, on the 
first turn of his father s fortunes, sha- 
ken him off, on the plea of his immoral 
conduct and lost character. 

Conway Townsend Crawley, Esq. 
member for Glannacrime, had found an 
early opportunity of attracting the eyes 
of persons in power, by serving in 
a cause in which they were interested, 
and had purchased a situation of trust 
and emolument, at the expense of every 
manly and every gentleman-like feeling.- 
Pushing his way into high society by the 
same intrepid effrontery as he had push- 
ed his way through life to for tune, he hap- 
pened one day to be seated at the head 
of his sumptuous table, entertaining a 
select party of official grandees, when 
Mr. Darby Crawley from Ireland was 
announced, and, to his horror and con- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 579 

sternation, his vulgar, blundering, but 
unfortunate father, entered the room, 
and, throwing his arms round him, ex- 
claimed : — 

" Con, honey, sure you won't turn 
your back on your poor ould father, like 
the rest of the world? — he that made 
a counsellor and a member of parlia- 
ment of you, and that warned you 
against poethry, and pathritism, and ga- 
nius ; and owes to him what you are at 
this minute, if you were twenty times 
as great/' 

The ridicule of this scene, prolonged 
by the good-nature of his guests and 
friends, was ineffacable ; and from that 
moment, Conway Crawley resolved on 
getting rid of a relative, who blended a 
disgraceful vulgarity and lost character 
with an effrontery which, like his own, 
was unconquerable. 

In a few weeks, therefore, Mr. Craw- 
lev, through the interest of his son, 



880 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

being still a loyal, though almost a lost 
man, was appointed consul to His Bri- 
tannic Majesty at a Turkish port. 
Meantime, consigned by that son to the 
back stairs, and housekeeper s room of 
his house in London, he felt the indig- 
nity with parental pride : but his natural 
cheeriness of temperament prevailed 
over his misfortune ; and while he sat 
with the priestess of conserves, enjoy- 
ing a sup of hot, his head full of tur- 
banned Turks, and the elephant in Blue 
Beard, on which he expected shortly to 
ride, with some acrimonious reference 
to the political power, and unnatural 
conduct of his son, he occasionally wat 
heard to sing forth— 

<f 'Tis a very fine thing to be father by law, 
To a very magnificent three-tail'd bashaw.'* 

His son, meantime, becoming a ser- 
vant of all work in his political voca- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 281 



tion, and remunerated accordingly, in 
his various capacities, literary, official, 
and diplomatic, used, not respected, 
tolerated, not esteemed, continues to 
live 

<c With 'pay, and scorn content, 

Bcws and totes on in court and parliament." 

On the successful termination of the 
great Fitzadelm cause, which had for 
some months occupied the public at- 
tention, the Marquis and Marchioness 
of Dunore took possession of their 
ancient castle and vast possessions in 
Ireland, and fixed there their chief re- 
sidence. For, convinced by a close 
and attentive observation, that the land 
of their birth was hourly sinking in the 
scale of nations, under the oppression of 
petty, delegated authority, and by the 
neglect and absence of its natural pro- 
tectors, they acted, with their accus- 
tomed energy and perseverance, upon the 







282 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

dictates of experience, and illustrated, by 
their example, the truth of a maxim 
now more generally felt and admitted, 
that 

IRELAND CAN BEST BE SERVED IK 
IRELAND. 



N O T E. 



(1) Page i 18.— The constant cry of Sir H. 
Sydney to the queen was, " Your majesty must 
plant justice here." His manner of giving in his 
resignation was singular, as coming from an Irish 
lord-lieutenant. u If," he says, " that cow- 
ardly policy be still allowed to keep the Irish in 
continual dissension, for fear lest through their 
quiet might follow I know not what, then my 
adfice to your majesty both is and shall be, to 
withdraw me and all charge here. It is flatter- 
ing to Ireland, that the few men of talent who 
have been sent to govern that kingdom became 
ever after her firm friends. Of this Sir H, 
Sydney, the unfortunate Lord Essex,* and Lord 
Chesterfield, are proofs. 



* The fiarl of E^sex here alluded to is not the favourite 
of Elizabeth's court, hut the unfortunate nobleman wUi* 
was murdered in the Tower. — See Essex's Letters, 



THE END, 



B, C'lahke, Printer, Well-Street, Loudon, 




ERRATA. 



VOL. I. 



Page 4 


line 1 9 for 


aouiheri read 


sourhrra 


so 


arbor 


ardour 


s« 


3 


Marleroont 


Ci'ai lemon* 


*J 


14 


Smart' 


Smart's 


143 


nit. 


settling 


setting 


J57 




trouble 


trr ubie yo« 


106 


S 1 


furzes 


frizei 


9i6 


13 


svibjiciant 


subjiciunt 


«90 


penult 


dele now 


301 


18 


Bclllanus 


Bcllianis 


•07 


1 1 


one 


one's 


SOS 


rb. 


torabrua 


tonitrua 



VOL. II. 



1 


5 


parvcot 


parvieat 


45 


IS 


of 


off 


to 


IS 


genius 


genus 


«« 




liquor 


liqueur- 


1 37 


10 


dele nowr 




1*? 


«0 


observed 


and observo4 


161 


17 


his 


her 


19! 


M 


dele soon 




*4t> 


* f f . 


Italiea 


Italian 


tic 


ult. 


push 


proa 1 



VOL. 



15 

104 
1^7 
1»1 
«27 
9«S 



read 

orguil 
dele aud 
her 

stagnate 
real 



is *t least a glorious illusion 

oig.eil 

per 

tugnaot 
led 



VOL. IV. 



79 


u 


the 


to the 


1 17 


10 


Hebemica 


Hib:rnica 


133 


17 


recular 


rernler 


143 


14 


believe 


believes 


264 


7 


parsing 


pressing 



Some errors in punctuation which affect the sense will be perceived 
which the reader is requested to correct en passant. 



3 9999 05468 9524 



