ZULMA, 

AND 

OTHER TALES. 

VOL. I, 



ZULMA, 



AND 

OTHER TALES: 

TO WHICH IS FRiriXID 

AN ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

BY 

THE BARONESS DE ST A EL HOLSTEIN. 



TRANSLATED FRvM THE FRENCH. 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 
VOL. I. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED TOR HENRY COLBURN, 
CONDUIT-STREET* HANOYER-SQUART. 

1313. 



451 t 



B. Clarke, Printer, WeJI-Streel, London. 



A |f ESSAY 

ON 

FIC TIONS. 



i 



i 



AN 

ESSAY 

ON 

FICTIONS. 



Of all the intellectual faculties be- 
stowed on man, there is perhaps none 
more precious than his imagination. 
Human life is little calculated to be 
a state of happiness, and lessons of 
philosophy have less influence in* di- 
minishing the sum of evils than those 
B 2 



S ESS .A Y ON FICTIONS. 

felicitous anticipations or recollections 
by which we are enabled to collect the 
few transitory pleasures scattered over 
earth, and to lengthen out the inter- 
val of enjoyment. 

It is unnecessary to expatiate on the 
pernicious consequences resulting from 
an unlimited indulgence of the imagi- 
nation (a theme so often dwelt on by 
frigid prudence or feeble mediocrity) : 
man requires excitement, and it is as 
unlikely that he should ever renounce 
the highest luxury of his moral na- 
ture, as that those who possess the 
talents should resign the privilege of 
extending his sphere of mental enjoy- 
meat 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 9 

The number of evident and neces- 
sary truths is small, and insufficient to 
satisfy the soul. The illustrious few 
by whose labours they have been dis- 
covered, are unquestionably among 
the first benefactors of man, but his 
gratitude is also due to those, who by 
the magic of the pen have created the 
sweetest illusions, or called forth the 
noblest emotions of Which his nature 
is susceptible. Metaphysical precision 
revolts the heart. Human life exhibits 
but a series of commencements, in 
which no precise line or limit is dis- 
cernible. Virtue alone reposes on an 
eternal basis : happiness is vague and 
fugitive ; examined too strictly, unless 
it vanishes like those brilliant shadows 
b 3 



10 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

which sometimes shoot along our path, 
but which wholly disappear if we at- 
tempt to reach them. 

It would be injurious to fictitious 
compositions to attribute to them no 
other merit than that of affording a 
momentary gratification. When they 
merely amuse the vacant hour, they 
may be said to speak to the eyes ; but 
they are capable of something more 
when they speak to the heart. They 
then become the successful interpreters 
of truth r and the eloquent advocates 
of virtue. 



The two primitive faculties in man 
are reason and imagination. From 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 1 1 

these are the others derived, and to 
these they are all subordinate. The 
empire of fiction, like that of the imagi- 
nation, is most powerfully supported by 
the passions. Philosophy indeed often 
acts an important part in directing its 
operations ; but to be an useful, she 
must be an invisible auxiliary. It 
should be a prismatic ray that is shed 
over the creations of fancy. The light 
of day dissipates its beautiful illusions, 
and with them all its graces are de- 
stroyed. 

In speaking of fictitious composi- 
tions, I shall consider theai in the re- 
lations of beauty and utility, since in 
works of this description the former 
b 4 



12 ISSAY ON FICTIONS. 

may exist without the latter; but the 
moral aim is totally defeated by the ab- 
sence nflnterestaLL attraction. Thephi- 
los >^hic principle ought not to be too 
apparent, nor should the moral appli- 
cation be officiously obtruded. If we 
would seize the passes of the heart, the 

object must not be too Jong antici- 
pated. 

I shall consider mythological fictions 
mere 7 y as they may be made subser- 
vient to poetical embellishment, though 
they might also be examined under the 
aspect of their religious influence ;* 

* I have read several chaptcri of a book en- 
titled, " L'Esprit des Religions," by Mr. Ben. 
jamin Constant, in which (he most delicate and 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 15 



but this point of view is foreign to my 
purpose, and it is simply to their lite- 
rary merits that I shall direct my at- 
tention. 

All works of imagination may be dis- 
tributed into three classes ; to the first 
of which belongs the marvellous and 
the allegorical, to the second the his- 
torical ; the third includes whatever 
is invented or imitaud, where nothing 
is true, but every thing is probable. 
This subject might alone afford mate- 



interesting parts of this subject are skilfully elu- 
cidated. It is a debt the author owes to loiters 
and philosophy, that this work should be com- 
pleted and presented to the public. 



14 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

rials for an essay of some length. It 
embraces almost every literary ques- 
tion, and might naturally lead to an 
analysis of the most eminent authors; 
but it will be sufficient for my purpose 
if I prove, that novel? and romances, 
which afford faithful exhibitions of 
human nature, and which describe the 
movements of the heart with eloquence 
and truth, with delicacy and pathos, 
must be the most useful of all fictions, 
and supply the best moral excitement 



ISSAY ON FICTIONS. 15 



§ t 

OF THE MARVELLOUS, 



The pleasure produced by works of 
the marvellous cast is quickly ex- 
hausted. Alen must become children 
before they can be captivated with 
those gigantic images which have no 
original in nature, or yield to mere fan- 
tastic impressions of terror, which have 
no foundation in truth. Philosophers 
must imbibe the facility of the vulgar, 
when they tolerate the perversion of 
thought in mysticism and allegory. 
The my halogy of the antients is com- 
monly composed of simple fables, the 



16 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

legendary superstitions of the Pagan 
world ; but we may also discover in it 
a series of allegories, personifying the 
intellectual powers and passions of the 
soul. It cannot be denied that there is 
a peculiar i a primal felicity, in the choice 
of those fables, and that they display a 
magnificence of fancy which ensures to 
their authors an imperishable fame: to 
their agency we are indebted for the 
splendid embellishments of style, and 
the creation of a, language consecrated 
to poetry, and thus preserved from the 
vulgar associations contracted by fami- 
liar use. But whatever merit belongs 
to this species of composition, has 
been engrossed by the first inventors, 
and their imitators have no tribute to 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 17 

receive from posterity. It is by a 
higher effort of genius that great effects 
are produced from the simple opera- 
tions of nature. If the oracles have 
ceased, if the speJls of mngic be sus- 
pended, the poet may still discover 
phenomena, metamorphoses, and mi- 
racles in the passions of men. The 
human heart supplies a new and inex- 
haustible mythology, Which opens a 
heaven and a hell to him who is per- 
mitted to explore its recesses, and to 
lay open its mysteries. 

AVhenever preternatural agency is 
employed, it checks oursympathy, and 
chills the sentiments with which it 
has been associated. Where amuse- 



18 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

rant is t!i3 sole object, it is to be 
sought in every possible direction. It 
has been sa d, that 14 The eyes are al- 
ways ch.ldren, and, in so. ne respects* 
the imagination is equ -illy inf iiitine." 
Its business is to ch-at life of care, to 
beguile the tedium of time, to produce 
the day-dreams which lengthen out the 
joys of existence. It suspends our 
hours, yet fills up the v >id of leisure, 
and, by its playful activity, substitutes 
recreation for repose. But when ima- 
gination is to be made subservient to a 
moral end, it becomes necessary to 
abridge this capricious liberty, and to 
reduce it to a si mple and consistent plan. 



Even Homer and Virgil are, in some 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 19 

respects, injured by the association 
formed between heroes and gods, and 
the conflicts of passion and destiny. 
Scarcely has the inventor obtained 
grace for a species of composition, 
the creation of which constitutes his 
first glory. — When Dido conceives a 
fatal passion for ./Eneas, in consequence 
of having h* Id in her arms the God of 
Love, whom by the artifices of Venus 
she has i nnocen tly caressed as Ascani us, 
the disappointed reader repines that 
the source of this affection was not 
rather traced to the simple movements 
of the heart. When we discover that 
it is the gods who inspire Achilles 
with rage or grief, and that his victories 
are also the effects of their omnipo- 



20 essay on fictions; 
tcnce, our admiration is diverted 
equally from Jupiter and the hero. The 
former is an abstract being, insulated 
from sympathy; the latter the passive 
instrument of destiny and the real in- 
terest of the eharncter— Its powerful 
energy escapes through the marvellous 
cloud in which it is enveloped. In the 
interfer rice of preternalu al agency, 
there is also something at once un- 
expected and inevitable, which de- 
stroys all tiie pleasures of sympathy. 
When Priam goes to Achilles, to 
implore the hody of Hector, I would 
fain dread the danger to which he ex- 
poses himself for paternal Jove; I 
would tremble with him on entering 
the tent of the terrible Achilles ; I 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. $] 

would hang on every word that falls 
from his venerable lips ; at once touch- 
ed with his pathetic eloquence, and 
anxious for the decision it may pro- 
duce. But I know that Mercury con- 
ducts Priam through the Grecian camp j 
that Thetis, by the mandate of Jupiter, 
lias disposed her son to restore the 
body of Hector. With this minute in- 
formation, it is impossible that 1 should 
remain in doubt or suspense. Atten- 
tion flags, and, but for the name of the 
divine Homer, I should scarcely be at 
the pains to read a discourse which 
succeeds, instead of leading to the 
situation. 



I have remarked that there was in 



J-t ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

preternatural agency something unex- 
pected, which, however opposed to 
foreknowledge of the event, was equally 
inimical to the pleasure of anticipa- 
tion : such is the effect produced by 
a sudden interposition of the gods, 
when, by an extraordinary effort of fa- 
vour or protection, they baffle the best 
concerted measures, and divert the 
course of events from all human calcu- 
lation. 

Unquestionably, the gods are here 
made to take the place of circumstance 
and casualty, and in their elaborate 
machinery we have chance personified; 
but from works of the imagination 
such ideas should if possible be ex- 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. vj 7 

eluded. Whatever is invented should 
be probable ; every mystery ought to 
admit explanation from moral causes. 
To establish this principle is to give 
them a more philosophic cast, and to 
afford greater scope to talent, since the 
real or imaginary difficulties from which 
the hero is drawn, by a stroke of des- 
tiny, are always awkward and con- 
strained. It is man who should in- 
terest man : perennial inspiration there 
only is to be found; it is there only 
that genius discovers the source 
of terrible and interesting emotions. 
The Inferno of Dante presents a scene 
less dreadful than the sanguinary crimes 
it has been our fate to witness. The true 
sublime, even of those Epic poems in 



2 * ESSAY OX FICTIONS. 

*m the splendour of preternatural 
machinery is most conspicuous, is inde- 
pendent of its power. What we admire 
in Milton's Satan is not fhe>W but 
the man: what remains of Achilles is his 
ardor and impetuosity: what we vv.sh 
to forget in the passion of Rinaldo for 
Armida is the magic intermingled with 
the attractions which have given it 
birth: what delights and touches in 
the Eneid is the sentiment which be- 
longs to every age, and is adopted by 
every heart. Our tragic poets, in choos- 
ing classical fables, have almost entirely 
disencumbered them of the preterna- 
tural agency which is intermingled 
with the graces of antiquity. 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 25 

In chivalrous romances the marvel- 
lous is tound not only to diminish the 
interest of the story, but to interfere 
with the development of character and 
sentiment. The heroes are gigantic; 
the passious bombastic: and this fac- 
titious humanity is more cumbersome 
than the prodigies of OJympus, or the 
miracles of Fairy Land. The false is 
more Complicated wilh the true, and 
even the imagination has a more cir- 
cumscribed sphere of activity : the ob- 
ject is uot to invent, but to exaggerate. 
What is really beautiful in nature, is 
disfigured, and the names of valour and 
virtue would appear ridiculous, if his- 
tory did net vouch for their actual ex- 
istence. On every subject it is how- 



20 ESSAY Ofi FICTIONS. 

ever necessary to qualify our opinions ; 
and I am tar from refusing admiration 
to the creative genius of those poe- 
tical fictions on which the mind dwells 
so long, and which have produced so 
many beautiful and brilliant compari- 
sons: but it were to be wished that 
genius should now puisue a different 
track ; and that its eye should always in 
future bedirected to the temple of truth. 
It is only for certain works, of which 
gaiety is a characteristic, that we should 
regret the absence of those ingenious 
fictions of which Ariosto made such 
charming use. But in that happy 
chance, which produces the charm of 
pleasantry, there is no fixed rule, no 
precise object. It is an impression 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 2f 

which cannot be analysed, it is not 
measured by reason, and batfles an ine 
erroneous results of calculation. 

Truth is seldom the source of gaiety, 
and, in reality, it is to works of the 
sportive cast that the introduction of 
preternatural agency becomes requisite. 

Nature and thought . are inexhausti- 
ble in producing sentiment and me- 
ditation; but in humour or pleasan- 
try, there is a certain felicity of ex- 
pression or perception, of which it is 
impossible to calculate the return. 
Every idea which excites laughter may 
be considered as a discovery; but 
it perhaps opens no track for any fu- 



fS ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

ture adventurer. To this eccentric 
power there lies no path : of this poig- 
nant pleasure there is no perennial 
source. That it exists we are per- 
suaded, since we see it constantly 
renewed: but we are as little able to 
explain the course as to direct the 
means The gift of pleasantry more 
truly partakes of inspiration than the 
most exalted enthusiasm. That gaiety 
diffused through a literary performance 
which flows not from happiness, and 
which the reader perhaps alone en- 
joys, without the participation of the 
writer, that bewitching gaiety springs at 
once to perfection, and is as suddenly 
extinguished. It may be regulated by 
reason, but its loss is not to be supplied 



2SSAY Ofc FICTIONS. 29 

by a combination of superior faculties. 
Neither in works of pleasantry, or of 
the marvellous cast, do we recognize 
the perfect likeness of nature. It is 
impossible that passion, or sentiment, 
or truth, should excite laughter; and it 
is by only certain accidental shades 
and modifications of them that risible 
sensations are excited. There exists a 
species of composition far superior to 
what I have just described, but equally 
capable of producing ludicrous situa- 
tions, and the effect of which would 
be totally destroyed by preternatural 
agency. This is the comic representa- 
tion of life and manners, the merit of 
which resides in a happy delineation of 
human character; if the marvellous 

VOL. I. C 



30 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

were blended with Gil Bias, the Tar- 
tufFe, or the Misanthrope, we should 
miss half the charms we now discover 
in these chefs d'ceuvres of genius. 

Nature produces more true sublimity 
than the most splendid machinery. We 
maybe permitted to speculate on the 
existence of a superior order of intelli- 
gent beings; but as we can form no 
conception of such abstract regions, 
our preternatural agents must inevit- 
ably be composed of human elements ; 
and what we are pleased to deno- 
minate a new creation is merely an in- 
congruous assemblage of ideas, derived 
from the very nature we wish to leave 
behind us. It is truth alone that is 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 31 

btanipt with the divine image. Inven- 
tion is attributed to genius; when in 
reality it is in retracing, in combining, 
in discovering what really exists, that, 
it justly merits the title of creation. 

Allegory is another species of fiction, 
which appears to me inferior even to 
that of preternatural agents : it impairs 
the force of thought, as much as the 
marvellous weakens the impressions of 
passion. 

The form of apologue has often been 
successfully employed to render useful 
truths popular and acceptable ; but this 
very example proves that it is employ- 
ed oul) to bring leason to a level with 

the vulgar capacity, and consequently 
c 2 



3& BSSAY ON FICTIONS. 

supposes a weakness or deficiency of 
understanding in the reader. Abstract 
ideas are incapable of receiving illustra- 
tion by any images presented to the 
mind. There is in them a geometrical 
precision, to which only positive terms 
are suitable. Mathematical truths can 
never be elucidated by images. Allegory 
is therefore not only without use, 
but in general destitute of attraction ; 
it labours under the difficulty of having 
a two-fold object ; it has to convey to 
the understanding some important 
truth, and to amuse the fancy with 
some ingenious fable, which must be 
considered as its emblem. In general, 
the abstract idea is confused, and the 
picture spiritless ; it is a fiction within 
a fiction, of which the details are dry 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 33 

and uninteresting, and to comprehend 
them is more laborious than the per- 
ception of any mathematical truth. In 
allegory it is necessary to separate the 
abstract idea from the image by which 
it is illustrated, and to commence with 
guessing the enigma before we compre- 
hend the solution. It will be found 
that the monotony of which we are sen- 
sible in the charming poem of Telema- 
chus arises from the character of Men- 
tor, who being at once preternatuial 
and allegorical, combines the incon- 
veniences incident to both kinds of 
composition. By the former he re- 
moves all suspense for the fate of Tele- 
machus; since we are but too certain 
he shall triumph over every difficulty 
and danger ; by the latter he destroys 



34 ESSAY ON FICTIONS, 

the effect of those passions which de- 
pend on internal conflicts. 

The two moral principles of reason 
and self will, which regulate moral con- 
duct, become in the poem two dis- 
tinct and independent personages. — 
The character of Mentor represents the 
empire af man, that ofTelemachus the 
dominion of passion. — Man is placed 
between both, and the interest thus bi- 
sected is incapable of resting on either. 
Nothing can be more tedious than 
those spiritual allegories, in which, as in 
Theism us and Macarus, the Will travels 
in quest of happiness; nothing can be 
more unprofitable than those mystical 
romances, in which, as in Spenser's 
Fairy Queen, each song is the recital of 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 35 

a combat between a knight who is to 
personify a virtue, and a vice who is 
to represent his opponent. 

Compositions such as these fail 
equally to impart instruction or 
pleasure, and commonly exhibit a 
lamentable waste of time and talents. 
After wading through the work, we 
arrive at the sequel too much exhaust- 
ed by the romantic part of the allegory 
to have strength or spirits to compre- 
hend its philosophic sense. 

Fables in which animals are made to 
speak, originally served as an apologue 
of which the people easily compre- 
hended the meaning. And from these 
c 4 



36 DSSAY 02* FICTI05*. 

a species of composi tion has since arisen, 
in which many writers have been am- 
bitious of excellence. But in this ca- 
reer one man only has appeared gifted 
with that felicity of genius which is 
never bestowed more than once, and 
which equally defies, rivals, and baffles 
imitation. It was the prerogative of 
La Fontaine to make animals speak, 
as if they had formed a class of original 
thinkers, who lived before the era of 
prejudice and affectation. He divests 
his fables of allegory by individualizing 
the character of the species ; and his 
comic vein flows from the skilful de- 
lineation of the real habits and manners 
of those animals he has introduced to 
our acquaintance. This career had its 
inevitable limit, and *11 succeed- 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS, 3J 

ing fables, by being plunged into al- 
legory, have become liable to the ob- 
jection inseparable from that kind of 
composition. 

Allegories have long been fa- 
miliar to oriental nations, with whom 
they evidently originated. In a despo- 
tic government it was necessary in 
communicating truth to the subject 
to devise some method to elude th* 
vigilance of the master. Sometimes 
indeed these truths, sheltered by the 
innocent disguise of a fable, were boldly 
carried to the foot of the throne, where 
it was presumed they would appear 
divested of every offensive political fea- 
ture, and where,as the moral application 

€ 5 



33 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 



was not officiously obtruded, the au- 
thor flattered himself that should it 
ever be detected by the sultan, it 
might obtain forgiveness, or perhaps 
favour, as he would not fail to 
attribute the discovery to his own 
sagacity and discernment. But all 
those ingenious evasions of despotism 
should be banished with its empire, 
since in ceasing to be necessary they 
cease to be interesting. 

In works of allusion we have also a 
species of fiction, which can only be 
appreciated by the cotemporary reader. 
In after-times their merits are judged in 
the abstract, without considering what 
object they were to achieve, or what 
difficulties they had to overcome. 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 39 

The poem of Hudibras, though replete 
with wit, labours under this dis- 
advantage, that the reader must en- 
deavour to discover what the author 
meant to say by what he has actually 
said ; his jokes are elucidated by volu- 
minous notes, and every pleasantry 
demands a formal explanation. The 
merit of the work is no longer generally 
perceived, and if it still preserved its 
reputation, it has lost what the author 
holds equally dear — its attractive po- 
pularity. In a philosophical work we are 
prepared to make some efforts of atten- 
tion ; but a tale should be compre- 
hended at a single glance, without the 
assistance of commentaries, or the 
toil of investigation ; and the more 
universally it is addressed to our sym- 



40 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

pathies, the stronger is its claim of 
usefulness, the better security does it 
possess for lasting fame. — The basis of 
excellence is truth; and whatever a 
writer gains for the day, is, as Massillon 
observes, so much lost to eternity. 

Allegorical similies being less tedi- 
ous and elaborate, do not equally dis- 
tract theattention, but it seldom happens 
that either a thought or a sentiment can 
be unfolded by a single image. In the 
tragedy of the Roman Father, when 
the old Horatius exclaims, " qu'il 
mourut/' (that he had died), we have 
an expression noble in itself, but surely 
incapable of personification. When 
Montesquieu compares tyranny to the 
savage of Louisiana, it is impossible 



ESSAY ON FICTION*. 41 

not to perceive that he should rather 
have borrowed a reflexion of Ta- 
citus, or substituted a thought from 
his own pen, which has so often sur- 
passed the best writers of antiquity. 
It would be too rigid to reject all those 
embellishments of fancy which facili- 
tate to the mind the acquisition of new 
ideas, or diversify those with which it 
is already familiar. Images and de- 
scriptions form the charm of poetry, 
and of every kindred composition, but 
for Truth nothing is so becoming as a 
dignified plainness, and a nobic thought 
has most energy when most simply ex- 
pressed. 

It is proper to mention those alle- 
gories in which philosophical ideas arc 



42 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

enlivened by pleasantry in Swift's 
Tale of a Tub, Gulliver, and Micro- 
megas, to which the preceding ob- 
servations are equally applicable. It is 
well if the reader laughs; but there is 
also another end proposed, that of pre- 
senting some abstract truth in an ob- 
vious and popular point of view ; and 
the author who succeeds in the one 
can scarcely hope to achieve the other. 
Even Gulliver is more diverting as 
a tale than instructive as a moral 
essay. It is the fate of allegory to be 
placed between Scvlla and Charybdis. 
If its moral be too obvious, it produces 
fatigue; if too recondite, it is overlooked 
and forgotten : the author who endea- 
vours to divide attention, infallibly 
ceases to excite interest. 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 4J 



In this division of my subject I shall 
proceed to speak of historical fictions, 
or in other words, of such works of the 
imagination as are founded on real 
events, a basis essentially necessary to 
tragedies and poetry of the heroic cast. 
History indeed presents no hero whose 
character and destiny could be com- 
pletely developed in the short period 
allowed for representation on the stage; 
and to discover a situation in which the 
difficulty may be obviated, certainly 
supposes the exercise of invention, but 
excludes the idea of preternatural 
agency. It exacts from the author not 
a new creation, but a skilful cornbi- 



*+ ESSAY OX FICTIONS. 

nation, and imposes on him the task 
of Apelles, who, from an assemblage 
of graces, produces one perfect beauty. 

The language of poetry accords with 
dramatic conceptions and heroic cha- 
racters. It presents not the hero who 
is chosen under a foreign aspect ; it 
simply divests him of vulgar elements, 
and in consecrating his apotheosis, ad- 
mits him to participation in the pri- 
vileges of immortality. In this fiction 
we see nothingexaggerated or distorted, 
nothing remote from probability or in- 
compatible with nature. We discover 
only human proportions ; anda man born 
forglory finds in the Henriade, or Gen- 
geskan, or Mithridates, or Tancred, 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 45 

nothing to excite wonder, but every 
thing to awaken sympathy ; he re- 
views the work without thinking of 
its author, and surrenders himself 
without reserve to the delight inspired 
by the representation of sublime emo- 
tions and heroic sentiments. 

But there is another species of his- 
torical fictions, which good taste should 
proscribe from literature, such as anec- 
dotes of the court of Philip Augustus, 
and many other novels founded on 
some epoch in history, but wholly sub- 
versive of fidelity and truth. W« 
might find these narratives pleasing, if 
we were not unhappily reminded by 
the names that they are intended t& 



*0 £SSAY ON FICTIONS. 

represent something which does not 
exist, and that they falsify characters 
and circumstances which have actually 
existed. The moml end of history is 
perverted by supposing for real actioni 
fictitious agents, and by tracing posi- 
tive effects to an imaginary source. 
The moral object of romance is equally 
perverted, since the author is too much 
circumscribed by facts to concert his 
plan with the freedom of which fiction 
is susceptible. 

The interest inspired by celebrated 
names is simply to be referred to allu- 
sion, and 1 have already insisted on the 
imperfection of that composition which 
depends on some other work for eluci- 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 4| 

dation, and rather exercises our recol- 
lections than our sympathies. It is 
dangerous to tamper with truth. In 
novels of this description we only meet 
with a series of intrigues : those events 
which history refers to political calcu- 
lation are attributed to the influence of 
love, and the story is thus embellished 
at the expence of good taste and good 
sense. The records of. truth are thus 
discredited by the daring forgeries of 
fancy, as a bad copy of a fine picture 
injures the impression produced of the 
original, by recalling to the mind an 
imperfect and unsatisfactory resem- 
blance. 



48 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 



§ HI. 

I shall now consider the utility of 
those original fictions whose object is 
•imply to produce a delineation of 
hu man character, in which the inci- 
dents are either imitated or invented, 
and where every thing is natural though 
nothing is true. In this division all 
tragedies are necessarily excluded, not 
even excepting such as are founded 
on imaginary events, since they are 
descriptive only of the stronger pas- 
sions, and present situations of a too 
singular and romantic cast to suggest 
practical applications for the mass 
of mankind. The sentimental drama in 
common with comedy takes on the stage 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 49 

that intermediate place which novels 
occupy in comparison with historical 
or epic fictions. Attached to private 
life, and bounded by the domestic 
affections, it is still precluded by the 
usages of the theatre from offering those 
minute details or gradual develope- 
ments of feeling, which almost render 
us parties in the scene. It is not 
indeed essential to the, author that his 
personages should be kings or heroes, 
but as he can exhibit only prominent 
situations, he has not time for those 
lighter touches or more delicate shares 
which form the magic of domestic 
fictions; and in reality the interest of 
human life is not thus concentrated 
to a particular point, presents not 



50 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

such picturesque contrasts, or such 
theatrical effect. The drama possesses 
advantages peculiar to itself, which 
might form the subject of an inde- 
pendent essay; but it is the novel onlj 
that is susceptible of those delicate 
circumstantial descriptions which bring 
before us our own thoughts, and re- 
verberate our habitual feelings. 

There is a singular class of composi- 
tions which have acquired the name of 
philosophical novels, and philosophical 
in one sense ought every novel to be, 
since every fiction should have a moral 
aim; but in those to which the epi- 
thet is applied, some abstract principle 
is embodied in the narrative, and every 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 51 

chapter perverted to an allegory. The 
novels of Candide, Zadig, and Mem- 
non, lose much of their charm in la- 
bouring under artificial constraint, 
and even the moral principles they are 
intended to develope would be more 
obvious, if instead of being myste- 
riously unfolded in symbols, they had 
been simply elucidated by examples. 
When the moral is thus made to pre- 
cede the story, the author gains as little 
credit with his readers as the tutor who 
labours to persuade his pupil that he 
will be lucky or unlucky as they shall 
observe or neglect some particular 
precept: the effort fails of success, 
since the child has intuitively a per- 
ception that there is less regularity 



52 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

in the succession of events, and almost 
unconsciously appeals from theory to 
experience. 

It has been the privilege of Richard- 
son and Fielding, and some few gifted 
individuals, to present us with a 
chart of life, according to all its bear- 
ings and relations, where we discover 
the inconsistency of man, his errors, 
his self-deceptions, his final convic- 
tions of those eternal truths so indis- 
solubly united to the interests of virtue. 
In such authors the incidents are in- 
vented, but the sentiments should 
seem to be spontaneous ; and the 
reader so completely loses himself in 
the subject of the work, as almost to 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 53 

imagine it is to him alone the lesson 
is addressed. That the merit of the 
novelist has been depreciated will 
scarcely be disputed by any unpreju- 
diced observer, nor ought the injustice 
to excite surprise, if we consider that 
this species of composition has an ap- 
parent facility, which invites the poor- 
est writer to try his skill, when it is only 
for transcendent genius to command 
success. From this cause it follows 
that the public are cloyed with amatory 
tales, which have so exhausted the pas- 
sion they pretended to describe, that a 
writer of taste trembles lest be should 
remind the reader of some mawkish 
scene which excites disgust. There 
are writers by whom the novel 

VOL. I. D 



54? ESSAY OX FICTIONS. 

is still more degraded, in being per- 
verted to a disgusting exhibition of 
vice, and while in reality the first ex- 
cellence of fiction is to present to man 
either a lesson, or a model of virtue, 
it has been their object to offer images 
which ought to excite abhorrence, but 
which never leave to the mind they 
have once polluted that unsullied 
purity it had previously possessed. 

But for a novel such as has been, and 
might exist, we may challenge admi- 
ration as one of the finest productions 
of the human mind, and the most emi- 
nently susceptible of moral influence. 
There is another circumstance which 
tends to lessen novels in the public 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 55 

esteem, and that is the general per- 
suasion that they have no other object 
than to describe love the most ardent, 
the most amiable, the most universal 
of all the passions, but whose omni- 
potence, though boldly proclaimed in 
youth, is in later life forgotten or 
contemned. To a certain point indeed 
all the stronger and nobler energies of 
feeling participate in the nature of this 
sentiment. To have been capable of 
enthusiasm in friendship, to have 
aspired to heroism in virtue, to 
have made the free-will offering of 
filial piety, or devoted every tiling to 
parental affection, the heart must h »ve 
once known the imperious emotions of 
tenderness, must at least have learnt to 
i> 2 



66 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

suggest an excuse for love. We may 
entertain for our duties an inviolable 
respect, but we shall still be wanting 
in that eagerness for their accomplish- 
ment, that surrender of all personal in- 
terests which belongs to enthusiasm, 
if we have not once loved with all the 
faculties of the soul, if we have not 
once forgotten our existence, but as it 
was blended with that of an infinitely 
dearer being. 

Not only the destiny of women, but 
the happiness of men who are not 
called into public life, is frequently 
determined by the operation of this 
single passion ; yet at a certain age their 
susceptibility to such impressions is lost ; 



I 



ESSAY OH FICTIONS. 57 

they acquire a new character; are oc- 
cupied with different pursuits, and ab- 
sorbed by uncongenial passions. It is 
in these new interests, these supple- 
mental sympathies, that genius may 
discover a new career; and to those 
who have the privilege to know, and 
the talent to describe, the movements 
of the human heart, ambition, pride, 
avarice, or vanity, might afford a sub- 
ject for novels, of which the incidents 
would be more new, and the situations 
equally varied with those which spring 
from love. It may perhaps be objected 
that history presents this picture of 
the passions, and that fiction would 
here be supplanted by truth ; but his- 
tory it should be remembered descends 
d 3 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

not to the threshold, and is familiar onl} 
with celebrated personages, and public 
achievements: its interest is indepen- 
dent of moral feelings, and the facts 
it perpetuates are often at variance 
with established principles. The ra- 
pidity of the narrative would be im- 
peded by those developements of cha- 
racter which can alone produce deep 
and permanent impressions, but which 
must inevitably give too much of the 
dramatic form to a composition whose 
merit is of a totally different cast. It 
is not easy to extract much practical 
morality from history, since it is im- 
possible to penetrate to those interior 
sentiments which may perform the 
part of retributory justice to the seep- 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 08 

tered tyrant, or become to the virtuous 
' man, in the very bosom of misery and 
desolation, the ministers of hope and 
peace. In the masterly narrative of 
Tacitus we receive indeed a beautiful 
lesson of truth, when we are led to 
contemplate the dying Germanicus 
as an object of envy, compared with 
the fortunate but infamous Tiberius. 

But history must always be limited 
by the nature of its materials, and after 
every effort on the writer's part, it will 
invariably be found to have a tendency 
to exalt our admiration of genius when 
crowned with success, to magnify the 
splendor of conquest, and exaggerate 
the privileges of authority. Seldom 

D 4 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

docs it increase our aspirations for that 
internal peace which flows from vir- 
tuous conduct, and is of such infi- 
nite importance to the real welfare of 
individuals, and to their reciprocal re- 
lations in society. fLet it not be sup- 
posed, however, that I would depre- 
ciate the intrinsic value of history, or 
that I overlook the necessity of en- 
riching invention from the stores of 
experience. I am sensible that even 
the delicate shades of discrimination, 
which lend such attractions to ficlion, 
are in reality derived from those phi- 
losophical principles whose basis is 
truth. But the morality of history 
is rather for nations than indivi- 
duals. In the lapse of ages, certain- 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 61 

effects continue to flow from cer- 
tain causes, and the course of human 
events is regulated by simple and im- 
mutable principles. A few exceptions' 
disturb not the general harmony of the 
system, but it is chiefly to these that 
our attention is directed. It is not the 
many, but the few, who are enrolled 
on the chart of history, and striking 
examples, and brilliant achievements 
are alone consecrated to remembrance. 
For the misfortunes and injuries which 
form the mass of destiny there re- 
mains an immense void, where all is 
consigned without notice, without dis- 
crimination, to frigid silence and name- 
less oblivion. In novels, on the con- 
trary, characters and .sentiments may 

d a 



62 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

be painted with, such strength as irre- 
sistibly to inspire abhorrence for vice 
and enthusiasm lor virtue; but the 
moral influence is not to be attributed 
to the skill displayed in the fable, but 
to a profound knowledge of the heart, 
and a perfect command of all its feel- 
ings. It is not from any circum- 
stance, however ingeniously devised 
by the author, that we can extract 
any salutary lesson. It is the human 
heart that must be delineated with all 
its littleness and greatness, its apti- 
tudes to elevation, and propensity to 
frailty ; it is in tracing its regular but 
insensible gradations in error, in catch- 
ing the emotions inspired by examples of 
magnanimity, or the sympathy awaken- 



ESSAY ON FICTTONS. 63 

ed by misfortune ; it is those simple 
but masterly touches of nature which 
lend to every object a gloss of proba- 
bility, and persuade us of its real ex- 
istence, till what we read becomes less 
the record of the past than the revela- 
tion of the future. 

It has been objected to novels that 
they convey a false idefi of man, but the 
remark applies only to inferior compo- 
sitions, which, like bad pictures, are un- 
faithful copies of nature. But allowing 
the novel to possess real merit, tve shall 
find nothing that gives such an insight 
to the human heart. Biographicahme- 
tnoirs might supply their place, if they 
were not, like history, appropriated to 



04 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

public characters ; and their use would 
be wholly superseded, if men in ge- 
neral possessed sufficient amplitude of 
mind and singleness of heart to give 
a faithful report of all they have ex- 
perienced : yet even to those candid 
confessions would be wanting some 
of the advantages peculiar to novels, 
since it is possible to give to truth a 
dramatic effect that revolts not its na- 
ture, and there exists for fiction an art, 
which far from inverting objects, puts 
them in a more sensible point of view. 
No real history, however striking in 
situation and character, could excite 
interest, unless the author possessed 
that talent for delineation and discri- 
mination which is the soul of fiction ; 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 6J 

but admirable as is the genius which 
penetrates to the recesses of the human 
heart, it is impossible to tolerate such 
tedious details as sometimes obtain 
a place even in novels of undisputed 
celebrity. The author is seduced into 
this error by the persuasion that he 
shall increase the versimilitude of 
the picture, not considering that what- 
ever checks the interest, must inevit- 
ably lessen that illusion on which the 
impression depends. If we were to re- 
present on the scene all that passes in 
a private apartment, the charm of the 
exhibition would be at an end. Novels 
have also their rules of dramatic de- 
corum, and nothing should be admitted 
by which the interest is not rather in- 



06 ESSAY ON T FICTION'S. 

creased than diminished. If a look, 
a movement, an almost imperceptible 
circumstance serves to paint a character, 
to develope a sentiment, the more sim- 
ple the means the more eagerly should 
it be embraced; but the scrupulous 
detail of an ordinary occurrence, far 
from heightening, destroys the previous 
impression. Disgusted or wearied, 
you escape from the illusion, and are 
presently displeased to receive neither 
the instruction of history, nor the in- 
terest of romance. Totoucli the heart is 
the great power of fiction : almost 
every moral truth may be rendered 
sensible by being put into action, or, in 
other words, associated with sentiment; 
and such is the influence possessed by 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 6*7 

virtue over the happiness or misery of 
man, that to her may be referred all 
the momentous situations of life. 
There are some philosophers so au- 
stere as to condemn every emotion of 
the heart, and so sanguine as to ex- 
pect that the moral empire should be 
alone maintained by the sacred name 
of duty. But such opinions are re- 
pugnant to the nature of man. 
AYhen virtue is to combat with the 
passions, she must be revealed in 
all her loveliness. To inspire a ge- 
nerous enthusiasm, a sacred haven 
must encircle the privations, sacri- 
fices, and disappointments : to kindle 
aspirations for excellence, misfortune 
should present attractions unrivalled 



68 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

by the blandishments of guilty plea- 
sure. It is by an intimate acquaintance 
with fictions which touch the heart that 
the soul nourishes its noblest sympa- 
thies, and almost unconsciously con- 
tracts with itself engagements ic would 
be ashamed to violate: but the more 
powerful the talent by which the affec- 
tions are touched, the more is it ne- 
cessary to extern' its influence to the 
passions of a rip • age, and to situations 
of universal interest. Love is so much 
the business oi novels, that for charac- 
ters unconnected with that passion 
there is in general but a subordinate 
part. An exception to this remark, 
however, occurs in Tom , J ones, w here 
the morality is general, and love is 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 60 

merely an agent in developing the philo- 
sophical principle. To evince the fallacy 
of such expectations as are founded on 
specious appearances, to demonstrate 
the superiority of natural and intrinsic 
qualities over the cold decorums pre- 
scribed by worldly prudence, is the 
true object of this novel, which may 
justly assert its claims to usefulness 
and celebrity. Another work has since 
appeared, which, in despite of the de- 
fects of tediousness and negligence, 
appears to me to realize the idea I have 
formed of a new order of fictitious 
compositions. This work is the Caleb 
Williams of Mr. Godwin, in which 
love forms no part of the plan, and the 
interest springs from an unbridled pas- 



70 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

sion for reputation in one of the par- 
ties, and an insatiable curiosity in the 
other; yet is this read with all the 
emotion inspired by romance, and all 
the reflexion suggested by philosophy. 
In many of Marmontel's Moral Tales, 
some chapters of the Sentimental Jour- 
ney, some detached anecdotes in the 
Spectator, and other moral works, in 
some fragments of German literature, 
which is daily rising in importance, 
we possess a few choice fictions, in 
which life is sketched under relations 
foreign to love. But no new Richard- 
son has yet consecrated his genius to 
the other pa sion of man, and we have 
hitherto no novel in which the history 
of their progress is fully unfolded. The 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 71 

success of such a work would spring 
from truth of character, the strength of 
contrast, the energy of the situations, 
and not from that sentiment so often 
felt, so easily described, and which 
pleases by what it recalls, even when 
it neither attracts by the grandeur or 
grace of its descriptions. 

It would be a valuable accession to 
philosophy, if novels should afford 
as minute an analysis of the other pas- 
sions as has been already offered of love. 
What beauties should we not discover 
in an ambitious Lovelace ! Nor let it 
be imagined that the numerous vo- 
lumes of morality have rendered such 
works superfluous, since from them 



/2 ESSAY OX FICTIONS. 

we acquire indeed distinct ideas of 
duty, but no adequate conception 
of the interna] springs of passion. 
From an excellent novel we may even 
extract a more pure and exalted mo- 
rality than is supplied by didactic 
essays, whose maxims, being intended 
for general application, can never emu- 
late that virtuous heroism of which 
the nobler mind alone is capable, and 
which present as a model an ambi- 
tious excellence it would be impossi- 
ble to prescribe as a duty. Where is 
the moralist so severe as to denounce 
the woman, who, urged by her family to 
contract a detested marriage, is led by 
their persecution to shew some marks 
of interest for the man who pleases 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 73 

her? In such a case what moralist 
shall menace her with disgrace and 
death ? Yet such is the plan of Cla- 
rissa, such is the work we read with 
impassioned admiration s without dar- 
ing to dispute with an author who 
holds our affections captive. What 
moralist would persuade a woman to 
yield to the most deep despondence, 
to a secret grief which undermines life, 
and shakes the seat of reason, rather 
than espouse the most virtuous of 
men, but whose religion happens not 
to be her own? Yet in Clementina 
the conflict between love and con- 
science, the struggle of passion with 
duty, presents a scene touching 
even to those who are latitudinarians 



74 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

in principle, and who would reject 
with scorn her superstitious scruples? 
In novels of a less exalted cast, hovr 
many delicate tests of sentiment are 
supplied for female conduct! In sup- 
port of this opinion, we have only to 
cite such chef d'ceuvres as the Princess 
of Cleves, the Comte du Comminge, 
Paul and Virginia, Cecilia, the Writings 
of Madame Riccoboni, Caroline of Lich- 
field, whose attraction is so universally 
felt and acknowledged, the affecting 
Episode of Calesta, and the Letters of 
Camilla, in which female frailty and 
its fatal consequences present a picture 
even more instructive than the exam- 
ples of virtue. Capable of attaching 
that sensibility which pleads for in- 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 7o 

diligence, it belongs to the novelist to 
assume a lofty tone of morals without 
revolting the heart ; and though the 
austere principles inculcated in didactic 
works are often opposed by the pity 
due to misfortune, or the sympathy 
extorted by passion, in the superior 
novel, even this sympathy is enlisted on 
their side, and pity made subsidiary to 
their cause. To novels of the amatory 
cast there is this insuperable objection, 
that the passion for love is described 
with an ardour which is calculated to 
call it into existence, and that there are 
seasons of life in which obvious danger 
prevails over every remote advantage : 
but to thisevil no novel would be liable, 
of which the object should be to deve- 



76 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

lope any other passion. Love gains 
strength by the reflexion of its own 
image ; but the best expedient for com- 
bating the other passions is to make their 
features recognized. Pride, avarice, and 
ambition, often exist in the bosom which 
is unconscious of their influence; but 
in tracing from their commencement the 
latent symptoms of a dangerous propen- 
sity, we should offer a warning to others 
and to ourselves j and were their fea- 
tures, their causes, their consequences, 
as familiar to the mind as the history 
of love, we should possess more cer- 
tain rules, and more delicate princi- 
ples. Were it even possible for the 
philosopher, like the novelist, to an- 
ticipate and develope every variety of 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 77 

conduct, there would still remain to 
the latter one incalculable advantage, 
that of being able to inspire transports 
of indignation, or enthusiasm, a de- 
licious melancholy, the various effects 
arising; from romantic situations, and 
in a manner analogous and supple- 
mental to experience. The impression 
produced by the novelist is not unlike 
that received from the real facts attested ' 
by our senses, with this difference, 
that being always directed to one aim, 
it is less likely to bewilder our 
thoughts than the shifting, scenes 
which pass around us. There are, in 
short, men over whom duty could assert 
no empire, and who might yet be se- 
cured from the commission of atrocious 

VOL. I. E 



78 ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

crimes, hy the capacity for receiving im- 
pressions of pity through the medium 
of the imagination. It is certain that 
those in whom humanity should only 
be excited by that sensibility which 
may be called the corporeal pleasure 
of the soul would be little worthy of 
esteem; but were such tictions po- 
pular, we should perhaps be secure 
from again meeting in a nation those 
human monsters whose character forms 
the most incomprehensible problem of 
the moral world. The gradation from 
the known to the unknown is lost, 
when we attempt to trace the various 
impulses which have led to those 
crimes by which revolutionary France 
has been disgraced. Their authors ap- 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 79 

pear divested of all traces of humanity, 
nor is it possible to conceive they 
should have retained any recollec- 
tions of pity ; or that their latent sym- 
- pathies had ever been elicited by any 
writings calculated to touch the soul. 
Such impressions, however evanescent, 
must have rendered them incapable 
of that systematic cruelty so repugnant 
to every natural feeling, which, for 
the first time- has exhibited in man 
an unlimited pretence to wickedness, a 
disinterested passion for crimes. 

There are some w T orks, such as Pope's 
Eloisa, and Werter, and above all the 
Eloise of Rousseau, which, independent 
of any moral agency, subdue the heart 
i 2 



bO ESSAY ON FICTIONS. 

by the magic of eloquence. Of such 
novels there exists no class. In a cen- 
tury there shall arise but one genius, 
there shall exist but one being capable 
of producing the solitary example: and 
shall we interdict these miracles of 
language, those deep indelible impres- 
sions, which are alone responsive to 
the emotions of impassioned souls ? 

Let us not forget that these works 
confer an incalculable benefit on the 
few readers capable of correspondent 
emotions. Their pleasures are rare, and 
they are ali ns to society. Leave then 
to these susceptible bungs the grati- 
fication of sometimes interchanging 
sentiments they do not trust to their 



JESSAY ON FICTIONS. SI 

lips. Those sentiments, so seldom un- 
derstood, are, like themselves, prema- 
turely judged, and precipitately con- 
demned. For such beings there would 
be no home in the universe, and they 
might even detest a nature so insu- 
lated from human fellowship, if they 
did not sometimes listen to the im- 
passioned feelings of a kindred bosom. 
It is this voice of nature that arrests 
them in the desert of life; it is this 
emanation of genius that scatters on 
their solitude some few rays of the 
felicity which escapes them in the 
world. Leave him then to repose in 
privacy and retreat, the unfortunate 
being exhausted by early sorrow or 
contiuued disappointment ; there, 
E 3 



82 ESS A Y ON FICTIONS. 

while disengaged from the vain struggle 
of fallacious hopes, he shail discover 
in some eloquent and pathetic page a 
friend, a companion, a being to whom 
he is known ; the only one by whom he 
is soothed and pleased ; yes, he is 
right — the book that but for one day 
suspends the corrosions of anguish 
performs a part not unworthy of the 
best of men. It is indeed not impro- 
bable that many sufferings originate in 
defects of character, but there are so 
many which spring either from supe- 
riority of mind, or sensibility of heart, 
so many that could be supported better 
by those who deserved less, that for me 
it is enough to know that the heart is 
wounded, to yield to it a tribute of 



ESSAY ON FICTIONS. S3 

respect, a mite of sympathy : and I am 
ever grateful to those fictions which 
have no other aim than to afford this 
temporary but precious alleviation. 

In this life, which we rather 
pass through than touch, whoever 
rescues man from himself, or the in- 
fluence of too powerful sympathies ; 
whoever arrest9 the progress of the 
passions, and substitutes in their place 
a series of independent enjoyments, 
should be considered as the dis- 
penser of the only true happiness of 
which humanity is capable : that man, 
if the influence of his talent could be 
perpetuated, would remain among the 
best and dearest benefactors of the 
human race. 



Z U L M A. 



■ 6 



J 



PREFACE. 



This episode was originally de- 
signed to occupy the place of the chap- 
ter on love, in a work " upon the injiu- 
ence of the passions, the first part of 
which I am about to publish ; but 
having since decided upon following the 
analytical form in the prosecution of 
this work, I have printed this part sepa- 
rately. It may perhaps be necessary 
to explain the view with which it has 
been composed. In depicting the pas- 



88 PREFACE. 

sion of love, I have been solicitous to 
produce a portrait of the most dreadful 
misfortunes, and of a character pecu- 
liarly empassioned. It appeared to me 
that this sentiment could not possess 
every imaginable energy, except in a 
ferocious mind united to a cultivated 
understanding; for the faculty of judg- 
ing adds greatly to grief, when this 
same faculty has nothing to detach it 
from the power of feeling. I have there- 
fore displayed a situation in which there 
existed at the same time despair and 
serenity, where the sufferer could ob- 
serve his own feelings, and was con- 
strained to describe what he felt. He 
is not then in that profound, but less 
bitter sorrow, in which we lose the 



PREFACE. 89 

power of expression. In irretrievable 
misfortunes the mind resorts to a spe- 
cies of calm which allows of thought 
without the cessation of suffering. In 
this state, passion ought to be pecu- 
liarly eloquent, and in this situation 
I have attempted to place Zulma. 
That performance, which beyond every 
other is dear to my mind, is to me 
sufficiently interesting to excuse these 
observations. 



ZULMA, 



A FRAGMENT. 



I was a prisoner amongst those savages 
who inhabit the banks of the Oronoo- 
ko; but as my ransom had been already- 
stipulated I enjoyed amongst them 
much liberty. A long abode in their 
country had afforded me an opportu- 
nity of learning their language ; and one 
of their old men, whom I had already 
known in one of his journeys to Lima, 
vj) showed me particular friendship. His 
r~ age entitled him to some sway in the 
i^: administration of their government, for 



92 ZULMA. 

as these savages do not possess pro- 
perty, the primary basis of social union, 
their wandering tribes adopt as chiefs 
those who derive from long experience 
that mind of self-possession, which is 
the guardian angel of human destiny. 

One morning I was awoke by thesou nd 
of military instruments : I believed that 
war was again begun. My antient pro- 
tector approached me, and said, " This 
is the most unfortunate day of my life. 
I am about to give to my countrymen 
a dreadful proof of my obedience. I am 
called by my age, and by lot, to judge 
a criminal : some of us are condemned 
to this sad duty. It is said that the 
crime we are about to examine cannot 



2ULMA. !W 

be pardoned ; but when my voice 
shall have pronounced the sentence of 
death, how shall my torn heart be sa- 
tisfied that I have not abused the right 
of man over man, and arrogated to my- 
self divine vengeance? After this trial 
I shall be eight days without seeing 
you, as it is an established custom with 
us that the judges who have passed 
sentence of death shall remain in soli- 
tary confinement during one week ; 
after which they shall again meet, ei- 
ther to confirm or reverse their decree. 
In your country, a second tribunal re- 
vises the decisions of the first : here, 
we call men from society into solitude ; 
from the impression of the moment, to 
the considerations of conscience. We 



N ZULMA. 

bless this institution, which often makes 
us revoke judgments too severe. Fol- 
low me, my friend, to the inclosure, 
where the pleadings will take place in 
the presence of the people. You will 
behold the family of the accused more 
disquieted than herself by the sentence 
which must be pronounced ; for our 
laws banish for ever the parents of a 
culpable child, and they frequently 
perish in our deserts, in a state of iso- 
lation and misery. This sad respon- 
sibility is a prejudice in common with 
you, and with us. The most compli- 
cated errors are often admitted in pre- 
ference to the most simple truths; at 
the same time, our wandering cus- 
toms not permitting to the government 



ZULMA. $5 

a constant and general inspection, it was 
perhaps peculiarly necessary to us to 
use every means for binding closer fa- 
mily ties. This retrospective judg- 
ment, however it may be judged of by 
you, has produced this happy effect. 
Come then ; listen with attention to the 
different arguments presented: and if 
you excuse the crime which I may be 
disposed to condemn, at once inform 
me of it, and spare your friend the irre- 
parable misfortune of being a mur- 
derer of the innocent." I then followed 
this good old man towards the exten- 
sive plain, where the people were as- 
sembled, and was astonished to approach 
it without any noise which indicated 
the assemblage of such a multitude, 



96 ZULMA. 

" All are collected within them- 
selves/' said the old man, " in the 
contemplation of misery and death; 
and these brave warriors shed tears 
over dangers which they no longer par- 
ticipate." 

I placed myself behind the tribunal, 
amidst the crowd by whom it was sur- 
rounded : a little farther there was a 
plane tree, surrounded with cypress, 
and it was their custom to place before 
this tree those criminals who were con- 
demned to perish. From the branches 
of this was suspended the bow 
which was the instrument of punish- 
ment. Before the judges was raised 
the amphitheatre destined for the ac- 



ZULMA. 97 

cuser, the accused, and his family. I 
approached it, and immediately saw 
upon a bed of turf a young man mor- 
tally wounded by an arrow : his blood 
no longer flowed, his limbs were stif- 
fened ; but never had I beheld such 
perfect beauty. I felt at the same 
instant a sensation of admiration and 
grief; 1 bewailed this young man as if 
I had known him when living. " Be- 
hold," said a person near me, " him who 
has been assassinated." I was pene- 
trated with horror against the criminal, 
whom my heart already coudemned. 
Themotherof the youngiuan kneitat his 
feet: she raised her veil to speak, but her 
griel' permitted not her words. The name 
of her son Fernand often escaped her,; 



9S ZULMA . 

lips, and between her sobs I thought 
she accused a young woman named 
Zulma of his death. Those around me, 
seeing my astonishment, explained the 
words of this unfortunate mother. At 
this instant Zulma appeared : in behold- 
ing her face the impression of her 
misery seized me: as she advanced 
slowly I had time to remark the beauty 
of her features; but very soon their 
commanding expression agitated my 
mind with a thousand different emo- 
tions. She passed before the fatal tree 
destined for her punishment; she 
stopped some instants to regard it ; but 
nothing appeared in her face but fixed 
attention: without any apparent emo- 
tion, she bowed to the judges with dig- 



zulm a. 99 

nity and respect, but turning towards the 
amphitheatre, in which was her place, 
she beheld the body of Fernand, at 
which all her limbs trembled. At 
first she supported herself upon her 
bow, and afterwards would have ad- 
vanced towards the deplorable object, 
but recollecting the desolated mother, 
who shuddered with horror at her ap- 
proach, she stopped, sighed profoundly, 
and by a powerful effort, appearing to re- 
sume her self-command, she thus began. 
44 Respectable woman," said she to 
the mother of Fernand, " pardon me if 
it was not to you, to you alone J 
addressed myself. My eyes cannot 
now be solely fixed upon the object 
you hold in your embrace. When the 



100 ZULMA. 

life of others is in question, this is not 
the time to regard him. I must justify 
myself to save my parents from the 
shame and penalty of my punishment. 
It must be done, and I can do it 
before the judges, and before the 
assembled people. But thou, unfor- 
tunate mother ! thou, who loved him ! 
thou cannot but require my death. 
I believe not that the words necessary 
for my defence can embitter thy re- 
grets: miserable am I if I wound thy 
heart, if I do not suppress all that can 
afflict it. Of what service would have 
been all my sufferings if I knew not 
how to respect misery?" Then Zulma 
stopped, but soon raising herself before 
the tribunal which was to decide upon 



2ULM A. 101 

her life, she appeared desirous to stifle 
in herself every emotion which could 
solicit pity. " Judges of my fete," 
said she, " it was I who shot into 
the heart of Fernand that sanguinary 
dart ; it is I alone ; and your laws con- 
demn me to death ; yet in -the eye of 
God I do aot bold myself culpable. 
Exalted people, you will absolve me. 
Old men, you must understand the 
language of the passions ; recall their 
remembrance into your hearts, and 
let the long history of my feelings 
interpret to you this astonishing cata- 
strophe. You all lament Fernand. 
you remember his charms, his talents, 
his valour— ah ! and with reason. Who 
could even under the delirium of pride 
vol. u w 



102 ZULMA. 

think themselves equal to him ? Taken 
prisoner in his infancy by a Spanish 
general, he learned from a polished 
people those terrible or seductive arts 
which by turns insure submission or 
captivation ; but his haughty soul 
could not endure the yoke of Euro- 
pean laws: he returned to his people 
to find himself in the presence of 
nature, and to be no longer separated 
from it by the institutions which 
seemed designed for its perfection. 
You will recollect the day in which 
having carried the prize at the chase 
by those new arts which he had learn- 
ed from our ecemies, he was indig- 
nant with the success which he de- 
rived not from his own strength, aDd in 



• 



i'.'l.M A. 103 

the different employments to which 
your confidence called him, disdaining 
to avail himself of the knowledge he 
had acquired, he made us doubt its 
utility, so well did he know how to 
show himself independent of such 
distance. In this country, where no 
distinction is established by law, he 
seemed to create the royalty of genius, 
and without wishing it himself, with- 
out the people even reflecting upon 
the homage they rendered, the ranks 
opened that he might pass through 
them in the hope of a nearer view. 
They followed him, not through sub- 
mission, but from unwillingness to 
quit him. His invincible attr ctir.ns 
swayed all you who hear me : owl! you, 
f 2 



10* ZULMA. 

old men; overyour children; even over 
those who might envy his destiny; each 
was his friend before a thought arose 
of becoming his rival. Ah! bewail 
him long, for his life was your glory, 
and his death is the mourning of the 
universe. But the world must perish 
when passion commands: the storm 
which secretly elevates itself in the 
recesses of the heart, overturns nature ; 
all around me seems calm : I alone 
know that the earth trembles, and that 
it will soon open beneath my feet, 

" Whilst you adm'red Fcrnand, m 
feeling more tender arose in my soul : 
I sought the crowd to hear his name 
pronounced. When your voices cried 



ZULMA. 10i 

long live Fernand, I drew down my 
veil to pronounce the words. In fol- 
lowing the general example I feared 
remark. I always feared I should not 
be able so lo constrain myself that 
it should appear merely enthusiasm. 
Long live Fernand ! Yet it is from mc 
he has received his death ; yes, it is lovo 
•lone which could sacrifice him, what 
being through hatred could have con- 
ceived any thing so horrible? Fernand, 
distinguished by those features novr 
scarcely to be recognized, those features 
on which death is impressed— he spokt 
to m€ _that day is so present to my 
mind, that the remembrance still occa- 
sions an emotion of joy : my confusion 
interested him, he feigned not to divine 
f 3 



106 Z ULM A . 

its cause, and sought to please me a* 
if he had not been certain of being 
beloved. He occupied himself in 
teaching me to understand the wri- 
tings of the Europeans, and from this 
study I derive the power of depicting 
the frightful portraits of my misfortunes. 
I greedily seized the tones of Fer- 
nand, of which my memory can never 
lose the least trace, could the sound of 
his voice permit one of his words to 
be forgotten ? The care he took to 
form my understanding and my mind 
appeared the surest guarantee of his 
constancy : he would identify me with 
his own ideas, direct my thoughts and 
sentiments in conformity to his own 
opinions and character : he then knew 



ZULMA. 10 7 

that a new existence must be neces- 
sary to me before I could learn to 
live without him ; he then knew that 
Zulma had no independent power to 
detach her from Fernand. The power 
of reflection, the gift of ideas, what- 
ever composes the empire of man over 
himself being in me the work of Fer- 
nand, could not be exerted against 
its author. As to myself, the con- 
nexion of every thought, the relation 
of every object, terminated in Fernand. 
The mind, violently separated from 
that which was herself, can only now 
be precipitated into despair. 

" From the commencement of our 
acquaintance 1 was sensible of the 
F A 



108 ZULMA. 

danger of my situation ; I felt "the daily 
increase of my passion, and judging 
that only one instant for conquering it 
remained, I resolved to converse with 
Fernand upon the fears lie had caused. 
I begged him to follow me into the forest 
of firs which borders the Oroonoko,and 
there choosing a wild retreat, where no 
human being could disenchant our soli- 
tude, in the presence of heaven, pure as 
my mind, and near the torrent, which, 
like that, was agitated, I interrogated 
my lover. ' I know nothing,' said I, 
' of human destiny: I advance from 
childhood into the most violent passion 
of youth ; I foresee a degree of happi- 
ness which falsifies whatever has been 
repeated to us of the imperfection 



CULM A* 109 

attached to the condition of life. If 
the heart can obtain such delightful 
enjoyment, why is love so redoubtable? 
Why is it not cultivated by the old 
as well as the young ? The first hope, 
the only regret, the sole movement 
which is used to govern the universe?* 
Fernand replied without being willing 
to inform me of the nature of the 
passions, he accused th(? insensibility 
of men, and swore to love me always, 
• Hear/ said I to him, 1 hear— if I 
am not necessary to your happiness, 
if your heart is not certain that it 
cannot exist without mine, leave me. 
I love you ; but so little time has 
passed since this sentiment reigned 
in my heart, it has not yet renewed 
W 5 



liy ZULMA. 

my existence: every path does not 
yet offer me the traces of your steps 
each day is not marked for becoming 

o 

for ever the anniversary of one of your 
looks or words. I have in life, in dis- 
tance, in my own thoughts, some re- 
treats to which I can fly from you ; 
habit and passion, which in appear- 
ance are opposite powers, are not 
united to enslave me ; but if you leave 
my heart to say Femand, will never 
forsake me; I no longer depend on 
myself— on you depends my exist- 
ence. 

M At the same time, as the heart of 
man is independent of his own resolu- 
tory, I only demand from you an oath. 



ZULMA. HI 

which it will always be in your power 
to observe. If you feel that your soul 
desires to be detached from mine, 
swear to me that before the moment 
when I might discover this you will 
inflict death upon me. You shudder 
at this word, but you place not your 
terror aright. Ah ! Fernand, it is when 
1 speak of your iucons'.ancy that you 
nuiv tremble for me. What fallacious 
pity makes you fear the end of my life 
more than the eternity of my despair V 
He re-assured me by expressions of 
tenderness, inspired by his love, in- 
terpreted by mine: my relations, my 
friends, my country, disappeared from 
my view, and this universe, which is 
said to be the work of one idea alone, 



H9 ZULMA. 

became to me the image of one sole 
and predominant feeling. 

" The most painful exercises, the 
most ingenious cares, whatever my 
mind, enlarged by its passion, could 
invent for the happiness of Fernand, 
were lavished upon him. I could expose 
to you numerous actions which demand 
yourgratitude, which united by a tie two 
hostile brothers into fri^ .ids ; but where 
every faculty of the soul is consecrated 
to one object, what signifies the com- 
binations of chance, which only offer 
to this devotion more or less glorious 
motives for calling it into action ? 
Passion is entire, nothing derived from 
it can be its equal: it is in thai sublime 



ZULMA. 113 

focus that all its rays should be con- 
centrated. 

" I must however rapidly describe to 
you some parts of my story. One day, 
upon the banks of that great river 
which fertilizes and defends our coun- 
try, the mother of Fernand, borne 
down by the current, would have 
expired in the waves, had 1 not pre- 
cipitated myself after her. I had no 
longer strength to draw her to the 
shore: at this moment Fernand ap- 
proached, 4 Behold thy mother,' cried 
I, 1 1 have lived long enough/ 

" 1 lost all sensibility in pronouncing 
these words, but when I recovered, Fer- 



114- ZULM A. 

nandwasat my feet, thanking me for the 
life of his parent; and the happiness of 
owing it to me was blended with the 
pleasure of seeing her again. His 
love was shewn in every accent, and 
reigned over all his soul. Ah ! could 
I yet hear his voice, he might with 
reason ask whether at that time he did 
not by the charm of his gratitude 
become my benefactor? But, cruel 
Fernand, shouldest thou have present- 
ed the taste of so sweet an intoxication 
to a heart thou wouldest abandon ? 
Didst thou thus prepare me for thy 
loss, when my soul, plunged in ecstasies 
of happiness, knew not how to reserve 
any strength against the attacks of 
misfortune ? 



ZULMA. l 10 

You were once taught by ca- 
lumny to distrust Fernancl ; you ac- 
cused him of secret intelligence with 
the enemy, and of having conceived 
the design of betraying you to him : 
his death was resolved upon; you 
shudder, yes it is you who pronounced 
that sentence, the greatest of crimes in 
every one but Zulma. My ingenious 
love deceiving all your spies hid him 
from their pursuit; but think not I 
recall this time to accuse him of in- 
gratitude. Far be it from me to term 
that a benefit which was only inspired 
by the invincible sensation of my mind; 
but when I see sacrificed by my own 
hand that object, who during so long 
a time I have preserved from unknown 



110 EULMA, 

dangers, that object whom through a 
thousand perils I have tried to save, 
I regard myself with astonishment, 
I believe myself my own enemy; I no 
longer know whether I am in life; and 
it is only by placing my hand upon 
my heart, in feeling it still consumed 
by the same passion, that I again 
know myself in the horrible contrast 
between my feelings and my misfor- 
tunes. 

" I followed Fernand a whole year 
into the deserts, where your cruel sen- 
tence constrained him to hide. In 
these sterile regions the most necessary 
means of existence were scarcely to be 
procured. One iource, a palm tree, 



ZULMA. 117 

made an epoch in our lives : sometimes 
whilst he slept, unbraiding my long 
hair, I held it in my hands to shield 
his head from the burning rays of the 
sun. 

" I scarcely know whether I suf- 
fered during this frightful retirement, 
for devoted to the hope of softening 
some of his cares, there remains to me 
of this year only the remembrance of 
that sentiment. Frightful rocks! burn- 
ing sands ! to you alone are attached 
the last memorials of my happiness. 

" Rejected by his country, abandoned 
even by nature, which seemed to refuse 
him the necessaries of life, a woman 



US ZULMA. 

surrounded Fernand with tenderness 
and love. A sovereign in these deserts, 
he saw existence and happiness de- 
pend upon his looks. Power, glory, 
all was restored to him by mv devotion 
and enthusiasm: my love was always 
placed between his own reflections and 
the injustice of man. He judged him- 
self in my heart — he loved me— he 
lived.— Oh God!" 

Sighs then stifled the voice of Zulma. 
I had seen her gradually abandoning 
her strength at the picture of past hap- 
piness. I looked at the old men, who 
remained immoveable and serene, as if 
the condemnation of Zulma appeared 
to them inevitable. The people, more 



easily moved, murmured the word 
panlon. This recalled Zulma to her- 
self, and she began immediately to 
apeak. " People," cried she, " you too 
readdv absolve the greatest of crimes. 
I am indignant for the sake of Fernand 
at a clemency so facile. The country- 
men of Fernand were at length con- 
vinced not ouly of his talents, but his 
virtues. You came out to seek him, 
at once to demonstrate your admiration 
and esteem, and, confiding with reason 
in the grandeur of his soul, from the 
profuudity of his exile you raised him 
to the command of your armies. 



" In defiance of my entreaties he ac 
cepted the command : my ardent soh 



120 KL'LMA. 



citations could not restrain him. His 
danger appeared terrible : his glory was 
to me no longer necessary. In the com- 
mencement of my passion, I loved 
whatever could justify its cxcess . 
Sometimes I was proud of the success 
of Fernand, and dared to suppose that 
he had secret pleasure in devoting 
himself to me. But in this epoch of 
our love, by what exterior event could 
it have been either diminished or in- 
creased ? My mind had passed into 
his, and before me, as to his own con- 
science, not actions but sentiments 
were necessary. 

"He departed, and thrice he 
came back a conqueror. The ac- 



EULM A . 121 

clamations of victory preceded his 
return, and in the reports of his 
glory I learned my own happiness. 
Every time he quitted, the most afflict- 
ing presentiments filled me with terror. 

u I know that the extremes of grief 
produce emotions which appear super- 
natural, and that great passions reign- 
ing in the mind act upon it as if by 
some strange inspiration, which makes 
it confide in its own impressions as 
oracular. But who would not desire 
that the mind was previously informed 
of approaching misery, as the earth 
trembles before the opening of the 
abyss, as the heaven becomes clouded 



m mm*. 

when the lightning is ready to appear? 
A report was one clay spread that Fer- 
nand had perished in battle. Wan- 
dering across all the horrors of carnage, 
this spectacle, though for the first time 
seen, left no traces in my thoughts: 
it was him whom I alone sought 
amongst slaughter and death, and this 
frightful appearance merely offered 
itself as an obstacle to surmount. 
After a search of many hours, ex- 
hausted by fatigue, I sunk at the foot 
of a tree: there, in the violence of pro- 
found misery, when every feeling of 
my existence was absorbed in grief, 
I endeavoured to calm myself by 
the resolution I had long taken not to 



ZULMA. 123 

survive Fernand. ' What,' said I to 
myself, 1 is there in his death from 
which mine cannot deliver me?' But 
that instant in which I should learn 
that he was no more affrighted me 
more than eternity. My thoughts 
could not repose in the tomb to which 
I should be precipitated by his loss. 
My mind could not conceive, the idea of 
absolute annihilation, and under every 
form of existence I beheld myself pur- 
sued by the attacks of grief. 

44 Absorbed in motionless despair, ex- 
amining myself with ferocious attention 9 
I saw him appear. Great God ! it was 
not life, it was heaven that was restored 
tome. I felt in one moment every oppo- 



12* ZULMA. 

site sensation— it was himself. My 
mind sunk under the weight of its own 
felicity. Ah ! whoever has seen such a 
day, has devoured the existence of 
many years ; and for me time is no 
more. Yet, my God! even at this hour, 
precipitated in the abyss of human mi- 
sery, I thank thee that I have existed. 
Thou hast in one day collected every 
good dispersed through life. In that 
day my impassioned soul approached 
the bounds which separate humaji 
nature from thy celestial essence. 

" Fernand was slightly wounded ; 
but we soon learned that our ferociou* 
enemies had dipped their arrows in 
mortal poison, and that to save hit life 



ZULMA. i^i 

it was necessary the wound should be 
sucked by whoever feared not the dan- 
ger of extracting it. 

" How attentive to my happiness 
did fate then appear to me. I was 
about to introduce into my veins 
that poison which menaced the life 
of Fernand. Ah! in the melancholy 
chimeras which alone clelight ten- 
der mind.s, what sweeter situation 
could be presented? I conquered the 
resistance of Fernand ; I deceived him 
respecting my danger: my fortunate 
efforts tore death from his bosom. 

" A long time in my turn had I to 
wrestle against it, but the strength of 

VOL. I. G 



J26 ZULM A . 

youth at length triumphed. It was said 
that the devouring action of this poison 
affected my brain : this is not my excuse, 
it is not that of Fernand. Every acces- 
sory idea might be overthrown. My love 
whilst I existed could not change. 
Zulma was the same for Fernand; he 
had no right to mistake me. Ah ! my 
heart alone ought to explain my out- 
rage. What actious of folly can be so 
strong as the wandcri- gs of passion 
which they are called upon to justify ? 

11 Fernand requested to leave me for 
some days, but I combatted this reso- 
lution. I lamented it to myself with 
bitterness. It was not from my benefits 
that 1 believed I had a right over Fer- 



ZULM A . 127 

nand, it was a remembrance of the 
impression of my own feelings which 
made me believe in my empire : it ap- 
peared to me that I possessed in my 
own mind a power of love which ought 
to predominate, and that a man so pas- 
sionately beloved could not believe 
himself free. Suspicion had never ap- 
proached me: that uncertain feeling 
was not made for my mind.— At last I 
consented to the wish of Fernanda 
he left me. At the time fixed for his 
return I awaited him, 

<; One day, yes, a day like the rest, 
when the sun shone with its usual 
rays, I walked out alone, weak, 
g 2 



12S XULMA. 

wandering in the same places, all 
filled with idens of the past. I ad- 
vanced into the depths of the fo- 
rest, when I perceived Fernand at the 
feet of the youthful Mirza : it was the 
last object that my eyes have beheld. 
In this instant this horrible picture 
still appears before me,; it hides from 
me the preparation for my punishment, 
the aspect of which would be more 
agreeable. I had no time for reflection : 
I acted without the concurrence of 
my thoughts: my hand seized the bow 
on which she rested : the mortal dart 
was shot — Fernand fell. At first I was 
possessed with only one idea, ihat he 
had ceased to adore Mirza. But when 
his blood flowed, when the paleness of 



ZULMA. 129 

death I know not what passed in 

my mind : I have lost since the idea of 
identity, the remembrance of existence. 
The despair of my family could alone 
recall me to myself: they informed me 
that my condemnation included theirs ; 
that I must justify myself to save 
them. They desired my life : it is my 
duty to obey them. You have now 
heard my story : none of you doubt 
of its truth : there is not one accent 
in it which belongs to fiction ; yet are 
you unjust if you condemn me. 
Which of you can believe himself 
more called upon to avenge the death 
of Fernand than I am ? Which of 
you has a thousand times saved his 
life? Which of you at this time adores 
g3 



130 ZVLMX. 



hk? 1 had the right to decide his 
fate: if my heart has judged him 
guilty, which of you will dare to ab- 
solve him ? Would you that his glory 
was tarnished, and that the name of 
Fernand should survive what was no 
longer himself? I have preserved my 
lover: he remains immortal: his shade 
applauds my courage: I am assured 
that in expiring no feeling of hatred 
approached his heart. No tribunal, 
no nation, even heaven itself cannot 
judge between Fernand and me. The 
love which united me to him cannot 
wander, cannot render me criminal : 
it is superior to law, and to the 
opinion of men: it is truth, light, the 
pure element, the first idea of the 



ZULMA. 131 

moral world. The sentiments by 
which you are animated are only a 
defaced image. Death, that thought 
which men regard as the most terri- 
ble, and the most over-powering, would 
disappear in the presence of what now 
occupies me. What is his life, what 
is mine, compared to that love which 
will suffer through all eternity? Let 
not man judge of that which belongs 
not to man ; leave it to my heart to 
pronounce its own sentence. Can 
you invent a mortal punishment which 
would not be a solace to me? You 
will only punish my family, that 
innocent family, a stranger to those 
emotions which nothing can inspire or 
G 4 



132 ZULMA, 



restrain. Save it then from the pain 
of my condemnation. Hear me when 
I assure you this sentence would be 
""just. Can you believe me blinded 
towards myself ? Can you think me 
sufficiency interested to be deceived? 
Ah ! of all judges, the most impartial 
will be Zulma. Interest for the safety 
even of the authors of my being would 
not persuade me to have recourse to 
fiction 5 how indeed could it ? I exist 
so strongly in myself, that to shew 
myself any other is beyond my power, 
and the shade of Fernand which hears 
me has more influence over me than 
you. People, you have heard me, 
Old men, now judge me." 



ZULMA. 133 

At these words Zulma pnused, and 
the emotion sue occ is ned tor an in- 
stant silenced the whole multitude ; 
but when she was no longer heard, 
loud and tumultuous cries resounded 
in her favour. The judges either par- 
ticipated in the general sensation, or 
believed it impossible to resist, and the 
pardon of Zulma was pronounced. 
Her family su rounded her, the popu- 
lace, always violent in their feelings, 
not content with delivering this ac- 
cused beauty, wished to crown her as 
in a day of triumph. "Stop, 1 * cried 
she, " is my family absolved ?" With 
loud cries she was answered in the 
affirmative. " Never shail the name of 
their daughter be a reproach to them. 
g5 



ZULMA. 

Then my weary labours are finished:" 
and by an unobserved motion she 
darted into l^r bosom one of the 
arrows suspended at her side. Terror 
and astonishment seized all who sur- 
rounded her, and " Have you," said 
she, with an expiring effort, " be- 
lieved that I would suffer the assassin 
of Fernand to live ? Ah ! if I could 
have lived without him, the inconstancy 
of Fernand would have been just." 
Then turning towards the body of 
Fernand, and to his miserable mother, 
" Sacred objects," cried she, " 1 can 
at present behold you— you, Fernand, 
and you, his mother; suffer me to ap- 
proach him. Through the tracks of my 
blood may I retreat where he will alone 



ZULMA. 135 

cherish me, where man is freed from 
all that is not virtue and love. There 
you will behold both of us. — I die/' 
The unfortunate Zulma fell without 
life at the feet of the mother of her 
beloved. This miserable being ap- 
peared at the moment confused be- 
tween tenderness and pity for the two 
objects sacrificed to each other. But 
soon sinking under the weight of ma- 
ternal grief, she appeared to lose the 
sense of existence, of which advanced 
age promised at least to abridge the 
duration. 



M I R Z A. 



j 



PREFA C E. 



It will I think be readily con- 
ceived that my Essay on Fictions was 
composed after the three Tales now 
published, not one of which merits the 
name of Novel. The situations are 
rather indicated than displayed; and 
their sole meiit consists in depicting 
some of the feelings of the heart. I 
had not attained the age of twenty 
when they were written ; and the 



0 



14,0 PREFACE. 



Freuch Revolution had then no exist- 
ence. I am wi jj ing ro , >eljeve that 

since this period my mind has acquired 
sufficient strength to be dedicated to 
more useful works. It is said that 
misfortune hastens the developement 
of every mora] faculty ; but I fear it 
sometimes produces an opposite effect, 
and throws the mind into a state of 
dejection which detaches us both from 
ourselves and others. The greatness 
of surrounding events makes us sen- 
sible of the annihilation of general 
thoughts, the imbecility of individual 
feelings, when, bewildered in life, we 
no longer know what course should be 
pursued by hope, what action should 
excite effort, what principle shall 



PREFACE. 141 

henceforth guide public opinion amidst 
the wanderings of mind and of party, 
and shall mark anew, in every career, 
the illustrious object of real glory. 



MIRZA; 



OR, 

LETTER OF A TRAVELLER. 



Permit me, Madam, to relate to 
you an adventure which I met with in 
my travels, which may perhaps prove 
interesting to you.* About a month 
ago I was informed at Goree that the 
governor had determined to settle a 



* This story is founded upon some circum- 
stances of the slave trade, related by the travel- 
lers to Senegal. 



negro family at the distance of SQme 
leagues from that place, in order to 
establish a plantation* similar to those 
m St. Domingo, doubtless flattering 
himself that such an example would 
excite the Africans to the cultivation 
of sugar, and that drawing amongst 
themselves the free trade of this com- 
modity, the Europeans would not tear 
them from their country to expose 
them to the dreadful yoke of slavery. 
Vainly have the most eloquent writers 
endeavoured to obtain this revolution 
from the virtue of mankind. The en- 
lightened statesman, despairing of con- 
quering personal interest, would rest 
the question upon humanity, or in 
destroying the advantages for which 



MIRZA. 145 

it is encountered; but the negroes, 
thoughtless of the future even on their 
own account, arestill more incapable of 
extending their views to future gene- 
rations, and reject present evil without 
comparing it with the lot which they 
might avoid. One African, delivered 
from slavery by the generosity of the 
governor, alone yielded to his projects. 
A prince in his own country, some ne- 
groes of inferior rank had followed 
him, and cultivated his land under his 
own direction. I desired to be con- 
ducted to him. I walked one part of 
a day, and the following evening ar- 
rived near a house, which the French, 
they told me, had assisted to build, 
but which had still a savage appear- 



146 MIRZA. 

ance. When I approached, the ne- 
groes were enjoying their season of 
recreation: they amused themselves 
with drawing the bow, perhaps regret- 
ting the time when thispleasure was 
their sole occupation. Ourika, the 
wife of Ximeo, the negro chief, was . 
seated at some distance from thegames, 
looking anxiously at her daughter,' 
two years old, who was playing at her 
feet. My guide advancing towards 
her, requested an asylum for me in 
the name of the governor. « J s j t the 
governor who has sent him ?" cried 
she : •« let him come in, he i s we i_ 
come; all we have comes from him." 
She approached me with precipita- 
tion : her beauty enchanted me: she 



MIRZA. 147 

possessed the true charm of her sex, 
whatever could be described of soft- 
ness and grace. " Where is Ximeo?" 
demanded my guide. — " He is not re- 
turned/' she replied : " he takes his 
evening walk when the sun is not 
above the horizon ; when the twilight 
ceases to shine he will return, and it 
will be no longer night for me.'' In 
finishing these words she sighed, and 
departed, and when she again ap- 
proached I perceived some traces of 
tears upon her face. We entered the 
hut, where we were served with a re- 
past composed of every fruit of the 
country: I tasted them with pleasure, 
pleased with new sensations. On a 
knock at the gate, Ourika started, 



HS MIRZA. 

rose with precipitation, opened the 
door of the hut, and threw herself into 
the arms of Xitneo, who embraced her 
without appearing to know what he 
did, or what he saw. I went up to 
him. You cannot imagine a more 
delightful figure: his features had none 
of the defects usual in men of his co- 
lour: his look produced an effect 
which I have never since felt; it 
pierced- the soul: the melancholy it 
expressed penetrated the hearts of 
those on whom it fell. The form of 
the Apollo Belvidere is not more per- 
fect: it may, perhaps, be rather too 
small for a man, but the depression of 
sorrow which was announced by all 
his motions, and painted in his look?. 



MIRZA. 

accorded more with delicacy than 
strength. He expressed no surprise 
at seeing us, and appeared inacces- 
sible to every feeling which was fo- 
reign to his predominant idea. We 
told him we were come from the go* 
vemor, and the intention of our jour- 
ney, m The governor/' said he, " has 
a right to my gratitude: in the estate 
in which I am, would you believe it, 
I have still a benefactor." He some- 
times spoke to us of the motives which 
had determined him to cultivate these 
lands, and I was astonished at his un- 
derstanding, and his facility of expres- 
sion. Pie perceived it, and said : " You 
are surprised when we are not a horde 
of brutes, whose destiny you pass it 

VOL. I. H 



ISO M IRZ A . 

may determine." "No/' I replied; 
u but a Frenchman would not speak 
his own language better than you." — 
" Ah ! you are right," said he : » vv e 
long preserve some rays of light when 
we have lived near an angel ; — and her 
beautiful eyes were cast down to see 
nothing but me." Ourika burst into 
tears, which Ximeo at length perceiv- 
ing : " Pardon me/' cried he, taking 
her by the hand, " the present belongs 
to thee; suffer remembrances.— To- 
morrow," said he, turning to me, cc we 
will go together over our plantation ; 
you will see whether I may flatter 
myself with its answering the wishes 
of the governor. The best bed is pre- 
pared for you ; sleep in peace ; I wish 



MIRZA. ljl 

you comfortable here. — The wounded 
heart/' said he in a low voice, " fears 
nothing for itself, but wishes to see 
the happiness of others/' 

I went to bed, but could not sleep. 
I was penetrated with the sadness of 
which every thing I saw bore the im- 
pression, though 1 was ignorant of the 
cause ; but I felt an emotion similar 
to what we feel on beholding a picture 
which represents melancholy. I rose 
at break of day, and finding Ximeo still 
more depressed than on the preceding 
evening, I inquired the reason. " My 
grief," replied he, " is fixed in my 
heart, and can neither increase nor 
diminish, but uniformity of life makes 
u 9 



15$ MIRZA. 

more imperceptibly, and new events, 
whatever they may be, produce new 
reflections, which are always fresh 
sources of tears/' With extreme care 
he shewed me the whole of his planta- 
tion, and I was surprised at the order 
I everywhere observed. The land pro- 
duced quite as much as a similar space 
cultivated at St. Domingo by the same 
number of men, and the happy negroes 
were not overwhelmed by labour. I 
saw with pleasure that cruelty was 
useless. I asked Ximeo who had in- 
structed him in the culture of land, 
and upon the proper division of the 
day for labour. " I have had, 5 ' said 
he, u little instruction, but reason can 
accomplish what reason discovers to 



MIRZA. 153 

be necessary: since we are forbidden 
to die, we must consecrate our lives to 
others. What could I do for myself? 
I had a horror for slavery: I could 
not have conceived the barbarous 
designs of men of your colour : I 
sometimes thought their Deity was 
the enemy of our's, and had com- 
manded them to make us suffer; but 
when I learned that one of our own 
productions, neglected by us, alone 
occasioned the cruel sufferings of the 
Africans, I accepted the offer which 
was made to me of giving them an 
example of cultivation.— May a free 
commerce be established between the 
two parts of the world! May my un- 
happy countrymen renounce a savage 
h ? 



l0 * MIRZA. 

life, devote themselves to labour, to 
satisfy your greedy desires, and con- 
tribute to save some from their unfor- 
tunate destiny! May those who are 
flattered with the hope of avoiding 
such a lot be occupied by an equal zeal 
to serve others"?' 



Whilst he thus addressed me we ap- 
proached a gate which Jed to a spa- 
cious wood, with which one side of 
thp estate was bounded. I believed 
Ximeo was about to open it, but he 
turned aside to avoid it. " Why," 

said J , « doyou not shew i " « Stop," 

Cried he, « you have a look of feelingr 
can you hear the long recital of mis- 
fortune? Jt is two years since I have 



really spoken — what I say is not speak- 
ing. — Toil see I have need to pour out 
my heart, but you ought not to be 
flattered by the confidence, yet I am 
encouraged by your kindness, and ex- 
pect your pity." u Fear nothing," 
cried I, " you shall not be deceived." 

c< I was born," said Ximeo, " in 
the kingdom of Cayor: my father 
was of royal extraction, and the chief 
of some tribes, which were confided to 
him by the sovereign. I was early 
exercised in the art of defending my 
country, and from my infancy the bow 
and the javelin were familiar to me. 
From that time I was destined to be 
the husband of Ourika, the daughter 
H 4 



156 MIRZA. 

of my father's sister: I loved her as 
soon as I was capable of love ; and this 
feeling was first developed in me for 
her and by her. Her perfect beauty 
struck me before I compared it with 
that of other females, and my choice 
confirmed my early inclination. We 
were frequently at war with the Ja- 
loffes, our neighbours ; and as we mu- 
tually continued the atrocious custom 
of selling our prisoners of war to the 
Europeans, a profound hatred, which 
even peace could not suspend, did not 
permit any communication between 
us. One day, in hunting over our 
mountains, I was insensibly drawn to 
a greater distance than I intended : I 
heard a female voice remarkable for 



MIRZA. 157 

its sweetness: I listened to the song, 
but heard not the words usually sung 
by young women : the Jove of liberty, 
the dread of slavery, were the subject 
of those sublime hymns which ar- 
rested my admiration. I approached; 
a young female arose : struck with the 
contrast between her age and the sub- 
ject of her meditations, I sought to 
find something supernatural in her 
features, which might announce that in- 
spiration which is supplied by the con- 
tinued reflections of advanced age. She 
was not beautiful, but her noble and 
regular form, her enchanting eyes, her 
animated countenance, left love no- 
thing more to desire in her appearance. 
She came up to me, and spoke long 
h 5 



158 MIRZA. 

before I could reply. At last I de- 
scribed my astonishment, which in- 
creased when I learnt that she had 
composed the words I had heard. 
' Cease your surprise/ said she : c a 
Frenchman established in Senegal, dis- 
contented with his lot, and miserable 
in his own county, retired amongst 
us : this old man has deigned to take 
tare of my youth, and has given me 
what is most desirable amongst the 
Europeans, the knowledge which they 
abuse, and the philosophy whose les- 
sons they so little follow. I have learnt 
the French language: I have read some 
of their books, and I amuse myself 
with thinking alone upon these moun- 
tains.' Every word she uttered re- 



MIEZA. 159 

doubled my interest and curiosity: it 
was no longer a woman, it was a Grace 
1 seemed to hear; and those men who 
amongst us consecrate themselves to 
the worship of the gods never had 
appeared to me to be animated by such 
noble enthusiasm. On quitting her I 
obtained permission to see her again: 
every where 1 was followed by her re- 
membrance ; but I carried away more 
of admiration than love, and for a long 
time, confiding in this distinction, I 
saw Mirza, which was the name of the 
young woman, without conceiving I 
should offend Ourika. At last I one 
day inquired if she had ever loved. I 
trembled on putting this question, but 
her easy wit, and open character, made 



1W> M1RZA. 

all her replies easy. < No/ said she; 
* I have been loved sometimes : per- 
haps I have been desirous of beinsr 
sensible to that passion. I wish to 
know this sentiment which :s diffused 
through life, and creates from itself 
alone the fate of every instant of time: 
but I believe I have reflected too much 
to prove this illusion. I feel all the 
emotions of my own heart, and I see 
those of others. I have not to this 
time either deceived myself, or been 
deceived/ This last word afflicted 
me. ' Mirza,' said I, < how I pity you ! 
the pleasures of thought are not the 
whole of occupation ; those of the heart 
can alone suffice to fill all the faculties 
of the soul.' She instructed me in 



M IRZ A. 161 

the meantime with a patience that no- 
thing could weary, and I was not long 
in learning all that she knew herself. 
When I interrupted her with enco- 
miums she ceased to listen ; when I 
paused she continued; but I saw by 
her conversation, though J had praised 
her, it was of me alone she thought. 
At last, intoxicated with her grace, her 
understanding, and her looks, I felt 
that I loved her, and I dared to declare 
it. What expressions did I not employ 
to make her conceive the idea of that 
elevation I had found in her mind! I 
was ready to expire at her feet with 
passion and with fear. 1 Mirza/ re- 
peated I, c place me above the world 
by telling me you love me ; open to 



MIRZA. 

me the view of heaven, that I may 
mount to it with you.' On hearing 
this she was moved, and tears filled 
those beautiful eyes, where I had only 
seen the expression of genius. ' Ximeo,' 
said she, ; to-morrow I will answer 
thee; expect not from me the arts 
of thy countrywomen; to-morrow thou 
shalt read my heart — reflect upon thy 
own. 3 In saying this she quitted me 
long before sun-set, the usual signal 
for her retreat, and I sought not to 
detain her. The ascendency of her 
character made me submissive to her 
will. Since I had known Mirza I saw 
less of Ourika. I deceived her; I 
pretended journies; I retard the 
time for our union; I dispersed the 



MIRZA. 103 

future from my mind instead of de- 
ciding upon -what were its demands. 

"At last arrived the morrow, which 
seemed to have been separated by ages 
from the preceding evening. Mirza 
advanced first to me. She had passed 
the morning in tears. ' Ximeo,' said 
she, in ft firm but gentle voice, i art 
thou sure that thou lovest me ? Is it 
certain that in these extended regions 
no object has fixed thy heart ?' Pro- 
testations were my reply. ' Well, I 
will believe thee. Nature, which sur- 
rounds us, is the only witness of thy 
promises. I know nothing certain of 
thee but what 1 have learned from thy 
own mouth. My loneliness, my solitude, 



i0 * MIRZA. 

forms the whole of my security. What 
distrust, what obstacle have I opposed 
to thy wiiJ ? Thou wilt not deceive 
my esteem for Xinvo; thou wilt not 
injure me for loving thee. J have 
distanced nryself iVom my family, my 
friends, my country, to depend alone 
upon thee. I ought in thy sight to be as 
sacred as decrepitude, childhood, and 
misery. No, I can see nothing: no' — 
I interrupted her. I knelt, at her feet. 
I believed myself true. The force of 
the present made me forget the past 
and the future. I had deceived, 1 had 
persuaded— she believed me. Oh God ! 
what passionate expressions did she 
find! How happy was she in loving! , 
Ah ! during two months thus passed, 



whatever there is of love and happiness 
was collected in her heart. I rejoiced ; 
but insensibly I became calm. Strange 
caprice of human nature! I was so 
.struck with the pleasure she had in 
seeing me, that I soon began to visit her 
rather for her sake than my own. I 
was so secure of a reception that I no 
longer trembled before her. Mirza 
did not perceive this. She spoke, she 
replied, she wept, she consoled her- 
self; and her ardent mind acted upon 
itself. Ashamed of her error, and 
more ashamed of myself, I was obliged 
to leave her. War was declared in 
another extremity of the kingdom 
of Cayor, and I resolved to go, 
but it was necessary to announce this 



166 AIIRZA. 

to Mirza. At that moment I felt 
how much she was dear to me. Her 
confiding and gentle security took from 
me the power of discovering my pro- 
ject. She seemed so wholly to live in 
my presence, that my language froze 
when I wished to speak of my de- 
parture. I resolved to write : this art, 
which she had taught me, was to be 
used for her misery. Twenty times I 
quitted her, but as often returned. The 
unfortunate being gladly mistook my 
pity for love. At last I departed, and 
wrote to her that my duty obligFd us 
to separate, but that I should return to 
her feet more tender than before. 
What a reply did she send ! Ah ! 
language of love, what are thy charms 



miuza, 167 

when embellished with thought! 
What was her despair at my absence, 
her desire for my return ! I shuddered 
at the remembrance of her excessive 
love; for my father never would have 
acknowledged as a daughter a wife 
taken from the country of the Jaloffes. 

M All these obstacles appeared when 
1 withdrew the veil that had hid me 

from myself. I again saw Ourika. Her 
beauty, her tears, the strength of a 
first attachment, the entreaties of all 
my family, what shall I say? — what- 
ever appears insurmountable when the 
heart is enervated— all conspired to 
render me unfaithful ; and my union 
with Ourika was ratified in the pre- 



168 



MIRZA. 



sencc of the Gods. The time fixed 
for my return to Mirza in the mean 
time approached. I wished to see her : 
I hoped to lessen the blow I was to 
inflict ; and I believed this possible. 
When we no longer love, we no longer 
divine its effects; even memory re- 
fuses to aid us. What were my sen- 
sations in traversing those scenes, the 
witnesses of my protestations and hap- 
piness ! Nothing was changed but my 
heart ; yet I scarcely knew them again. 
No sooner was I beheld by Mirza, than 
1 believe she experienced in one mo- 
ment more of happiness than is ge- 
nerally spread over the whole of life. 
How can I describe to you by what 
dreadful gradations I led the unfor- 



MIRZA. 16<J 

tunate Mirza to the knowledge of my 
heart? My lips treoibled when they 
pronounced the word friendship. 
1 Friendship 1 / cried she, c thy friend- 
ship! Barbarian, ought such a senti- 
ment to be offered to my mind ? Give 
me death, that now is all thou canst 
do for me/ Her excessive grief seemed 
nearly to produce this effect. She fell 
at my feet without motion. Monster 
that I was, it was then that I should 
have deceived her; but it was then I 
was true. 5 Leave me, unfeeling 
man/ said she, ' the old man who 
watched over my infancy, and who was 
*a father to me, may yet live some 
time ; I must exist for him. I am 
indeed dead already/ added she, plac- 



170 MIRZA. 

ing her hand upon her heart, 4 but my 
cares are necessary to bim — leave me/ 
4 I cannot/ cried I, 4 I cannot sup- 
port thy hatred/ 1 My hatred?' re- 
plied she ; c fear it not, Ximeo ; there 
are hearts which alone know love, and 
in which every other passion acts only 
against themselves. Farewell, Ximeo ; 
another is about to possess thee.' 
4 No, never, never/ said I. 4 I be- 
lieve thee no longer now/ replied she: 
4 yesterday thy words might have made 
me doubt whether the sun shone. 
Ximeo, press me to thy heart ; call me 
thy beloved mistress ; recall thy former 
accents, which I yet hear, not, as be- 
fore, to enjoy them, but as a remem- 
brance. But that is impossible. Fare- 



i 



Ml RZ A . 171 

well, I shall again find them when 
1 am alone; my heart will hear them 
always ; they are the cause of that 
death which I bear and retain in my 
heart. Ximeo, farewell !' 

" The affecting sound of this last word, 
the effort she made to depart, are all 
present to my mind, her image is before 
my eyes. Gods! render this illusion still 
more strong, that I may still see her one 
moment, or rather feel what I then 
lost. I remained a long time motion- 
less in the place she had quitted, dis- 
tracted, agitated like the wretch who 
has committed some monstrous crime. 
Night surprised me before I thought of 
returning home. Remorse, rcmem- 



172 MIRZA. 

brance, the feeling of Mirza's misery, 
was attached to my soul. Her shade 
appeared before me as if the termi- 
nation of her happiness had been that 

of her life. 

" War was declared against the Ja- 
loffes, and i was called to fight against 
the countrymen of Mirza. I wished 
to acquire glory in her eyes, to justify 
her choice, and still to merit the hap- 
piness I had renounced. 1 had little 
fear of death, and had made so bad an 
use of life, that I risked it perhaps 
with a secret pleasure. I was dan- 
gerously wounded; but learned, on 
my recovery, that a female daily placed 
herself before the threshold of my 



MIRZA. 173 

door motionless, but starting at the 
least noise ; and that, when I was one 
day worse, she fainted; that, on her 
recovery, she exclaimed, ' Let him 
not know the state in which you have 
seen me ; to him I am even less than 
a stranger ; my interest must afflict 
him/ At last oneday,aday how memo- 
rable ! still faint and weak, my family 
with Ourika came to visit me. I was 
calm when I dismissed the remem- 
brance of her whom I had caused to 
despair ; at least I believed I was. I 
thought I had been conducted by fate. 
I had indeed acted as one thus go- 
verned : and I so much feared the time 
of repentance, that I employed every 
effort to keep my thoughts fixed upon 
vol. u j 



174- mirza . 

the past. The Jaloffes, our enemies, 
broke suddenly into the town we in- 
habited. We were without defence, 
and sustained a long attack ; but at 
last they succeeded, and made many 
prisoners, amongst whom was myself. 
What were my feelings when I beheld 
myself loaded with fetters ! The cruel 
Hottentots only destine die vanquished 
to death; but we, more infamously 
barbarous, serve our common enemies, 
and justify their crimes, by becoming 
their accomplices. A detachment from 
the Jaloffes made us march all the 
night. When day appeared we found 
ourselves upon the banks of the Sene- 
gal, where barks were already prepared. 
I saw white men, and was convinced 



* 



MIRZA. \f£ 

of my lot. Our conductors soon be- 
gan to make vile conditions for their 
infamous exchange. The Europeans 
examined with curiosity our strength 
and our age, to found upon them the 
hope of our being longer able to sup- 
port the evils to which we were des- 
tined. I had already taken my deter- 
mination. I hoped that in passing to 
this fatal bark my chains would be 
loosened, and leave me the power of 
plunging into the river, and that in 
defiance of the ready assistance of my 
avaricious possessors, the weight of 
my irons would carry me to the 
bottom. With my eyes fixed upon 
the ground, and my thoughts attached 
to the terrible hope which I had em- 
l 2 



176 MIRZA. 

braced, I seemed to be separated from 
surrounding objects. Suddenly a voice, 
which happiness and grief had made 
familiar to me, made my heart bound, 
and tore me from motionless medi- 
tation. I looked, and beheld Mirza, 
not as a mortal, but beautiful as an 
angel ; for her mind was painted upon 
her countenance. I heard her demand 
from the Europeans to be heard. Her 
voice trembled, but it was neither with 
fear nor tenderness. ' Europeans!" 
said she, 1 to cultivate your lands you 
condemn us to slavery ; your interest 
renders our misfortunes necessary to 
you; you resemble only the god of evil; 
and to make us suffer is the only object 
of that misery to which you destine 



MIRZA. 177 

U9. Behuld this young man : weakened 
by his wounds, he can neither support 
the length of the voyage, nor the la- 
bours you demand. You see my 
strength and my youth. My sex has 
not enervated my courage. Take me 
as a slave instead of Ximeo. I will 
live, since this is the price at which 
you grant him liberty. I will no longer 
regard slavery as degrading. I will 
respect the power of my masters ; oyer 
me shall they retain it; and by their 
benefits it shall be consecrated. Ximeo 
ought to cherish life ; Ximeo is be- 
loved. 1 belong to no one upon earth. 
I can withdraw from it without leaving 
a void in any heart which will feel that 
I exist no more. I go to finish my 
I 3 



1/5 M1JRZA. 

days ! a new happiness makes me sur- 
vive my heart. Ah ! allow yourselves 
to be moved • and when your pity does 
not oppose your interest, resist not its 
voice/ 

" On finishing these words, the exalted 
Mirza, whom the fear of death would 
never have suffered to fall at the feet 
of kings, humbly bent her knee, but 
preserved in this attitude all her dig- 
nity ; and admiration and shame were 
the lot of those she implored. For 
one moment she might think I ac- 
cepted her generosity; for I had lost 
the power of speech, and was tor- 
mented with my inability to regain it. 
The ferocious Europeans cried with 



one voice, 4 We accept the change : 
she is young, she is beautiful, she is 
courageous; we will take the negress 
and leave her friend.' 1 again resumed 
ray strength. They approached Mirza. 
« Barbarians V cried I, ' take rae ! 
respect her age, her weakness- Ja- 
loffes ! will you consent that a female 
of your country shall* be a slave in- 
stead of your most cruel enemy ?' 
« Stop !' said Mirza, ' cease to be 
generous. It is alone for thyself that 
thou dost this act of virtue. Had my 
happiness been dear to thee I should 
not have been abandoned. I loved 
thee more when I knew thee insensible. 
Leave me the right of complaint, since 
thou canst not withdraw my misery. 
I 4 



180 MIRZA. 

Tear not from me the only good that 
remains— the delicious thought of be- 
longing to thee by the service 1 have 
done thee. I have followed thy destiny. 
I shall die if my life is no longer useful 
to thee. Thou hast only this means 
of saving my life. Barest thou persist 
in thy refusal !' I have since recalled 
all her words. At the time I believed 
I should hear them no more. I shud- 
dered at the design of Mirza. I 
trembled lest these vile Europeans 
should not accede. I dared not to de- 
clare that nothing should separate me 
from her. These greedy merchants 
would have dragged away both of us. 
Their hearts, incapable of feeling, per- 
haps already conceived this would en- 



MlfiZA. 131 

sue ; already even they promised them- 
selves, in future, to choose as captives 
those who from love or duty would 
be redeemed or followed, studying 
our virtues only in subservience to 
their interest. But the governor, inr 
formed of our combats, of the self-de- 
votion of Mirza, and of my despair, 
advanced towards us as an angel of 
light. 4 Be free !' said he to us both ; 
4 I give you back to your country and 
to your love. So much greatness of 
soul would have shamed the Europeans 
who had called you their slaves l J 

44 They soon took off my irons. I em- 
braced his knees, blessing, in my heart, 
his gooduess, as if he had sacrificed his 



182 



legitimate rights. But ought usurpers, 
in renouncing their injustice, to expect 
they should rank as benefactors? 1 rose, 
and believed that, like myself, fe» 
was at the feet of the governor, but saw 
her at some distance seated under a 
tree in profound thought. I ran to- 
wards her. What love, what admira- 
tion, what gratitude, did I feel and 
express at the same time ! « Xiraeo,' 
said she, < there is no longer time for 
this. My m i sery j s too deep , y ^ 

graven to be obliterated by thy hand. 
I cannot hear thy voice without shud- 
dering with sorrow j and thy presence 
freezes in my veins the blood which 
once flowed only for thee. Impas- 
sioned hearts know only extremes. 



MIKZA. 183 

When thou acquainted me with my 
lot, I doubted of it for a long time. 
Thou mightest return, s h 3 uld have 
believed that thy inconstancy had been 
a dream ; but now, to annihilate this 
remembrance, I pierce the heart from 
which it cannot be effaced/ In pro- 
nouncing these words, the mortal dart 
pierced her bosom. Gods ! who at 
that time suspended my life, have you 
prolonged it only the more to avenge 
Mirza by the protracted punishment 
of my grief. During a whole month 
the chain of remembrance and thought 
was entirely interrupted. I sometimes 
believe myself in another world, the 
hell of which is the remembrance of 
the first. Ourika made me promise 



184 xMIRZA. 

that I would not attempt my exist- 
ence. The governor has convinced me 
that I must live to be useful to my 
unhappy countrymen, and to respect 
the last wishes of Mirza, who conjured 
me, in dying, to take care of myself, 
to be consoled for her sake. I have 
obeyed. I have inclosed in the tomb 
the sad remains of her whom I love, 
though she is no more ; of her whom 
1 knew not in life. There, when the 
sun sets, when nature seems dressed in 
mourning, when universal silence al- 
lows me to attend to nothing but my 
own sad thoughts, prostrate upon her 
tomb I feel the indulgence of misery, 
the full feeling of my trouble. My 
raised imagination sometimes creates 



MIRZA. 



1S6 



phantoms ; and I believe I see her, but 
never as an irritated lover. I hear her 
console and partake of my grief. In 
fact, uncertain as to our future state, I 
respect the remembrance of Mirza in 
my heart, and fear, that in inflicting 
death upon myself, 1 should annihilate 
all that remains of her. Two years are 
passed ; and you are the only being to 
whom I have confided my grief; but 
I expect not your pity. Should a 
barbarian be pitied who caused the 
death of such a being as he laments ? 
Promise me only that you will never 
forget the name of Mirza ; tell it to 
your children ; and preserve, after my 
death, the remembrance of this angel 
of love, this victim of misfortune." 



100 M1RZA. 

On finishing his recital, a gloomy 
melancholy was depicted over the 
charming countenance of Ximeo. I 
was bathed in tears, and attempted to 
speak. " Can you believe," said he, 
" that it is possible to console me? 
Can you conceive that any thoughts 
respecting my misery have not been 
suggested by my own heart? 1 have 
been wishing to inform you of these 
circumstances; but 1 well knew you 
could not soften them. I should die 
were the remembrance taken away. 
Remorse would usurp the place and 
entirely occupy my heart ; and the 
pains of that are sterile and burning. 
Farewell, 1 thank you for having heard 
me." 



\ 



MIJRZA. 187 

His gloomy calm, his despair, not 
vented in tears, readily convinced 
me that every effort would be vain. 
I dared not to address him on the sub- 
ject ; for there is something sacred 
in misery, and I quitted him with a 
heart full of bitterness, to accomplish 
my promise, to recount this history, 
and, as far as I am able, to consecrate 
the unfortunate name of Mirza. 



END OF VOL. I. 



B. Clarkr, Priuter, WclUSirtc >i, Limuun. 
