CLAN-ALBIN. 



VOL. I. 



CLAN-ALBIN 



A NATIONAL TALE. 



A nntiou fam'd for sonsj and beauty's charms ; 
Zealous, yet modest; innocent, though free; 
Patient of toil ; serene amidst alarms ; 
Inflexible in faith ; invincible in arms. 

Beattie. 



IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



VOL. I. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, HDRST, BEES, ORME, & BROWN, LONDON \ 

MA.CREDIE, SKELLY, AND MUCKERSY, EDINBURGH J 

AND JOHN CUMMING, DUBLIN. 

1815. 



Jgha Moir, Printer. 



fa3 

v.l 



ADVERTISEMENT 



BY THE EDITOR. 



Tales and Novels are generally of too deli- 
t cate a structure to sustain the weight of those 
old-fashioned things called Prefaces, even if 
^ their lively readers had patience to peruse such 
heavy performances. By the courtesy of Eng- 
land, however, writers of all descriptions may 
claim the privilege of explaining their design 
in coming before the public ; and not without 
good reason. But for this right, how often 
might the stupid reader plod on through a long 
work, without at all suspecting how much the 
author intended his edification and entertain- 
ment in every chapter and page ? 

Few of the old romance or novel writers ap- 
pear to have had any higher purpose than the 



11 ADVERTISEMENT. 

mere amusement of their readers, — a very good 
purpose too : But, in this clever and aspiring 
age, we have conceived the project of tricking 
grown ladies and gentlemen into knowledge 
and goodness, by a process somewhat similar 
to that by which the ingenious Professor Von 
Feinaigle dexterously grinds the little boys of 
Ireland into philologists and philosophers, 
while they innocently fancy themselves engag- 
ed in trundling a hoop or tossing a ball. The 
Tale which occupies the following pages^ has, 
as I take it, no pretensions of this exalted- sort. 
It neither usurps the privileges of the moral- 
ist nor the preacher. It appears indeed to have 
merely the plain, direct character, and single- 
hearted purpose, of the old-fashioned novel, 
with no loftier design than harmlessly to beguile a 
few of those hours which can neither be devoted 
to business nor redeemed to wisdom,by a simple 
delineation of Scotish manners and scenery. 
If, however, it shall be able to lead back the me- 
mory of any wandering son of Scotland, to that 
olden time when some pastoral valley formed 
his little world, and when his most ambitious 



ADYERTISEMENT. HI 

wish was to climb the neighbouring hill's top, I 
am confident that the highest aim of the writer 
will be accomplished ; — for those pure and 
peaceful recollections cannot fail to meliorate 
the heart which they so delightfully engage. 

Injustice to the Author, it ought to be men- 
tioned, that the first half of this Tale was not 
only written but printed long before the ani- 
mated historian of the race of Ivor had allured 
the romantic adventurer into a track, rich, ori- 
ginal, and unexplored, and rendered a second 
journey all but hopeless. As it now appears, it 
relates wholly to another period of society; 
and its most striking characters and incidents 
are any thing but fictitious. That high-born 
and hard. fated woman, who was driven abroad 
in early life by the ruin of her family and the 
misfortunes of her country, and who returned 
from France to an insular and solitary refuge 
among the humblest of that once powerful 
clan, whom her knowledge and her virtues 
long improved and blessed, is far indeed from 
being the portrait of fancy. 

It is, I believe, part of the duty of an editor 



IV ADVERTISEMENT. 

to deprecate the severity of critics, and the 
harshness of cavillers, never doubting that 
such must exist ; and, by the usual pleas in ar- 
rest of judgment, namely, age, sex, inexperi- 
ence, haste, a first offence, and so forth, to im- 
plore from the facility of good-nature what 
cannot be yielded by the unmixed justice of 
good taste. It is a humiliating thing, after all, 
•—even if it could be obtained,— to hold from 
courtesy that suffrage which is due only to de- 
sert ; and I know that I shall best fulfil what 
is expected from me, by simply challenging 
for the Chief of Clan-Albin, that which every 
Highlander gives, and has, therefore, a right 
to demand, — 

" The equal combat of the Fingallians" 



CLAN-ALBIN, 

A NATIONAL TALE. 



CHAP. I. 

No friend's complaint, no kind domestic tear, 

Pleased thy pale ghost, or graced thy mournful bier; 

By foreign hands thy dying eyes were closed, 

By foreign hands thy decent limbs composed, 

By foreign hands thy humble grave adorned, 

By strangers honoured, and by strangers mourned. 

Pope. 

In a dark and stormy night in November, 
178 — , Ronald Macalbin, a Scottish High- 
lander, left the hamlet of L , to cross 1 

the mountains to Glen-Albin, a solitary and 
remote valley in the Western Highlands. — In 
the person of Ronald were vested the various 
trades of Blacksmith, Farmer, Distiller, and 
Drover ; and in the last capacity he had just 
been attending a cattle fair, annually held at 

L , as agent for a little community to 

which he belonged. 

The leave of absence which Ronald had 
obtained from his wife was for one day, but 

VOL. I, B 



2 CLAN-ALBIN, 

at the fair he had met with many clansmen 
and old friends, and his social propensities 
were of the most ardent kind. It was on the 
evening of the third day, that he reluctantly 
bent his way homeward, revolving some pro- 
bable tale with which to appease the anti- 
cipated clamours of his help-mate. Like 
most of the procrastinating sons of mortality, 
Ronald had averted the evil day as long as 
possible. In the midst of his jollity the idea 
of his wife had indeed intruded, but it still 
fled before the jests of Mr. Wingate, top-master 
to an English drover, and the pipe of " Piper 
Hugh ;" or was drowned amid the quaighs of 
Fairntosh with which he laboured to keep his 
spirits buoyant. 

It was now when alone, and exposed to 
the fury of the tempest, that all the terrors 
of the reception he expected congregated in 
dismal array before him ; and the thunder* 
which broke on the surrounding mountains, 
rolling in long deep peals through the glens, 
and flinging back on the stunned ear, in awful 
reverberation, seemed but a faint emblem of 
the more dreaded moral thunders which thirty 

* In the West Highlands thunder is very common in 
winter. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 3 

years experience had taught Ronald to anti- 
cipate. 

" Had she the heart of a Christian," thought 
Ronald, — " let alone of a wife and namesake, 
she could not scold to-night;" — and he rolled 
an additional wrapper round a fine plaid shawl 
which he had purchased at the fair as an offer- 
ing of peace. 

" Had she the soul of a Macalbin she 
would pity me." — And the next suggestion of 
Ronald's fancy appeard so like high treason 
against the powers that were, that he feared 
to give it a local habitation in his mind, much 
more to embody it in words ; for the law* 
recognized in his household, assimilating to 
those of the realm, made it death even to 
imagine evil of the supreme authority. 

The tempest raged with increasing vio- 
lence ; and Ronald, leaving his track to the 
sagacity of his horse, continued to frame and 
reject a thousand plans for palliating his con- 
duct, or averting its punishment, as he skirted 
the mountains. 

" I will entreat old Moome to plead for 
me," — he exclaimed at last ; and delighted 
with this idea, he was urging on his horse, 
when the animal suddenly stopped short, and 



4 CLAN-ALBIN, 

refused to advance. — Ronald, who could have 
faced an opposing host of his own species with 
an unblanched cheek, and found courage in 
danger, felt all the national awe and dread of 
beings of a superior nature v Now it was well 
known to Ronald, that both horses and dogs 
can discover spirits invisible to human ken ; — 
his wife had often assured him that his noc- 
turnal rambles would tempt some supernatural 
visitant — he began to think his hour was 
come ; and, in a voice that shook with terror, 
demanded, "if no one stopped the way." No 
answer was returned; — he again attempted 
to make his horse proceed, but the animal 
was rooted to the spot ; and, to confirm his 
worst fears, the dog began to howl most pite- 
ously. Ronald, nearly distracted with terror, 
shouted in a louder tone ; and, mingled with 
the echoes of his own words, fancied he dis- 
tinguished the faint murmurs of a female 
voice. His courage instantly revived, and 
heartily ashamed of his fears, he alighted, and 
leading his horse forward a few paces, dis- 
covered a female leaning on a cliff, by the 
side of the path. 

" 'Tis a sad night," said Ronald in Gaelic, 
" Are you a stranger, or a countrywoman ?^~ 



A NATIONAL TALE. 5 

God help you ! are you alone r" Ronald 
received no intelligible answer ; and he re- 
peated his observation and interrogatory in 
the best English he was master of. 

" I am indeed alone," said the female in a 
feeble voice ; — and Ronald inquired whether 
she was going. 

" To the next hamlet," she replied, — " Is 
it still far distant." 

"To Dunalbin !" — exclaimed Ronald, — 
" then we shall go together ; and if you can 
ride behind me, I give you a thousand wel- 
comes." — In a tremulous voice the wander- 
ing female returned her thanks, but declined 
his offer. — Ronald would strip off his slip-o?i 9 
and convert it into a pillion for her accom- 
modation ; — this was likewise declined. — " If 
she would ride alone, he would lead forward 
the horse." — " I cannot indeed ;" said she 
earnestly, "when I have rested, I hope I shall 
be able to go on." 

Half petted by her peremptory refusal, 
Ronald remounted, and slowly rode off. 

" It is a pitiful night for any Christian soul 
to be out and alone in the middle of Glen- 
lenan," said Ronald, addressiug his rough- 
coated steed, — " and that woman a stranger 
B 2 



6 CLAN-ALBIN, 

too — English, or Irish, or Lowland — a sol- 
dier's wife, I warrant — crossing the countries, 

poor thing, to Fort . Well, women are 

all alike positive. It will be three in the 
morning before she gets through the glen ; 
— and then a mighty likely thing that Mr. 
Daniel M'Pherson will open, the New Inns to 
a soldier's wife ; — and then the river to-night 
will be dreadfully swelled — the poor thing 
might be drowned." 

These probabilities smote the simple, but 
humane heart of Ronald. — " I will return, 
and at least tell her of the stepping-stones," 
thought he, — " perhaps she is come to reason, 
and I will bring her home. She might be 
afraid to meet me in that lone place — I will 
tell her whose husband I am." 

Ronald, besides the courteous hospitality 
of the national, and the kindness of the indi- 
vidual character, had a third motive for press- 
ing the stranger to accompany him to his 
home. He knew that his wife, to a violent 
temper, united a generous disposition; and 
that her anxiety to welcome and accommodate 
the stranger, would divert the displeasure his 
lengthened stay must have occasioned. He 
retraced his steps. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 7 

" I am returned," cried Ronald, as he 
again approached the wandering female, — "to 
tell you that the stepping-stones are now 
removed to the pebbly shallow, where the 
willow dips into the stream — by ' the Cairn 
of the Hunter.' " 

Ronald received no answer, but his ear 
caught a faint hollow moan, that seemed to 
announce the separation of body and spirit. 
He was instantly on his feet, and caught the 
unfortunate female in his arms, as she was 
sinking from an attempt to rise. 

" Don't be afraid, poor soul," said the 
kind-hearted Highlander, in a voice which 
instinctively softened to the expression of 
sympathy and encouragement — " Don't be 
afraid of me, I shall take good care of you. 
— Don't you know that I am Ronald, — the 

smith's wife's husband." " Ronald's wife's 

husband," received no answer ; but in a 
short time he perceived that his wretched 
companion was seized with the pangs of 
child-birth. 

" For the love of God, I pray thee, have 
me conveyed to the shelter of some roof, and 
to the care of some female — what a condi- 
tion is mine !" — and she shuddered with the 
mingled agony of body and spirit. 



8 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Ronald placed her gently under the shelter 
of a projecting cliff, stripped off his upper 
garments, and wrapped them around her ; 
— even the new shawl was put in requisition ; 
for Ronald, forgetting that he was — " his 
wife's husband," — only remembered that he 
was a man. 

The trampling of the horse's feet was the 
usual signal for Ronald's wife to commence 
her cannonade ; but when she saw her hus- 
band, instead of his customary slow and hesi- 
tating mode of entrance, furiously dashing 
open the wattled door, she blessed herself, and 
vowed the man had seen a spirit. The wild, 
raised, and haggard appearance of Ronald, 
confirmed this conjecture, till in a few inco- 
herent sentences he explained his adventure 
in Glenlenan, and loudly called for blankets 
and dairy candles. — The " weeping blood of 
woman's heart," instantly warmed at the 
strange recital, and while Ronald made ready 
a kind of sledge, which, in a country where 
roads are impassable to wheeled carriages, 
was used for carrying stones, she had made 
every arrangement for conveying the wander- 
ing stranger to Dunalbin. 

" And God grant that she be alive," said 
Ronald's wife, as attended by his daughter he 



A NATIONAL TALE. 9 

was about to set out ; and Ronald, who fancied 
her voice never sounded so sweet s as when 
tuned to the note of pity, ventured to shake 
her hand while he repeated her wish. 

" Is she young," inquired Mary, the 
daughter of Ronald, as they hastened for- 
ward. — " I should think so," said Ronald, 
" some soldier's wife I warrant — ah Mary, you 
see what it is to be the wife of a soldier !"— 
" Poor thing !" sighed Mary, starting for- 
ward involuntarily — " A soldier's wife !" — 
and she darted away, unmindful that the 
dreary glen she entered was celebrated as the 
haunt of many a wayward ghost. 

" She is gone I" cried Mary, as Ronald 
approached with his sledge, — " we are too 
late to save her ;" and she wept and trembled 
while she gently supported the stranger in 
her arms. A low moan, which seemed the 
last effort of expiring nature, broke from the 
lips of the wandering female. — " She lives ! — 
cried Mary, with tremulous joy; and depo- 
siting her charge gently on the ground, she 
sprung into the sledge. Ronald placed the 
stranger in her arms. — " O drive softly, very 
softly, my father. — Think you is she indeed 
the wife of a soldier r" 



10 CXAN-ALBIN, 

" She is a stranger at any rate," replied 
Ronald ; — and the claim of a stranger is to a 
Highlander only secondary to the right of a 
kinsman. 

Mary persevered in kind endeavours to 
impart vital warmth to the almost frozen frame 
of the wanderer, and to restore her to sensi- 
bility. A struggling sigh at times gave token 
of returning animation, but a death-like still- 
ness succeeding, would chill every hope. 
Mary listened with inbreathed expectation ; 
and they reached Dunalbin. 

The heart of Ronald beat cheerily when 
he viewed the fire of turf and brushwood, 
which his wife's humanity had heaped, blaz- 
ing brightly in the centre of his hut. The 
good woman stepping to the door, bade them 
a cordial welcome ; and Ronald lifted the 
stranger into the cottage ; and recommending 
her to the care of his wife, retreated to the 
cellar; for so is the second, or inner apart- 
ment of a Highland hut, where there happens 
to be a second, modestly named. 

The clothes of the unfortunate stranger 
were drenched with rain. Mary undressed 
her, and they placed her in bed. She was 
made to swallow a small quantity of warmed 



A NATIONAL TALE. 11 

milk, the only cordial the house afforded suit- 
able to her condition, and in a short time she 
perceptibly recovered. Her languid eyes 
met the earnest gaze of Mary. — " May God 
reward thy care of an unfortunate," said she 
faintly. — Mary smiled, beckoned her to be 
still, and muttered a few words in Gaelic, 
which was her only language. The stranger 
understood not the exact meaning of these 
words ; but her heart comprehended nature's 
universal language. Mary's kindness was 
eloquent, and the wanderer returned her 
thanks with a languid, though grateful smile. 
Ronald entered the apartment on tip-toe. 

" She is better," cried Mary smiling, and 
without waiting to be interrogated — " The 
soldier's poor wife is better." 

" Now darling," said Ronald, whispering 
his wife — u you see plain it was God himself 
put it in my heart to stay so long at the fair — 
this poor soul else would have perished in 
Glenlenan." — Ronald, who had kept his eye 
anxiously fixed on the face of his wife while 
he made this observation, did not venture to 
hazard another; but quietly followed her 
back to the cellar, where, now that the stran- 
ger no longer needed her attentions, she set 



12 CLAN-ALBIN, 

out his supper of milk, cheese, and potatoes. 
If ever a genuine Highlander knew the vul- 
gar sensations of hunger, thirst, cold, or 
fatigue, it is certain he never complained of 
them. Ronald, who cold, wet, and weary, 
had waited his wife's leisure with a patience 
which in his own eyes had no merit, made a 
hurried and spare repast, and stretched him* 
self, still in his wet clothes, upon his humble 
pallet, that on any sudden emergency he 
might be ready to obey the call of his wife, 
and administer to the comfort of the stranger. 

Ronald had slept for some hours, and wa$ 
actually dreaming of striking a bargain with 
Mr. Wingate for the Dunalbin shotts at an 
advance of half-a-crown a head, when he 
was awakened by the feeble cry of a new-born 
infant. 

" To Himself be the praise," cried the 
pious Highlander — " Now shall I go to the 
New Inns for a drop of wine to cherish her 
heart. — But if I could go to * The Lady,' — 
across the lake is but a half mile, and she 
would get it sooner." — Ronald consulted his 
wife, who scoffed at the idea of disturbing 
« The Lady." 

" Now Ronald you make me ashamed," said 



A NATIONAL TALE. 13 

the indignant matron — " rather than go down 
the glen, and over the hill, and across the 
moor, you would be cruel enough to alarm 
your mistress.'' — Ronald had never felt his 
clannish pride more bitterly insulted : to in- 
sinuate that to spare himself the fatigue and 
danger of exploring six miles of Highland 
road, over mountains and mosses, in a dark 
winter morning, he would willingly alarm 
" The Lady." — Few could feel how loved, 
how revered was that " Lady," by all who 
boasted the name of Macalbin ! 

" Now God forgive you woman," said 
Ronald, his kindly feelings as much wounded 
as his clannish pride — " for sure and sure you 
know I would shed my blood a thousand and 
a thousand times, rather than alarm her dog, 
if it had not been for the sake of the stranger." 
— Ronald's wife was stung by a sense of her 
unkindness, but before she had time to apo- 
logize, he snatched up his brogues and his 
bonnet, and rushed from the house. 

Before proceeding to the New Inns he went 
to the door of a little hut, which stood in the 
centre of the hamlet, and awoke its ancient 
and solitary inhabitant. 

Unah, whom youth and age alike loved 
vol. I. c 



14 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and venerated, was the characteristic oracle 
of a genuine Highland hamlet, — a mother in 
Israel ! — Four generations had she seen 
ushered into the theatre of existence, she 
had beheld as many swept from its stage. In 
the chamber of sickness, sorrow, or death, 
her presence, her consolations, and her ad- 
vice, were indispensibly requisite ; and Ro- 
nald, as a matter of course, had resolved to 
awaken " Old Moome," * (by which endear- 
ing appellation she was universally known) 
when the stranger was brought home ; but 
the multitudinous recollections of the fair had 
banished the thought, till it was recalled by 
the cry of the infant. Ever ready to obey 
the call of humanity, and to feel the sacred 
claim of that sacred character, — " the stran- 
ger," — Moome soon arose ; and, followed by 
her little dog, hastened to Ronald's cottage, 
while he bent his steps to the New Inns: — 
and he succeeded in his embassy, though 
Mr. Daniel M'Pherson, the proprietor of that 
great house, grumbled a good deal at having 
his rest broken by the wants of the canaille 
of Dunalbin. For he was a man of property 
and fashion ; had been many years a waiter in 

* Nurse, or second mother. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 15 

one of the great hotels in Glasgow, and a 
long time butler to the gentleman to whom 
belonged the glen of Glenalbin. With his 
savings he had stocked an extensive sheep 
farm, while its former numerous tenants, now 
on the banks of the Mohawk river, — " lan- 
guished for their native glen.'* To this he 
added a house of entertainment for the few 
travellers that chance brought to this remote 
district. 

Ronald trudged home with his bottle 6f 
wine, regarding himself with that pleasing 
complacency which naturally springs from the 
consciousness of having performed a deed of 
kindness. 

" This is what will do her good," thought 
Ronald, — " with a week's, or at most a fort- 
night's good nursing, she will be afoot ; and 
then I can give her and the little one a cast 

over C : — she will be able to walk the 

rest of the way ; — for I warrant she is used to 
march." 

Ronald had assumed as a certain position 
that the wandering female was the wife of a sol- 
dier, and going to Fort . Had anjr one at 

that moment undeceived him, it is probable he 
would have felt no inconsiderable disappoint- 



16 CXAN-AUBIN, 

ment ; for it might have rendered useless the 
little arrangement his benevolence had 
formed, and just completed, as he entered 
his cottage. 

" Here is what will strengthen her heart/' 
said Ronald, as he held the bottle between 
him and the fire, admiring the rich colour of 
the potent elixir. — " Do, dear Moome, give 
her some ;" — turning to the old woman, who 
sat by the fire, nursing the new-born babe. 
Ronald stooped to look at the child ; — the ser- 
vice he had done its mother gave it a claim to 
his protection ; — it was in some measure the 
creature of his benevolence. As Ronald 
gazed, the mingled feelings of his kind heart 
became complicated beyond the simplicity of 
his understanding. He felt for the infant 
what he could neither comprehend nor ex- 
plain. 

" God bless the babe ! — is it not a lovely 
boy now, Ronald ?" said Moome. — " 'Tis in- 
deed a dainty rogue," replied the honest 
Highlander, — " he will be a good soldier yet, 
if God spare him ;" and he again urged 
Moome to administer the cordial. 

" Och, and it is herself will surely die !" 
replied the old woman, speaking in a low 



A NATIONAL TALE. 17 

tone, lest her words, though in a strange 
tongue, should be overheard by the unfortu- 
nate object of her compassion. 

Ronald turned his eyes to the bed, where 
Mary sat watching the last emotions of nature 
in the convulsed frame of the wanderer. 
He strove to rally his spirits. The abrupt 
termination of the little scheme his kindness 
had formed for the relief of the young female, 
shocked him perhaps more than her actual 
sufferings. He could not reconcile himself 
to the idea of being deprived of an oppor- 
tunity to do her good. 

" We will drink her health however," said 
Ronald ; and from a chest he brought forth a 
case-bottle of — " Real Fairintosh." — He pre- 
sented his silver quaich first to Moome ; for 
age and rank are alike venerable and sacred 
in the eyes of a Highlander ; — and with de- 
vout energy did she bless the infant which 
slumbered in her lap, and with humble piety 
pray for the preservation of the life of the 
mother. A species of devotion mingles with 
the social orgies of the Highlanders, who, 
over the national beverage, will recal with 
hallowed awe the memory of the dead, or with 
fervour implore blessings on the living*. 
C 2 



18 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Ronald was in the attitude of bowing to 
old Unah as she returned the quaich, when 
Mary beckoned her to bring forward the child, 
and she supported the sufferer, while Moome 
gave the infant to her feeble embrace. The 
powerful energies of nature lent momentary 
strength to her enfeebled frame, as she clasped 
the little babe to her bosom, with all a mo- 
ther's clinging fondness. The big drops of 
her speechless agony fell on its innocent 
face, while she kissed the babe, thus bap- 
tized in the tears of its mother's misery. It 
was the last effort of expiring nature ! Moome 
caught the infant as it was falling from her 
arms. She sunk back on the pillow — her dim- 
eye still fixed on the child. With trembling 
anxiety did Mary watch the ebb and flow of 
the pulse she touched. It alternately lessened, 
quivered, stopped, and again fluttered against 
the pressure of her finger. Ronald saw its 
movements in the countenance of his daugh- 
ter. It again lessened, fluttered, and stopped -> 
— Mary became pale ; — a sigh, rather felt 
than heard, quivered on the lips of the wan- 
derer ! 

" She is gone to God !" — said Moome, in 
the emphatic language of her country. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 19 

Mary continued to support the lifeless form 
of the stranger, while Ronald, his wife, and old 
Moome, as they encircled the bed, gazed on 
in silent pity. For some minutes this interest- 
ing silence was preserved inviolate, — their spi- 
rits bowed before the awful majesty of death! 

The combined emotions of sorrow and ter- 
ror held their feelings in painful concentra- 
tion, till Mar3 T , gently disengaging her arm, — 
folded down the eyelids of the departed. It 
is a simple duty, but how powerfully can it 
awaken all those s)^mpathies which link toge- 
ther beings of a common destiny. 

" God knoweth who may perform this office 
for me," said Mary. It was an appeal to 
every heart ; — the little group sat down by 
the bedside ; and the women wept together. 

A stream of light from the candle, which 
Ronald held, played full on the face of the 
departed. — " How pale ! — how lovely !" — ex- 
claimed Mary, earnestly gazing. 

" What will become of her little orphan ?" 
said Moome. Mary had forgotten the child. 
She stretched out her arms to receive him. 

" Poor babe," cried she, as she folded him 
to her kind heart — " What will become of 
thee ?" She looked to her mother j but the 
good woman made no answer. 



20 CXAN-ALBIN, 

" We will take care of him, to be sure,'* 
cried Ronald firmly ; for he felt the full force 
of Mary's imploring glance — " Perhaps we 
may find his father ; — but at any rate, it is no 
great matter bringing up a boy, — what signify 
his few potatoes more or less, — if it were a 
girl indeed, — that would be a different story ; 
— but since God has sent him to us, it must 
be for good." — Mary's eyes sparkled with joy. 

" How fortunate !" cried she — ■" Allan's 
sister, whose child died yesterday, will be 
so happy to suckle him ; — we will nurse him 
between us, dear Moome. — he will soon run 
about and trouble nobody." — She bent down- 
ward, and fondly kissed the little object of her 
solicitude. 

It was still some hours from day ; and they 
performed the last sad offices to the dead. — 
Mary cut off a ringlet from the soft redun- 
dance of fair hair which hung over her shoul- 
ders. — " I will keep it for her little orphan," 
said she, as she placed it in her bosom. 

They next examined the little packet she 
had brought, to see if it afforded any clew to 
her story. It consisted of two or three articles 
of apparel, and a small quantity of baby linen, 
all of such textare and quality as denoted the 
condition of their possessor to be much supe- 



A NATIONAL TAUE. 21 

rior to that of a soldier's wife. On searching 
her pockets they found a small case, which 
contained the miniature resemblance of a 
gentleman, dressed in a military uniform, of 
uncommonly handsome appearance, and who 
seemed about thirty years of age. Besides 
that, there was nothing save a few shillings, 
and a large embroidered pin-cushion, such as 
used to be made by the inhabitants of religious 
houses on the continent. Mary deposited 
these articles in a place of security. 

They were now at leisure, and sufficiently 
composed, to examine the figure of the de- 
ceased. — " She might be about twenty-five 
years," said Moome. Ronald thought that 
impossible. Though slender, she was ele- 
gantly shaped ; her complexion was singu- 
larly delicate, and even in death her counte- 
nance exhibited all those meekened charms 
that characterize a Guidean Madona. 

" Oh the saint-like smile which hovers on 
that pale face !" cried Mary. 

" She has thrown off earthly cares ! — She is 
gone to eternal rest ! — Her spirit is with 
God !" — said Moome. 

" It is impossible she could have been the 
wife of a soldier," sighed Mary. — That de- 



22 CLAN-ALBIN, 

lusion had existed while it was necessary : it 
had called forth all the latent sympathies of 
Mary's heart. 

" Och, and I'll be sworn it was herself was 
the lady every inch of her, poor soul ! — Look 
to that soft hand," said Moome, — " And that 
gentleman in the picture is her husband, no 
doubt, — God help him, and teach him to bear 
his sorrows !" continued Moome, while she put 
on her spectacles to examine the picture. 
Unah gazed upon it, till her imagination, 
associating all that was lovely with a dear 
loved Dalt, * long since gathered to his 
fathers, caught fire, and she persuaded her- 
self that it bore a strong resemblance to 
" Donald Dunalbin, whom it had pleased 
Him, to take to himself, many and many was 
the year since." 

Instead of adding the sirname to the Chris- 
tian name of the sons of great families in the 
Highlands, the title is added, to distinguish 
them from the rest of the clan. There was 

* Dalt, a foster-child. The custom of fosterage still 
subsists in the Isles, and some parts of the Highlands, in pri- 
mitive force. By the lower classes it is clung to with Hiber- 
nian zeal. It promotes their interest, natters their pride, 
and forms the bond of a very endearing connexion betweea 
the poor and the rich. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 23 

many a Donald Macalbin, but there was 
but one Donald Dunalbin, the second son of 
Sir Norman Macalbin ; and he had been the 
beloved Dalt of Moome, fifty years previous 
to this period. 

Ronald and his wife, at the entreaty of 
Moome, retired to rest : Mary heaped the fire 
with fresh turf; and they quietly took their 
stations to watch the corpse, and nurse the 
infant, unwilling to alarm their neighbours 
till day dawned. 



24 CLAN-ALBIN, 



CHAP. II. 



■By night, 



The village matron, round the hlazing hearth, 
Suspends the infant audience with her tales 
Breathing astonishment ! Of witching rhymes 
And evil spirits. ***** 
At every solemn pause the crowd recoil, 
Gazing each other, speechless, and congealed 
With shiv'ring sighs j till eager for th' event 
Around the beldam ail erect they hang, 
Each trembling heart with grateful terrors quelled. 

Akkhside. 

" Well did I know," said Moome — " that 
an interment was coming to Dunalbin ; — all 
last night did my little Cassare bark and howl ; 
— no doubt he was looking at it then. And 
was it not these eyes saw the corpse-lights go 
from this house to the burying-ground itself. 
Och ! and that is a sign I never saw fail ; and 
well did I know it was she would die, poor 
lady. Now Mary, while your mother was 
in the cellar, and you at the turf-stack, two 
birds, so white and beautiful, hovered round 
the bed. In a twinkle they were gone ; — 



A NATIONAL TALE. 25 

and was not that the warning spirits of the 
stranger and her child." 

" He shall not die !" cried Mary, whom 
these funereal bodings alarmed ; and invo- 
luntarily she clasped the fondling to her 
bosom. 

" Nay, God forbid !" cried Moome, — 
" but it was very natural for the spirit of the 
child to company with the spirit of the mo- 
ther." Mary readily allowed the propriety 
of this. — Now Moome knew that Highland 
children, especially before they are chris- 
tened, are very liable to be either stolen, or 
changed by fairies ; nay, for that matter, 
Lowland children were, till lately, in the 
same situation : but she possessed a charm 
against the evil designs of the fairy people, 
and resolving to make sure work, immediately 
used it in behalf of the sleeping orphan. 

" God will guard him," said Moome, as 
she laid down her bible, and put aside the 
madder of charmed water with which she had 
sprinkled the infant ; and, seating herself, 
she began to entertain her youthful auditor 
with many a marvellous, and awe-inspiring 
tale, of ghosts, wraiths, warnings, fair 
dreams, second sight, second hearing, &c. &c\ 

VOL. I. D 



26 CLAN-ALBIN, 

For nearly eighty years Moome had been 
familiar with these supernatural appearances, 
and she now spoke of them with all the calm- 
ness of philosophy. No one could have a 
firmer conviction of every thing that favours 
superstitious belief ; but as no man is a hero 
to his valet, no ghost was an object of inti- 
midation to Moome, and she descanted with 
calm seriousness, while Mary sat shivering 
with horror. 

" It was in the year Macalbin went to 
France," said Moome, beginning to relate a 
story of the second sight, or more properly 
third sight, which she solemnly vouched for 
truth — "just two days before All-hallow-eve ; 
well can I remember it, and great reason I 
have ; — for sure enough it was that very Hal- 
low-eve I first knew Roban was to be mine : 
— whom I saw as plain as I now do you Mary, 
as I knitted the knots, and his face turned to 
me full ; however that is not my story. — 
A rainy season it had been, but that night 
was fair and beautiful ; and by moonlight we 
went to cut down some barley. Well, we 
worked, and sung, and strove, the pipe 
cheering us all the while ; (my own uncle, 
c Farquhar-^wv//,' was piper then, the pre- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 27 

sent Hugh's grandfather.) Well, what should 
we see but a man running down the hill in 
only his shirt and philabeg, with a handker- 
chief tied round him, as a runner would have 
in those days. We guessed he came with 
news, and bad news sure enough they were ; 

for old Donald-bane, at was dying ; 

and he came to see if Rory Calgary would go 
see him. Now Rory, who had learned the 
doctoring, to be sure was a darling ; — besides 
Donald-bane was a Cult * of his mother's. 
— * I will go indeed,' says he, f were it twice 
farther;' and a lad went to the hill to catch 
him a horse. But before he arrived poor 
Donald was speechless, — though he still 
knew him, and grasped him by the hand as 
if he grappled for life. Donald's children 
were all present ; some of them grown up 
and married off the house, were come from 
a distance to console his last moments, and 
receive his blessing. His poor old woman sat 
behind him in the bed, supporting his head 
on her knees. They had lived together forty 

* Cho-alt, a connexion by fosterage. All the relations 
of the Moome, or foster-mother, are Cho-alt to the Dalt, de- 
Toted to him through life, and but too often a tax on his ge- 
nerosity. 



28 CLAN-ALBIN, 

years, and loved each other too Mary. Young 
Rory, who was tender-hearted, could not 
help shedding tears as poor Donald-bane 
clung to him ; — besides, Donald was his mo- 
ther's Cho-alt you know. Well, in a few 
minutes he breathed his last, — and his daugh- 
ter threw the plaid over him. 

" Rory could be of no more use to poor 
Donald, and his presence was a restraint on 
the grief of the family ; so they gave him a 
blanket, and he went to lean in the cellar till 
morning. But Rory's warm heart would not 
let him sleep ; for he heard Donald's children 
weeping, and his wife mourning, as she still 
sat in the bed. She at last began to speak, 
and he listened to her words : — 

" ' You are now lying there in corpse, 
Donald my husband,' said she, — * and forty 
years ago, ere I knew you, or thought of you, 
I saw you thus !' — Oh Mary, and it was no 
time for telling lies when the spirit of Donald 
was just gone forth! — ' I was then a young 
girl,' said she to the children, — ' and had no 
thought of your father, for another sought 
me for his wife. I foolishly entreated Old 
Morag-crotach, (Hunch-backed Marion) to 
show me my fortune. It was evening, and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 29 

we went to the banks of a lonely stream. * 
She made me place my foot on her's ; — she 
held my hands within her own ; and her spirit 
came upon me ; — I saw with her eyes. I saw 
you, Donald my husband ! — who now lie on 
my knees a corpse, — I saw you cross that 
stream, followed by our four children. In 
your arms you carried the two I have born 
dead ! — I had heard of Donald-bane : he 
often went to Ireland, and round among the 
Isles with his boat, and was often in danger; 
and I asked Morag if he would be drowned. — 
4 No !' said she, — ? No, Donald will die at 
home.' — My Donald has indeed c died at 
home 1' — and the poor woman wept more 
bitterly. 

" * I am sure my father knew he never 
would be drowned ;' said Donald's eldest son, 
— ' for well do I remember one night we were 
in the Sound of Jura. It blew loud and 



* In this manner seers impart a portion of their gift. Pro- 
bably something of this kind is meant, when the Rhymer is 
said to have showed Corspatrick the death of King Alexander, 
when,— 

" He put his hand on the Earlie's head, 
And showed him a rock beside the sea, 
Where a king lay stiff beneath his steed, 
And steel-dight nobles wiped their e'e." 
D 2 



30 CLAN-ALBlS 7 , 

wildly ; the sea rolled with a heavy swell, — 
and we saw neither moon nor star, but heard 
the dreadful roar of Corywrekan. My bro- 
ther and I were much alarmed ; but my father 
told us not to fear, he would never be drowned. 
So we took courage, and ran in for Black- 
mull's Bay. We saw he knew something, 
though we dared not question him. 1 

" Donald's family continued to talk over 
these circumstances all night. They were 
all alone, the widow and her children. When 
morning dawned Rory took leave. He was a 
light-hearted young man, and in the Low- 
lands had learned to laugh at our stories, but 
he said, — ' If ever there was a true tale of 
second sight, it was that of Donald-bane's 
wife, who apostrophized the newly departed 
spirit of her husband.' " * 

During this relation Mary had often hitched 
her stool (formed of twisted bent) nearer to 
Moome ; who continued to add tale to tale 

* Note. Among a thousand tales of second sight, the 
writer of these pages has chosen that above detailed ; because 
it affords a tolerable specimen, and is of recent occurrence. 
Donald-bane was a few years since a ferry-man between Mull 
and Ulva, exactly on the route of fashionable tourists, and it 
is probable his widow, the heroine of this story, still resides 
there. In relating her story her own words have been used. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 31 

with the garrullity peculiar to her age, and to 
her character ; for Moome was doubly en- 
dowed with the gift of story-telling — it is the 
failing of age, and was likewise the weak- 
ness of Moome. 

" Hark !" cried Mary, during a pause in 
the conversation, — " Heard you not a noise 
over-head ?" 

" No, my dear," replied Moome coolly, — 
" but I am old and deaf; — it would only be 
the boards cracking of which your father will 
make the stranger's coffin ; that always hap- 
pens." — There were several boards laid across 
the rafters of Ronald's cottage, to be ready 
on any emergency ; and in the meanwhile 
they formed a kind of rude cieling, which 
gave the hut an air of snugness and comfort, 
superior to most Highland dwellings, 



32 CLAN-ALBIN, 



CHAP. III. 



" I have seen the walls of Balclutha, but they were de- 
solate ; and the voice of the people is heard no 
more. The thistle shook there its lonely head : the 
moss whistled to the wind. The fox looked out from 
the window, the rank grass of the wall waved round 
his head. Desolate is the dwelling of Moina, and 
silence is in the hall of her fathers." 

OSSIAN. 

JLJay was now dawning, and Ronald's wife 
arose, which interrupted Moome's tales, 
but she promised to renew them on the fol- 
lowing night ; and Mary retired, leaving the 
orphan to her care. 

The inhabitants of Dunalbin were still ig- 
norant of the addition the last night had made 
to their little society ; but the news spread 
apace, and Ronald's cottage was soon filled 
by a group, which pity, curiosity, and a va- 
riety of motives, had drawn together. — 
Moome, who was the village orator, had re- 
lated the story for the tenth time, when Ro- 
nald proposed to go to " The Island," and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 33 

take the advice of " The Lady," in his future 
arrangements. 

Lady Augusta Macalbin was the last of 
her race. Like a column in the melancholy 
waste, she stood, in solitary majesty, pointing 
out the spot where feudal greatness had risen, 
and flourished, and faded. She was the only 
living descendant of Sir Norman Macalbin, 
once hereditary proprietor of an extensive 
tract of country, stretching out on every side 
from Glenalbin, far as the eye could scan. 
He had been the chief of a powerful clan ; 
but attachment to the ancient line of Scottish 
kings, and the profusion of his age, had 
estranged his property : and his princely 
domain now increased the accumulating for- 
tunes of a newer family. Lady Augusta was 
an only daughter. She had seen seven gal- 
lant brothers descend to the grave before her ; 
and now stood alone and unsubdued amid the 
wrecks of time. Her life, lengthened out 
beyond the usual span of human existence, 
had been loaded with more than the custo- 
mary portion of human misfortune ; and she 
had lived to weep all those transitory bless- 
ings, which, in possession, seldom bestow en- 
joyment. — Her figure, which rose tothemajes- 



34 CLAN-ALBIN, 

tic, was still erect, and unbroken as that mind 
whose energies had risen superior to the re- 
iterated crush of misfortune, and resisted the 
continual pressure of adversity. Time, 
which had stolen the rose from her cheeks, 
and silvered her dark locks, had neither 
dimmed the lustre of her full-orbed eye, nor 
furrowed that ample forehead, which still 
seemed the polished image of a strong and 
noble mind. The beauty which in early life 
shone conspicuous in Lady Augusta, was im- 
pressive and commanding ; she seemed des- 
tined to sustain the tottering honours of her 
race ; but she was now chiefly distinguished 
by a benignity of countenance, and kindness 
of manner, which spoke a language of love 
and indulgence to all mankind; — she was des- 
tined to raise the veneration still felt for the 
name of Macalbin to a species of adoration ; 
and by her single virtues to keep in remem- 
brance the long fallen honours of her family. 

Many years before this period, Lady 
Augusta had returned from France, and fixed 
her lonely residence among the poor, nominal 
retainers of her ancestors. Embosomed in 
the solitude of the mountains, she appeared 
to them the embodied spirit of benevolence 



A NATIONAL TALE. 33 

and feudal kindness. Her virtues, her mis- 
fortunes, and her rank, in a country where 
almost idolatrous respect is paid to hereditary 
greatness, had thrown a mysterious veil 
around her, which curiosity never ventured 
to withdraw. Her griefs were sacred to her- 
self: they belonged to another age, and 
another class of beings. Never had the 
sanctity of her sorrows been profaned by 
mortal tongue ; — she leaned upon her own 
mighty spirit, and its strength seemed able 
to sustain the misfortunes which sixty years 
had accumulated. Her smiles, her courtesies, 
her kindnesses, and her benedictions, were 
given to her people ; — if she ever complained, 
it was to the wilds of Dunalbin ! — if she ever 
wept, it was in the solitude she loved ! 

It was whispered that in early life Lady 
Augusta had been married to a gentleman of 
France ; but no one knew, and no one ven- 
tured to overstep the mysterious circle mis- 
fortune had drawn around her. Indeed this 
very mystery served to enhance the reverence 
universally felt for " The Lady ;" (for in the 
glen this was her emphatic name) and it was 
thought that its elucidation, as well as its con- 
cealment, must have concurred to do honour 
to the most exalted of human beings. 



36 CLAN-ALBJN, 

Such was " The Lady," to whom Ronald 
hastened. It may now be proper to introduce 
our readers to the remote region which her 
presence embellished. 

Glenalbin is about five miles in length, and 
one in breadth ; it is situated in one of the 
most remote districts of the West Highlands, 
and encircled by some of the loftiest and 
most rugged of the Caledonian mountains. 
Rich in all the characteristic scenery of a 
romantic country, it cannot be described as 
merely beautiful, or merely sublime ; but 
from a felicitous combination of picturesque 
beauty, wonderful magnificence, and gloomy 
grandeur, often bordering on horror, results 
a whole which seems the favourite finishing of 
nature ; a chosen spot where she has com- 
piled all her charms. 

On the north side of the glen is seen a lofty- 
range of mountains, gradually sloping to- 
wards a beautiful lake, which, like an embossed 
mirror, gleams at their base. Its opposite 
side is skirted by a ridge of precipitous 
cliffs, starting boldly from the lake, athwart 
which they often throw a lurid shade ; they 
are seen grouped in every grotesque form, the 
favourite and unmolested haunt of nume- 
rous birds of prey. Beyond these, and rising 



A NATIONAL TALE. 37 

from them by a gentle swell, ridge above 
ridge, the summit of one range forming the 
base of another, tower the hills of Kenan- 
owen, now fading in the haze of distance, 
and now brought near to the eye by the thin 
mists which enveloped their aerial tops, or 
rolled along their dark sides, like the broken 
billows of a stormy ocean. 

The verbal delineation of external nature 
seldom conveys a very lively, and still more 
seldom a very faithful image of the objects 
described. It were vain to paint Glenalbin ! 
— which exhibits combinations of terrific 
grandeur, and gloomy sublimity, from which 
the eagle-genius of Salvator might have 
caught bolder images, and a loftier tone of 
conception. The effects of these is power- 
fully heightened, when contrasted with the 
soft and endearing charms exclusively appro- 
priated to the scenery of the Scottish glens. 
The clear lake, gracefully retiring in little 
bays, and sprinkled with wooded islets. The 
shrubby slope, connecting the mountain with 
the plain ; the rustic mead which the plough- 
share liad never violated. The mossy rill, 
creeping unseen beneath tangling thickets, 
and betrayed only by their verdure ; and the 

VOL. L f 



38 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Alpine torrent, dashing furiously from cliff 
to cliff, and tracing its impetuous course 
down the mountains, by a sweeping line of 
silver foam. On every side may be seen 
many an irregular acclivity, and many a 
" bosky cleugh," hung with the shaggy un- 
derwood peculiar to the country. The dwarf- 
oak, the holly, the trembling poplar, and the 
weeping-birch, sighing and breathing fra- 
grance, adorn the inferior range of hills, 
while the elegant mountain-ash, its resplen- 
dent berries glowing amid its bright foliage, 
starts from every rifted rock. On the steep 
banks of the mountain streams, and impending 
over their channels, hang the alder, the hazel, 
the wild-guin, and white thorn, garlanded 
with the briar-rose, the woodbine, and all 
those beautiful climbers which the hand of 
Nature has woven around them, in gay and 
luxuriant festoons : — for here she may be 
still viewed in her original state, — -joyous, 
smiling, liberal, and sportive, — unmolested 
by the trappings of art, and unconfined by 
the robes of ceremony, she unfolds her native 
charms, and defies every attempt to improve 
her " wildly rustic graces." 

But the soul which animated this wild scene, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 39 

— the point from wliich its interest diverged, 
was the straggling hamlet of Dunalbin ; — its 
blue smoke slowly rising among the lofty 
elms, under whose shade many successive 
generations had reposed. Its fairy group of 
infant inhabitants, its domestic animals brows- 
ing on the ferny braes, the natural, though 
rude disposition of its little domiciles, — all 
announcing its claim to antiquity, and unde- 
cayed simplicity of manners. At the eastern 
extremity of the glen, where the lake narrows 
in a fine sweep, are seen the turrets of Dun- 
albin castle. Surrounded by groves of oak, 
which seem coeval with the Druids, and 
frowning in desolation, it overhangs the 
waters of the lake, its mouldering grandeur 
conveying to the mind a fine image of the 
fall^n^ fortunes of those who for ages had been 
its proud possessors. 

Besides the hamlet of Dunalbin, many 
clusters of warm and sheltered huts were 
sprinkled over this once populous glen ; — now 
nestling amid thick copses, and now under 
the shadow of some friendly rock. But Dun- 
albin was the capital of the vale, for there 
stood Ronald's smithy, a corn-mill, and a 
little house where humble lore was taught, 



40 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and sermon occasionally heard : for in High- 
land parishes of such extent the minister ofteft 
preaches at different places. This shelter was 
however only sought in inclement weather, 
for when the sun shone bright and warm over 
all that little glen, the good pastor would 
meet his hill-side flock on a daisied slope 
before the school-house, — the loved scene of 
many an infant revel. And sweet was the 
hymn of praise ascending from that hill-side 
flock, which came, in a still morning, floating 
over the lake to the delighted ears of " The 
Lady." 

It was in an island, near the centre of the 
lake, that Lady Augusta had fixed her resi- 
dence. Eleenalin, literally, " the beautiful 
island," had been, from time immemorial, 
the burying place of the Chiefs of Clan-albin ; 
and her humble friends at first regarded her 
proposal of living among the spirits of her 
ancestors as something bordering at once on 
madness and presumption. Often at midnight 
dreadful screams had been heard to issue from 
the island, and often had a pale blue light 
been seen playing there, amid surrounding- 
darkness. — Lady Augusta had now lived in 
Eleenalin undisturbed for upwards of thirty 



A NATIONAL TALE. 41 

years. Indeed her presence seemed to have 
banished all its supernatural inhabitants ; no 
sound was now heard save the wind howling 
amid the cliffs, nor was any light seen, save 
the twinkling of a solitary lamp, which, 
streaming from the cottage of the Lady, shed 
its fairy ray on the still waters of the lake. 

This lovely islet, of scarce half a mile in 
circumference, was an epitome of all the 
beauties of the glen. It boasted its little 
eminence, and its tinkling streamlet ; its tiny 
lochan, its abrupt cliff, and its flowery shel- 
tered nook. — It was in one of these, sur- 
rounded on all sides by copses and cliffs, and 
only open to a small bay, that " The Lady" 
had reared her home. Never was any spot 
more fitted to inspire the delightful home- 
feeling, peculiar to confined scenery, than 
this sweet recess. Yet it commanded a view 
of the hamlet, — of human beings, — their af- 
fections, their enjoyments, and their occu- 
pations ; — without which the loveliest scenes 
of nature exhibit but a cheerless void. 

This litfle solitary home was inexpressibly 

dear to Lady Augusta, — it was the scene of 

her unshared sorrows. Here she spent a life 

of piety and benevolence, and here she 

E 2 



42 CLAN-ALBIN, 

hoped to find a peaceful grave. — Seldom did 
she quit her little kingdom, though she re- 
ceived daily visits from the hamlet, which 
was at the distance of a quarter of a mile 
across the lake. 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 



CHAP. IV. 



The lonely dwellers in the glens and moors, 
Their habitations, and their little joys." 

Grahame. 



It was still early when Ronald reached 
Eleenalin. "The Lady" had just risen, 
and as he related his adventure, standing 
bonnet in hand, pity and wonder alternately 
predominated in her expressive countenance. 
— " It is indeed a very strange circumstance," 
said Lady Augusta. — " And is there nothing 
which may lead to a discovery of her friends ?" 
— She inquired still more particularly, but 
Ronald had already told all he knew. She 
begged him to be seated, while he described 
the appearance of the unfortunate stranger. 

This was an honour which Ronald posi- 
tively declined. Women of all ranks in the 
Highlands associate together with kindness 



44 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and familiarity — but for a commoner — a man, 
to sit down in presence of his Lady ; — Ronald 
pegged to be excused, he better knew his 
distance. He however described the stranger 
as " very pale, and in very low order, with a 
very synall bone, but good hairy'' whom Mary 
called beautiful, but whom Ronald thought 
not very happy in point of looks ; though he 
owned that she was " very like a gentle- 
woman." 

Lady Augusta was accustomed to hear 
Ronald and his compatriots employ the same 
phrases in describing a fine woman and a fine 
cow, and though she perhaps did not place 
quite so much merit in a large bone and high, 
order, she seldom dissented from the general 
opinion. After a pause of some minutes, 
during which she seemed to take no cogni- 
zance of any surrounding object, she arose, 
and wrapping herself in a Highland cloak, 
bade Ronald lead the way to the shore. — 
" Alone, a stranger, friendless !" — said the 
Lady, in a tone which evinced a deep and 
intimate sympathy with the condition of the 
wandering female. 

" Still the good girl I ever knew," said 
Lady Augusta, addressing Mary, who sat 



A NATIONAL TALE. 45 

nursing the little orphan. Mary rose blush- 
ing, and humbly curtsied her thanks. 

Lady Augusta almost started back as she 
viewed the corpse of the hapless stranger. 
Many painful associations seemed to crowd to 
her mind ; and she, who never wept her own 
sorrows, shed a generous tear over the woes 
of another. — The trifling articles found on 
the deceased were next submitted to inspec- 
tion. On the picture she gazed almost as 
earnestly as Moome had done ; and Mary, 
unseen, had kissed off the warm tear which 
had fallen on the glass — for never did Catho- 
lic adore his tutelary saint with more intense 
devotion than Mary worshipped the Lady. 

A nurse had been provided for the orphan, 
the sister of that Allan whom Mary had men- 
tioned on the preceding night. Allan was 
the lover of Mary ; but two years before this 
he had been called out by his Laird as a sol- 
dier, with the alternative of seeing an aged 
father, a widowed sister, and her infant chil- 
dren dispossessed of the little patch of land 
from which they derived a scanty subsistence, 
and thrown on an unknown, unfriendly world. 
Love and duty strove for mastery in the heart 
of Allan \ but he was now a soldier in Ame- 



46 CLAN-ALBIN, 

rica. The father of Allan lived in another 
country ; that is, beyond a ridge of stupen- 
dous mountains, which in the Highlands are 
the boundaries of what are called countries : 
but he had a sister married in Dunalbin, who 
had taken the orphan to her bosom. She 
was very poor, but Mary was as generous as 
gentle, and her heart still kept the promise 
she had made to her absent lover. 

The hamlet of Dunalbin contained about 
thirty families, who rented the north side of 
the glen, and a considerable tract of hill 
country for summer grazing, and the pasture 
of a few sheep. It was one of those conjunct 
farms so common in the Highlands before the 
introduction of sheep -farming, and of which 
some lingering instances yetremain. — Its pro- 
duce " just gave what life required," — to 
upwards of 180 souls, all living together as 
one great family, — all connected by blood 
or marriage ; by a common name, a common 

origin, and a common head, the Chief 

of the Clan. That clan had now no 
chief! — but memory clinging to all that had 
once been their pride, their grace, and 
their glory, feelingly supplied that want. 
This little remnant of Macalbin's clan were 



A NATIONAL TALE. 47 

united by similarity of pursuit, of condition, 
of hopes, of enjoyments, of recollections, 
and of sufferings, — by every affection that 
endears, — and by every bond which links 
society in harmonious union. A Highland 
bhalie, such as it then existed, afforded an 
object of more pleasing contemplation to a 
mind of sensibility, than the flocks of a 
thousand hills. The simple, and unaccom- 
modated lives of the inhabitants, their ro- 
mantic virtues, and enthusiastic attachment 
to the Chief, and the Clan ; — every pleasing 
peculiarity of national manners, which then 
marked them a distinct people, — a race which 
society in its progress seemed to have forgot- 
ten, — undebased by its corruptions, unim- 
pressed by its usages, still bearing the lofty 
character of heroic times, — all combined to 
seize the imagination, and to interest the 
heart through its powerful medium. 

It might indeed have been easy to find a 
people who practised a more improved mode 
of agriculture, who better understood the 
qualities of soil, and the uses of manure ; 
and who could avail themselves of local ad- 
vantages with skill infinitely superior. But 
for purity of manners, warmth of affections, 



48 CLAN-ALBIN, 

kindness, and courtesy, — for every social 
virtue, and fire-side endearment, — for that 
untutored elegance of sentiment, and love of 
music and song, which embellish all these, 
even in the lowliest condition ? — No ! — it was 
impossible ! — The last of the clan were a 
chosen people, with whom peace and love 
took refuge. 

And the cow of the fatherless and the wi- 
dow was in the fold of the bhalie ; — Moome's 
cow was there ; and her little flock, rent-free, 
ranged the hills of Glenalbin. And what 
Moome received from generosity, she be- 
stowed in kindness ; for with the wool of that 
little flock, and a distaff, which, though it 
performed little, never was idle, Moome could 
clothe the orphan and the poor. If " Mac- 
albin's blood " warmed their veins, so much 
the better ; for though Moome's charity did 
not end with the clan, it certainly began 
there. 

Besides a share of this social establishment, 
which Ronald held in right of his wife, he 
rented a croft in another part of the glen, and 
was what is termed a " small tenant.'* He 
was likewise the blacksmith ; and this trade 
had been hereditary in his family from the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 49 

lamented days when the head of every bul- 
lock and cow slaughtered for the chief was 
the blacksmith's perquisite. Few heads now 
for llonald ! — but still his situation was com- 
fortable compared with the lot of his neigh- 
bours. And he was as generous as rich ; for 
Ronald now informed the Lady — " that he 
had got a cask ; [no Highlander thinks it 
necessary to add — c of whisky.'] — that his 
wife would have every thing decent; that some 
of the women would sit up all night to help 
her to bake oat-cakes ; that all the neighbours 
in the glen had sent fowls, and cheese ; that 
he had looked out a piece of wood for the 
coffin ; and finally, that he would send his 
horse for the Minister, who would ride over 
on the following day, which, if the Lady 
pleased, he wished to fix lor the interment of 
the stranger, and the baptism of her child." 

The Lady bowed in token of approbation ; 
and afterwards added — " you shall carry the 
corpse of the stranger to Eleenalin. 'Tis not 
fit that her ashes should mingle with stran- 
gers. Should her friends ever inquire after 
her, we may point out where she is laid. 
Mary may yet lead that infant to weep at the 

VOL. I. F 



50 CLAN-ALBIN, 

grave of his mother. There is the green 
knoll called Kilechan, (the cell, or grave of 
Hector) where moulders the dust of the un- 
fortunate lover of the Lady Malhina, my 
remote ancestor. There he was surprised 
when asleep by the barbarous vigilance of 
her haughty brothers ; but I have no spirits 
for that bloody catastrophe. Sacred be the 
last asylum of unfortunate love !" The Lady 
raised her speaking eyes, and for a moment 
was silent. She then resumed — " That fa- 
vourite spot shall be sacred to this lady and 
her misfortunes." — These were sentiments 
dear to Highland pride, and Highland ten- 
derness. A grave among the graves of 
their ancestors^ was perhaps the only thing 
the people of the glen would have grudged 
to the stranger; and that she should suffer 
what to their feelings appeared the worst, as 
it is the most irremediable of evils, — separa- 
tion in death from her kindred, — that she 
should sleep with strangers, — was most afflict- 
ing to their prejudices and their tenderness ; 
and Ronald, with a bow more humble than 
low, spoke his sense of this unlooked for 
goodness. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 51 

The Lady then took leave, and went from 
hut to hut through the hamlet, visiting that 
little flock which now engrossed all of affec- 
tion that the grave had not swallowed up ; — 
all of care that she felt for any thing of this 
earth. 



K 



LIBRAR? 



32 CLAN-ALBIN, 



CHAP. V. 



And we— behind the Chieftain's shield, 
No more shall we in safety dwell, 
None lead the people to the field, 
And we the loud lament must swell, 
Och hone a righ, Och hone a righ, 
The pride of Alain's line is o'er. 



Scott. 



JNowise fatigued by previous exertion, or 
rather strong in her wish to oblige, Moome 
on the succeeding night, offered to watch by 
the corpse of the stranger ; and Mary, who 
loved her for her virtues, and adored her for 
her traditionary lore, gladly accepted this 
offer. 

Several girls likewise joined in this kindly 
meant attention to the dead; and with many 
a tale did Moome amuse their vigil. On that 
night Mary's soft nature wept over the moun- 
tain hunter who now slumbered in Kilechan, 
although his venerable historian frequently 



A NATIONAL TALE. 53 

reminded her that he was chief of a clan who 
had always been enemies to ' our'' clan, and 
that to avenge his murder, his clan had put to 
death two of Macalbin's sons, and their fol- 
lowers, whom they had surprised on a hunt- 
ing excursion. — Towards morning the young 
women went to their homes, and Mary was 
left alone with her friend. 

" Now do, dear Moome," said she, " that 
we are all alone, tell me how you met the 
Green Lady at the head of the glen, who told 
you all that should ever happen to the clan, — 
I once heard my mother tell it, but I should 
like dearly to have it from your own lips." — 
Mary had sat spell bound during the night, 
eagerly listening to what she dreaded to hear, 
the strange delight of terror thrilling her soul, 
and absorbing all her faculties. Often had 
she listened to the same tales, but she was 
now in the chamber of death, and every 
awful event breathed deeper horror. — " Now 
do, dear Moome, tell me ?" Moome assumed 
a look of gravity and importance. 

" You are still too young for that Mary." 
" But (by your leave) I may never have 
such an opportunity," replied Mary — " and I 
shall be so silent." And she held her breath 
F 2 



54 CLAN-ALBIN, 

in fearful expectation*, for hearing the Story 
from one who had communed with the Spirit, 
seemed nearly as awful as meeting it in per- 
son. 

" Well Mary, I know you are a wise girl 
and a good ; and sure enough that is what 
concerns you as well as me, and all that are 
called Macalhin ; so if you promise to be 
discreet ?" — Mary readily promised ; and 
Moome commenced that narrative in which 
she felt a solemn pride, and regarded as the 
most important event of her life, except 
nursing Donald Dunalbin. 

" It was ten years after I married Iloban 
Macalbin," said Moome. — " Roban's father 
had been gillie-casflue * to the old Laird, and 
Eoban was always about' the castle, where I 
also, happy time ! was nurse to Lady Augusta, 
— a child she was then. So when we married, 
there being no place for us at the time, Mac- 
albin gave us a croft off his own farm, 
Bruachrua it was, and a shealing at Glen- 
tannar with the other tenants. Well, it was 
about midsummer, and I had to go to the 
moss, I got up very early to have the milking 

* That person of a Chieftain's body-guard, whose busi- 
ness it was to carry him over fords. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 55 

over; besides the weather was hot, and to- 
wards noon the cattle became restive. Ah 
Mary, believe me now, the weather is no more 
like what it was in my young days than old 
times are to the new. It was a lovely serene 
morning ; the sun was not yet up, and the 
mist was low on the hill. Och, well can I 
remember it ! — Well, stepping through the 
Bruar, what should I do but miss my beads. 
Look at them Mary, they are real ambers — 
Mary had seen them every day in her life ; 
but she courteously examined them, and 
complimented Moome on their possession. 

" Beautiful they are, sure enough," replied 
Moome. — " The very day I took home my 
Donald, my darling Dalt to the castle, did 
the dear Lady that was, present them to me 
from her own neck. Just eight years he then 
was, and such a boy ! O Mary you never saw 
the boy could match him, dressed as he was 
that day in new tartan of my own making ; 
for bure enough I was a namely xt)tb-maker in 
my own time." Mary had also heard this 
history of the beads a hundred times, but 
Highland courtesy restrained her impatience, 
and Moome resumed. 

" Well, when I came home, Roban was 



oG CLAN-ALBIN, 

still asleep, and I was loath to awake him, 
though he should have been up at Macalbin's 
peats long before that. So I just stooped 
down, and kissed poor Roban, (for I was 
young then) thinking if he awoke it was good, 
and if not I would let him sleep. So I found 
my beads, and hastened to my cattle. And 
a namely fold Roban had for a commoner ; 
five tidy* cows, besides other cows, and their 
followers, and sheep on the hills, all for ten 
shillings, Saxon money; Roban's few services 
at the peats, and such as that, and some duty- 
fowls from myself, and a few hanks of yarn. 
And to be sure the Lady would say — < I can 
know Unah Bruachrua's yarn from all the 
women's in the glen.' — These were her own 
words, dear Lady. God give her soul its 
peace ! and forbid that I should take pride to 
myself for my spinning ; for no doubt many a 
Macalbin woman span better than I, though 
she would say so, dear Lady ; and God forbid 
that I should belie the dead. — Well, as I was 
saying of Rohan's fold, — but you will notice 

* Milch cows. Besides the stated services to the Laird, 
and the rent, whether paid in money or in kind, the Lady 
has her claim on the wife of the tenant, called " The Wife's 
Portion," or due, consisting of fowls, butter, yarn, &c, and 
attendance at graddanino, waulking, &c, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 57 

Mary there was no sheep farms in those days 
— I was hastening on, gazing round me at our 
master's castle, and all our cattle ; and the 
smoking cottages of our own clan ; and prais- 
ing Himself for all his goodness, for at that 
moment my own heart felt it, and was full of 
it ; — when all at once what should I see com- 
ing slowly towards me, just down from Tober- 
mora, (the well or spring of the Virgin) hut 
a lady so tall ! so lovely ! — Guess yourself if 
I was not in the terrors. — She was dressed in 
green, a white tunag * flowed from her shoul- 
ders, which was fastened by a gold broach ; 
and her fine yellow hair — such hair ! — hung 
around her. I had not recovered my terror 
when she asked my news. Trembling I said 
I had none strange. 

" i Were any one to ask me for news, I 
could tell what would seem strange,' — said 
she. — Think yourself Mary, how I trembled, 
meeting such a lady in such a place, who did 
not belong to the family, 

" * Don't fear me woman,' said she, — ' Ask 

* Tukag, a short mantle, still worn by old women in some 
parts of the Highlands. The plaid is only worn in full dress, 
but the tunag by way of shawl. In the distant isles this piece 
of dress is called Gidlechan. 



58 CLAN-ALBIN, 

my news ; I am not at liberty to speak un* 
questioned.' — It was then I was sure she was 
a spirit. All the while she stood, her starry 
eyes fixed upon me, and her arm wrapped 
in her tunag. 

" My God preserve me ! — cried I, almost 
fainting with terror. 

" • Perhaps I adore that Being as much as 
you do,' said she, — ' Ask me for news.' — See- 
ing she was a good spirit I took courage, and 
you may be certain my first question was what 
would happen the Dunalbin family. 

" * Their race is nearly run,' said she, and 
drew her hand across her forehead, — * And 
now 'tis finished ! — You shall live and see 
Macalbin without a foot of land, or a hut in 
his country to give him shelter. — You shall 
yet see four different lairds divide Macalbin' s 
lands. — In this glen you shall see fifty smokes 
put out in one morning !' — Oh Mary, conceive 
my feelings, I forgot the awful being with 
whom I conversed, and thought only of 
Macalbin ! — 

" And his sons ? — I cried in agony. 

" ' They shall live while they live between 
the turf and the thatch,' said she — ' Fifty 
years hence, and no gentleman shall bear 



A NATIONAL TALE. 59 

the name of Macalbiu but a day will 

come.' — Oli Mary how sadly have I seen all 
this accomplished !" — and Moome wept anew 
the desolation of her clan ; and then resumed 
— " Well, you may be sure I thought, after 
all I had seen and heard, I was no longer for 
this world, had the spirit not told I should 
live to see, — would that I had died and never 
seen ! But after a while I asked what would 
happen to Norman Ballachadron, the Laird's 
brother's son, a cho-alt of my own he was, and 
a gay, wild young man ; many is the chase he 
would <nve mvself when he would come to 
the hill with his gun, and I a young girl alone 
in the shealing, and the herds all out of sight. 

11 'He will follow evil, and evil will pursue 
him,' said she, — ' He will go to misery, and 
his lands to the Macphersons.' — Mary, I 
thought it a pity of his father's son !" * 

* This is an abridged account of a vision, or rather spirit, 
seen by a woman in one of the isles a few years ago. Many 
of her predictions are already fulfilled : she lives to witness 
the daily fulfillment of others ; and the accomplishment of 
the whole is devoutly expected by her all-believing country- 
men. With a licence common to all expounders of visions, 
some alterations have been made in the above to suit parti- 
cular purposes • but they are very few. 



60 CLAN-ALBJN, 

Moome reserved the remaining part of her 
vision to another opportunity, for the spirit 
had communicated very copious information, 
and now went home to refresh her spirits with 
a short sleep, before the funeral of the stran- 
ger required her attendance. 

The sun shone brightly on the following 
morning, when Ronald sent off his horse to 
fetch the Minister ; — it was the fairest of winter 
days : mild yet clear ; and Ronald, who had 
the enviable talent of appropriating and 
finding pleasure in every common blessing, 
almost flattered himself it had been sent to 
grace the splendid funeral he meant to give 
to the wandering stranger. 

It was noon when the Minister, Ronald, 
his wife, and daughter, together with the 
orphan and his nurse, embarked in the same 
boat that was to convey the remains of the 
stranger to her last home. In another boat 
was the Piper, who professionally attended 
the burial, with Old Moome, and such otfier 
inhabitants of the hamlet as age and virtue 
had rendered most respectable. Several 
other boats, from the farms round the lake, 
promiscuously crowded with men and women. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 01 

closed the procession ; — for at that time the 
custom of females attending funerals still 
prevailed, though now almost fallen into 
disuse. 

The little vessels glided slowly over the 
lake, the dashing of the oars, measured hy 
the melancholy notes of the bagpipe, whose 
long-drawn dolorous tones, imitating the ex- 
pression of human sorrow, now died away in 
faint hollow murmurs, and again burst on the 
tar with all the broken impetuosity of im- 
passioned grief. It was a scene of powerful 
interest; and the poor Highlanders, whose 
passions are all of the liveliest and most ardent 
kind, and susceptible of any impulse through 
the medium of their national music, appeared 
grieved in a manner which to a stranger must 
have seemed either affected or absurd. But 
it was not the simple feeling of pity for the 
untimely fate of the unfortunate wanderer, 
though they truly mourned her destiny ; — it 
was not merely the helpless state of the infant 
orphan, though their hearts tenderly allowed 
his claim ; — it was the remembrance of other 
years that swept over their minds with a power 
so strong, yet so tender, — it was the view of 
that sacred isle where reposed the dust of their 

VOL. L G 



IrZ CLAN-ALB1N, 

chiefs, those departed heroes who had ad- 
vanced the name of Macalbin to a high pitcli 
of glory among the clans of the country; — 
it was the venerable figure of the Lady, who 
stood alone on the beach, like the guardian 
genius of the place. — The Lady, the last of 
Macalbin's line, deserted in her old age ! — it 
was the hills of their fathers ! those lofty 
mountains which for ages immemorial had 
been the scene of their departed glory, — that 
combined to awaken the high and solemn en- 
thusiasm of the national character : — but 
above all, it was the " Cronach of Macalbin," 
that touched a chord in every bosom, which 
vibrated the deepest tones of sorrow ; and the 
last of the clan wept together as they slowly 
approached the ground which in their eyes 
was hallowed. 

Lady Augusta bowed a silent welcome, and 
the mourning train proceeded to her cottage. 
There they halted. They would first witness 
the baptism of the orphan, for the presence of 
the inanimate mother was dear to superstitious 
tenderness. 

" Let him be named Norman," said the 
Lady, — " It was the name of him who last — 
it was the name of the youngest son of Ma- 
calbin." 



A NATIONAL TALE. 63 

Tears were all the reply ; and the simple 
ceremony was performed. The Lady kissed 
and blessed the little orphan whom she took 
to her arms. 

" Be thou happier than he whose name thou 
bearest." — Had the Lady added another word, 
her feelings might have overpowered that 
habitual self-control she struggled to main- 
tain, and she gave the infant to the attendants. 
The sleeping innocent was carried round the 
kindly circle, receiving mingled embraces 
and benedictions ; and they proceeded to the 
spot set apart as a last refuge for the misfor- 
tunes of his mother. 

" She is taken away from the evil to come," 
said the Lady, as bending over the grave, 
she wiped away a sympathising, and not un- 
grateful tear. — " Blessed are they who die in 
youth, they are at rest from trouble." — Her 
mind reverted to her early sorrows, and ano- 
ther tear trembled on her eye-lash. 

The shovelled earth now rattled hollowly 
on the coffin. That ghastly sound ! — for a 
moment it chilled the current of life in every 
bosom. Gradually it became more obtuse ; 
some of the attendants wept, and the earth 
was fast closing over all that had been mortal 



64 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of the early victim of misfortune. Another 
minute and it was all over ! and the sweeping 
blast strewed the lingering yellow leaves of 
autumn on the turf which wrapped her cold re- 
mains. — The Highlanders bowed profoundly, 
and slowly retired from the grave. 

The Lady kept the infant Norman, his 
nurse, and Mary, for the remainder of the 
day ; and the rest of the party proceeded to 
Ronald's barn, where the feast was spread. 
Trout of the lake, grouse from the moors, 
the fowls, cheese, and other rural dainties, 
contributed by friendly neighbours on similar 
occasions, furnished a table in the wilderness - r 
and by the potent aid of Ronald's shell, a 
scene very different from the preceding was 
exhibited. It was the second act of a High- 
land funeraL 



A NATIONAL TALE. 65 



CHAP. VI. 



The wild glen hides an orphan boy, 
He binds his vale-flowers with the reed, 
He wears love's sunny eye of joy, 
And birth he little seems to heed." 

Lanchorne. 

'* The live long summer day 



She at the house end sits ; and oft her wheel 

Is stopp'd, while on the road far-stretched she bends 

An eye o'erflowing melancholy look ; 

Or strives to mould the distant traveller 

Into the form of him who's far away. 

Hopeless and broken-hearted, still she loves 

To sing, " When wild war's deadly blast was blaurn." 

Grahame. 

1 HE 1 yiews of a stranger lady, whom Ronald 
the smith had found in Glenlenan, spread like 
wild-fire over the district^ with many wonder- 
ful exaggerations. It was said he had found 
a great sum of money in her possession ; that 
her friends had committed her to his care ; — 
a thousand things were said, but conjecture 
was at last exhausted, for months and years 
passed away, and no inquiry was ever made 
after the wandering female. 
G2 



66 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Meanwhile the little orphan remained in 
happy unconsciousness, under the protection 
of the warm hearted mountaineers ; and gra- 
dually the lovely infant ripened into a bloom- 
ing boy, and in Glenalbin gaily sported away 
those first blest days when innocence smiles 
on the joys of infancy. 

Norman, now nearly six years old, was 
universally known by the appellation of " the 
Lady's child ;" and was become so general a 
favourite in Dunalbin, that in every hovel he 
might have found a home, and in every indi- 
vidual a friend and protector. And Norman 
was also Piper Hugh's pet, and Moome's 
darling ; and never had so much love been 
lavished on happy childhood. The affections 
of his faithful Mary were now bound up in 
him ; for peace had for three years been con- 
cluded with America ; every war-worn soldier 
had returned to his family ; — Allan was not 
known to have shared a soldier's bed, still 
Mary heard not of her lover. Mary, besides 
numberless personal attractions, was an 
heiress, and many suitors contended for her 
fair hand ; but faithful to the memory of her 
unfortunate lover, she steadily rejected every 
offer, and seemed regardless even of the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 67 

odious epithet Old Maid, a most ungrateful 
sound to the ears of a young Highlandwoman. 
Ronald, who was most desirous to see his 
daughter married, was certainly surprised, 
and even provoked by her obstinacy. — " But 
she is a good girl for all that," thought he, 
— " and certainly has little of her mother's 
temper ;" — for that good woman still used 
gentle remonstrances, when Ronald's social 
feelings kept him late at fairs and funerals. 

The only servant of Lady Augusta, a stout 
Highland girl, who rowed a small skiff every 
morning to Dunalbin, usually took the boy 
back with her ; and the cherub face of little 
Norman was now the chief attraction of the 
Lady's breakfast table. The Lady wished 
that he should converse familiarly in English 
from his earliest infancy, an accomplishment 
not to be learned in Dunalbin, where the 
only language was pure Gaelic. She was not 
however infected with the fashionable fear 
which now reigns in most Highland families ; 
she was old-fashioned enough to think that 
there was nothing very horrible or vulgar in 
a mountain child lisping the language of the 
mountains ; in a Highlander being perfectly 
acquainted with the energetic idiom of his 



68 CLAN- ALB IN, 

native land. She even felt something like 
contempt for those modern renegadoes who 
pride themselves in real, and often on affected 
ignorance of all .that it should be their boast 
to know. 

Little Norman now spoke English and 
Gaelic with equal fluency ; and usually re- 
counted to the Lady, in the former tongue, 
the fairy tales with which Old Moome enter- 
tained him in the latter. Often, when in 
relating his little stories, a flash of intelligence, 
like a wandering sun-beam, would light up 
his childish features, and give a transient 
glimpse of the future man ; the Lady would 
for a moment imagine a wild, visionary, flitting 
resemblance to all she had ever loved and 
lost ; and gaze, sigh, and gently dismiss him. 
Indeed she was now so much attached to the 
child that it was with reluctance she ever saw 
him depart from Eleenalin ; but she could 
not damp his gay spirits, by making him the 
melancholy sharer of her solitary evenings : 
and from the example of her humble neigh- 
bours she had nothing to fear for her young 
protege. They were poor indeed, according 
to the generally received notions ; and the 
pedantry of knowledge might have deemed 



A NATIONAL TALE. 69 

them ignorant : — but they had no taint of vul- 
garity, no mean servility ; their deference to 
rank was the homage of sentiment ; — no surly 
selfishness, — none of those coarse features of 
character which distinguish the peasantry of 
other countries. 

It was in a fine evening in the end of March, 
when Norman, breaking wildly from the ser- 
vant of the Lady, who had rowed him ashore, 
tripped away light as the breeze that flitted 
over the lake, to the cottage of Moome. 

The cottage of Moome was the theatre, the 
opera-house, and the ball-room of Dunalbim, 
Every night a rosy smiling group might be 
seen encircling the fire of turf which blazed 
cheerily in the middle of her hut, — a group 
that united social enjoyment with individual 
usefulness, and gaily blended mirth with in- 
dustry. Young women were seen busily 
turning their wool-wheels, girls still younger 
knitting or carding. Even playful infants,, 
their fairy toils well repaid by Moome's tales, 
seated in every corner, would tease wool and 
listen, smiling over their voluntary labour ; — 
while the young men, returned from their 
daily occupations, would employ themselves, 
in making brogues, wooden dishes, rude 



70 CXAN-ALBIX, 

baskets, twisting cotfrse bents into ropes, to 
be applied to various uses, making and re- 
pairing such nets as were wanted in the fishery 
of the lake : — M each by the lass he loved," — 
swelled the choral song, or listened with deep 
attention to the chanted legendary ballad, 
and the tale of other times ; — the traditionary 
record of ancestral glory, the spirit-stirring, 
and oft*recounted exploits of C LAN-ALB IN. 

It was a scene of this kind, a scene of sim- 
ple and natural enjoyment, that the distant 
halloo of Norman interrupted, as he flew up 
the green slope from the margin of the lake. 

" That is my boy," said Mary, while her 
eyes shot a gleam of delight. She had but 
slightly participated in the sociality of the 
evening, for her heart was heavy. She 
thought of him who was " far away," at times 
she thought of him as still living, and it was 
a hope which rather distracted than tran- 
quillized her mind : yet Mary in her turn 
sung her ballad, but it was hi unison with the 
feeling of the moment ; — a simple Gaelic 
ditty, composed by a woman, a native of the 
glen, some years before, on a very melan- 
choly occasion. In the following lines it is 
rather imitated than translated ; for Gaelic 



A NATIONAL TALE. 71 

" thoughts that breathe," can only be truly 
conveyed in the glowing pictured words of 
the mountain tongue. 

BALLAD. 
O cold, cold, blows the wintry blast, 

The snow falls on my cheek; 
All slumber in the arms of love, 

But a grave is all I seek. 

For wildly blew the blast of war, 
My true-love cross'd the sea ; 

And cold he lies in the arms of death,' 
Far, far from home and me. 

Now Heaven preserve mine orphan boy, 
Sweet pledge of sweeter love, 

Dear image of a hapless sire, 
O may'st thou happier prove ! 

Will Heaven protect mine orphan boy ? 

Will angels be his guard ? — 
Hope brightens in his sunny eye, 

A mother's prayer is heard. 

Then fare thee well mine orphan boy, 

. Sweet babe of many tears, 

Thy father's love, thy mother's joy : — 

Heaven shield thine infant years ; 
For I must to my true-love's grave 

Across the stormy deep ; 
I'll stretch me on his hallowed sod, 

And so soundly I shall sleep. 



72 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Moome, whom native courtesy taught to 
divide her attentions among- her youthful 
guests with punctilious nicety, had ' often 
addressed herself to Mary, but her soul was 
sad ; and Moome's next tale was that of " Sir 
Bertram and Margaret the fair ;" for Moome, 
though no metaphysician, had a clew to all 
the mysterious workings of the human heart. 

It was a Saxon tale, Sir Bertram, a knight 
of the cross, had once on a time gone to the 
Holy Land, leaving his lady, fair Margaret, 
to pine in solitude. Twenty years had he 
been absent, and he was universally believed 
to have fallen into the hands of the Foul Pay- 
nim. Margaret devoted herself to his memo- 
ry; shut herself up in her castle, saying 
prayers for the repose of his soul, and work- 
ing his exploits on tapestry with her maidens. 
But Heaven preserved its knight, and he re- 
turned to reward with increased affection, the 
suffering and constancy of the " Fair Mar- 
garet." 

Mary wept at the recital, but her heart was 
soothed ; and when she heard the gleesome 
shout that announced her little Norman, she 
was almost happy. 

" God bless the boy 1" cried Moome, as 



A NATIONAL TALE. 73 

Norman bounded into the middle of the circle, 
and kissed his " Mother -beg" (little mother) 
for so he named Mary, and pressed his cherub 
lip to the hairy cheek of his " dear* dear 
Hugh Piper." He then saluted the whole 
circle, and delivered the kind remembrances 
of his " Lady Mother," and her inquiries 
about Hugh's rheumatism, and Moome's eyes, 
and the foot of Catharine, the daughter of 
Catharine, which had been burnt. He then 
seated himself with the younger children, and 
the well teased wool was soon scattered about, 
to the great annoyance of Moome, and the 
inexpressible delight of Hugh Piper. But 
the restless vivacity of his temperament soon 
required other amusement ; and creeping 
slily behind Moome, he snatched the flax 
from her distaff, and looking archly in her 
face, playfully held it to the flame, and alter- 
nately drew it back. 

" Now Moomie I shall burn it," said he,, 
u unless you promise to tell me the tale of 
the < stranger lady,' who was buried at 
Kilechan long, long ago, when I was but a 
little child. I was there to-day alone, and 
pulled all these primroses on the fairy-knoll," 
and he took a handful of wild-flower* from 

VOL, I. H 



74 CLAX-ALBIN, 

his Highland bonnet. — " I know every story 
of every rock in the g-Jen but that. Come 
now, — that's a dear Moomie. — So you won't ! 
well, here it goes ; once, twice," — and he 
held the flax to the flame. — " Stay then, 
young rogue," said Moome, while her eyes 
glistened, and every one exchanged such a 
look ! Hugh arose ; went out, and again re- 
turned. Norman .leaned against Mary in the 
attitude of deep attention, while she stopped 
her wheel, and twisted her fingers into the 
light auburn hair that hung over his green 
tartan dress. But Moome remained silent ; 
— every one wore an air of restraint, and 
Norman saw that something was concealed. 

" Do, Morag dear, put on the potatoes," 
said Moome at length — " It must be time 
since Norman is come." — " That is the story 
then ;" said he haughtily — " Well, my Lady 
Mother shall tell me to-morrow." — Norman 
scorned to intreat a second time ; even the 
flax was safe, for he disdained to burn the 
flax of an ill-natured old woman who refused 
to tell him a story he was anxious to hear. 

Morag, whose turn it had been to be the 
servant for the night, soon executed her busi- 
ness. Xhe smoking potatoes were emptied 



A NATIONAL TALE. 75 

into a claar, round which every one promis- 
cuously ranged, and partook of a social, if 
not luxurious meal. Jt was Saturday, and 
Moome, whose piety allowed of no dancing 
with which the other nights of the week often 
concluded, followed the young people to the 
door, with mingled blessings and good nights. 
Each was taking off his several way, when 
Norman suddenly remembered a heap of 
husks which he carefully collected during the 
preceding week, while the young women 
were skutching their flax. It was no sooner 
mentioned than every little urchin, who over- 
powered with sleep, had been nestling in the 
arms of his sister, leaped to the ground. The 
heap was soon formed, and Norman, rejoic- 
ing in the work of destruction, carried the 
brand, and set fire to the Bratchel, which soon 
flamed to the heavens, many a brilliant sparkle 
flying off like blue circulating stars, amid the 
loud shouts and joyful acclamations of the 
youthful party who leaped through the flames, 
dragged and pushed each other in a wanton 
maze. Even the venerable figure of Moome, 
as she leaned on her staff, her garments 
gleaming in the blaze that ruddied her silver 
locks, was insufficient to protect a favourite 



76 CLAN-ALBIN, 

cat which had followed her to the scene of 
revelry. It was rudely thrown into the flames 
by a little mischievous boy of the same age 
as Norman, who, perceiving the danger of 
the favourite, darted into the flames and 
rescued the terrified grimalkin, v\hich he re- 
stored to its angry mistress. Norman had now 
forgot his quarrel with Moome, and while 
she patted his head, and sagely predicted 
M that he would yet be a gentleman when the 
grass waved over her grave that said so," he 
repeatedly asked if she thought his " Lady 
Mother," would see the Bratchd. 

Hugh's pipe now struck up its gayest lilt, 
-and by the blaze, every one was jigging, but 
Norman had recollected an omission, and 
running to Mary, begged her to hold him up 
high in her arms till he made a speech. Mary 
complied, and smiling upon the crowd below, 
he desired the girls to meet in Ronald's barn 
next Monday to waulk blankets for the Lady. 
" You Mary-bane, Catharine, Flora, Marga- 
ret-roy, Anna-tugh, all of you ! come all ! 
all !" — Loudly echoing, all ! all ! — they dis- 
persed, while Norman kissed Moome and the 
Piper, and bounding into the arms of Mary 
was carried away. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 77 

The news of the xvaulking was a happy 
hearing: for Moome. At such meetings she 
presided in all her power and glory, and as 
the Piper conducted her to her hut. she could 
not forbear expressing her unfeigned pity 
for the Lowlanders, whom, what are called 
fla.v-mills and fulling -mills precluded from all 
the social delights of beating and skutching, 
the blaze of a Bratchel, and above all, the 
superlative joys of a waulking. Moome had 
not the remotest idea but that the modes of 
life by which she was surrounded were not 
only the happiest, but the best and most 
enviable ; and never thought of the Lowlan- 
ders but with a mixed feeling of pity and con- 
tempt. The Piper was convinced that they 
were the best, but by no means quite so certain 
that they were so esteemed ; and his feelings 
for Lowlanders were those of dislike and 
disdain. 

Hugh Piper, the present favourite of Nor- 
man, and the faithful follower in after life of 
all his varied fortunes, — the friend, the coun- 
sellor, the fellow- sufferer, — was a person of 
somewhat singular character. Hugh was a 
bachelor, about forty years of age, and 
boasted the proud distinction of being the 
H 2 



78 CLAN-ALBIN, 

lineal descendant of the " high hereditary 
piper" of Clan-albin. And the talent had 
not degenerated in Hugh, who was esteemed 
one of the first players of the bagpipe in the 
Highlands or the Isles. Hugh was moreover 
an exquisite performer on the violin, an emi- 
nent hunter, and a skilful fisher. The Lady, 
with whom he lived in his boyhood, had be- 
stowed some pains on his education, intend- 
ing him for a schoolmaster to the hamlet, but 
this was an occupation little suited to his 
habits ; and perhaps beneath the dignity of 
" the high hereditary piper." One seldom 
makes progress in what is despised ; and the 
Piper had no great opinion of " clerkly skill." 
In short Hugh had no capacity for learning ; 
and now, in his fortieth year, he remained as 
ignorant as infancy of every thing beyond 
the mountains. Only, he knew in general 
that the Saxons were a selfish, effeminate, 
grovelling race, mongrels and slounges, crea- 
tures of yesterday ; whose contempt of his 
country he repaid with tenfold scorn, — whom 

he hated somewhat less than the clan of 

(which every Macalbin is born and bound to 
hate) — but despised infinitely more. But 
though the most violent of clansmen, Hugh 



A NATIONAL TALE. 79 

was the most kind-hearted of men, every in- 
dividual of the ahhorred clan, or the despised 
country, with whom he chanced to meet, 
proved an exception to the general rule, till, 
like many other good rules, it was more spo- 
ken of than acted upon. On every thing 
within his limited sphere, his observation was 
singularly acute. His mind grasped firmly 
at every object with which it came into con- 
tact, and although his views were seldom 
comprehensive, they were often true, and al- 
ways original. And on these Hugh would 
reason with all the inaccuracy of enthusiasm, 
and speak with all the natural eloquence of 
strong feeling. Hugh possessed in a high 
degree that whimsical combination of shrewd- 
ness, simplicity, and humour, which charac- 
terizes many of his countrymen ; and like 
them, his first passion was clanship. But to 
these national features of mind he added some 
that were peculiarly his own. Among these 
was an unbounded fondness for children. 
Hugh was admirably skilled in all their little 
sports ; a most ingenious fabricator, and a 
very generous distributor of toy-boats, bows 
and arrows, shinny s, and alder-tree guns ; 
and he was as zealous in sharing, as in pro- 



80 CLAN-ALBIN, 

moting their games, for he still possessed the 
wild spirits, open affections, and artless man- 
ners of childhood. Hugh never passed a 
hazel thicket without thinking how well they 
liked filherts, nor climbed a hill without 
thinking how droll they looked when they 
stained their cheeks with bilberries. No 
wonder then that the Piper was caressed, and 
loved, and called " Uncle Hugh," by all the 
children of the glen. But Hugh was endeared 
to every age, for his was the most social, 
friendly, careless, and disinterested of all 
created natures. 

Yet Hugh was a man of many failings. If 
to spend whole days, and almost every day, 
in sporting with children, ranging the hills 
for game, not worth (in that country) the price 
of the powder, putting the stone, throwing 
the hammer, playing the shinny, piping at 
this wedding, and the other interment ; or 
even in lounging in the sun, pursuing the 
vagaries of a wanton fancy, to the utter 
neglect of every important concern, — if all 
this was idleness and folly, Hugh was indeed 
very idle, and very foolish. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 81 



CHAP. VII. 



Sweet is the falling of the single voice, 
And sweet the joining of the choral swell 
Without a pause, ta'en up by old and young 
Alternately, in wildly measur'd strain. 

Grahame. 



JYlONDAY came and brought the rwulking, 
an occasion of joy and song. Moome's very 
best songs were reserved for waul kings ; and 
at these social meetings the spirit of glad- 
ness was often poured forth in extemporary 
verse. 

A Highland waulking is a very primitive, 
and to some, a highly interesting spectacle. 
On such occasions the young women for many 
miles around the theatre of action (generally 
a barn) assemble, and contrive to enjoy a 
holiday, while they discharge the duties of 
good neighbourhood. These meetings con- 
sist exclusively of females, and some expe- 



82 CLAN-ALBIN, 

rienced matron presides, not more to direct 
than to animate their labours ; for she is 
often herself a poet and a composer of rude 
melodies, and is always eminently skilled in 
music and song, — the soul and charm of a 
waulking. Animated by exercise, brilliant 
spirits, and many inspiring associations, the 
hoary dame and her attendant maidens, while 
breathing forth the lively effusions of native 
feeling, through the enchanting medium of 
their wild national melodies, form a very 
striking group. From this primitive custom 
is derived the practice, — common even in the 
highest circles where Gaelic song is intro- 
duced, — of singing round united handker- 
chiefs. * 

It may easily be believed that Moome, who 
was prime mover in every important opera- 
tion, shone forth at such seasons with resplen- 
dent glory. Alike respectable for age, expe- 
rience, and sagacity, every thing was guided 
by her advice, and submitted to her direction. 

* In waulking the women sit round a board, or a frame of 
wicker work, on which they dash the cloth in measured time to 
the animating jorram or luinneg. The leader of the band 
sings the stanza, the whole band unite, in the chorus, which is 
repeated three times. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 83 

The dying of cloth, or of yarn for the tar(an t 
was performed under her immediate inspec- 
tion ; in making new setts her fancy was 
allowed to be inimitable ; though some of the 
girls began to think she was rather partial to 
the brilliant yellow, and the resplendent scar- 
let. At the making of the great Lammas 
cheese, and salting of the winter Mart, while 
a Mart had been annually slaughtered in the 
bhalie, Moome always presided. Then in 
nursing the sick, or curing the maimed, she 
was equally skilful, — had a thousand charms 
against every disease to which man or beast 
is liable, possessed the power of averting, or 
rather counteracting the baneful effects of 
the evil eye, and of making a cow yield her 
milk to a strange calf. Moome could besides 
expound dreams on the most scientific prin- 
ciples ; and tell fortunes either from the 
grounds of a tea-cup, or in the more ancient 
manner, from the shoulder-bone of a sheep. 
At making Gaelic rhymes none in the glen, — 
in a glen where all were poets, — excelled 
Moome ; and a more extensive collection of 
the tales of Ossian Mach-Fingal, and every 
ancient bard, was in the possession of no per- 
son in the Highlands. With the genealogy of 



84 CLAN-ALBIN, 

all the neighbouring clans she was intimately 
acquainted ; but for the Clan ! — the clan of 
Macalbin ! — Moome could have run up from 
Sir Norman, to Albin the first of the line with 
more ease and quickness than a Catholic 
priest repeats his Pater-noster. These talents, 
and powers, and the virtues they adorned, 
could not fail to recommend Moome to her 
clan and kindred ; — she was universally loved, 
and revered as an oracle from whom there 
was no appeal. — Nor was any wished. 

The girls were gathered to the waulkiyig y 
and Norman, with a group of rosy ragged 
children, was seated in a corner of the barn 
waulking an old handkerchief, and joining 
his infant voice in the choral swell, when the 
barking of dogs was heard. As the ba-rking 
of dogs always announced a stranger, a rare 
and interesting object in a secluded glen, 
Norman sprung up, and hastened along the 
path. At a considerable distance he perceived 
the stranger. Driving forward the pebbles 
strewed in the path, Norman ran to meet him. 
It was a soldier : his regimental rags fluttered 
in the wind, and his shoulders were loaded 
with a knapsack. 

" Welcome! a thousand, times!" — cried 



A NATIONAL TALE. 85 

Norman in Gaelic. — " Thank you my dear," 
replied the soldier — " Your appearance is I 
hope ominous of good, — you are the first 
soul I have met in Glenalbin ;"— and they 
walked on together, Norman now hopping on 
one leg, now on the other, or wielding his 
shinny. 

" And tell me whose dear little boy you 
are ?" said the soldier, for the appearance of 
Norman was much superior to the children of 
.a Highland hamlet. — " I am the Lady's child, 
and mother Mary's boy ;" — replied Norman. 
" And who is Mary r" cried the soldier. — 
" The Mary who is my mother is Mary the 
daughter of Ronald, and Duncan," said the 
boy, still speaking in Gaelic. 

"Son of God! — my Mary!" — cried the 
soldidlr ; and fiercely grasping the boy by the 
shou/der, he again questioned him. — " Mary 
and the Lady are my mothers," replied he, 
gazing with wonder on the perturbed coun- 
tenance of the soldier, which lately pale 
and sickly, was now suffused with crimson. 

" And your father ?" « I don't know 

himself, unless it be Ronald smith, or Hugh 
piper. — Hugh gave me this shinny, and the 
boat which I swim at Eleenalin, — and told 
VOL. L I 



86 CLAN-ALBIN, 

me to bold up my head, and look like a 
chieftain and a warrior." — Norman's infor- 
mation was unheeded ; the man leaned 
against a rock in deep musing. 

" If you would give it to myself," said 
Norman, touching the knapsack, and with a 
look of infantine compassion regarding the 
soldier. — " You won't believe how strong I 
am, and how I threw little Roban, when 
Uncle Hugh made us wrestle. I could carry 
it for you, and take you to Mother Mary, 
who loves the soldiers in her heart, and would 
give you milk and cheese, like the old one 
who came to the shealing." 

" Then let us go, since Mary loves a sol- 
dier," said the man, and he extended his 
hand. But Norman flew on before. 

" Mary, here is a soldier without ; — I told 
him you loved a soldier." — Mary, blushing 
deeply, rose to give the soldier welcome. 

" My child told you we loved a soldier," 
said she. Allan knew the voice of his be- 
loved ; — he was already in the middle of the 
bam. 

"Mary! — your child ?" cried the soldier. 
— Mary gazed, reddened, the blood rushed 
back to her heart, and she fell into the arms 



A NATIONAL. TALE. 87 

of the soldier, exclaiming — " Allan ! — my 
own Allan !" — The silence which followed 
was sacred to the best feelings of the human 
heart. 

Quickly the news of Allan's arrival circu- 
lated through the hamlet, the glen, the hills, 
and the country, — " Ronald's Mary's Allan I" 
The young pair were soon surrounded by 
their affectionate kindred, and congratulated 
with all the warmth of the national character : 
and Moome blessed the Lord that she had 
lived to see so happy a day for the sake of 
her " gentle Mary ;" and even hinted that 
her own prayers had no inconsiderable effect 
in bringing about an event at which every 
one rejoiced. 

" I always said he would return," said 
Moome, addressing herself to Mary. — " Don't 
you remember now the dream I had of him 
just Christmas last three years ?" — Mary re- 
membered it well, — her eyes spoke her gra- 
titude, while those of Unah beamed with 
chastened exultation : she loved to foretel 
happiness, and it was but right that she should, 
enjoy the success of her predictions. The 
remainder of the day was dedicated to social 
joy, — a little jubilee to the young people of 



88 CLAN-ALBlN, 

Dunalbin, a feast of the kinder feelings to 
their elders, who gathered around the war- 
worn soldier, eagerly listening to his tales of 
woe and wonder. 

Ronald's best whisky, and his wife's bluest 
cheese were distributed with hospitable pro • 
fusion ; the relations of Allan soon joined 
the social party ; the pipe of Hugh sounded 
its merriest note, and Mary, seated by her 
lover, forgot even Norman, who was gone to 
Eleenalin. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 89 



CHAP. VIII. 



" The appointed day arrives, a blythesome day 
Of festive jollity. * * * * 
Soon as the bands are knit, a jocund sound 
Strikes briskly up, and nimble feet beat fast 
Upon the earthen floor. Through many a reel 
With various steps uncouth, some new, some old, 
Some all the dancer's own, with Highland flings 
Not void of grace, the lads and lasses strive 
To dance each other down." 

GftAHAMG. 

.Lady Augusta was in the eyes of Norman 
the first of human beings, or rather some- 
thing beyond mortality. His love for Mary 
was perhaps as tender, but it was a different 
feeling ; , what he felt for the Lady was a 
species of adoration ; her image embodied to 
his fancy the abstract idea the pious Moome 
had already given him of the Deity, while 
she directed his infant thoughts to heaven, 
and laboured to impress his understanding 
with the incomprehensible attributes of the 
Supreme Being. Lady Augusta was the object 
I 2 



90 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of his awe, of his worship, and of the myste- 
rious sentiment of terror and doubt which 
absorbed his childish imagination. There ap- 
peared a gradation so infinite from the Lady 
to the inhabitants of Dunalbin, that the scale 
was too boundless for his limited vision, and 
he assigned to each a different nature, and a 
different sphere of existence. The extreme 
solitude in winch she lived ; the superiority 
of her manners, obvious even to the infantine 
discernment of Norman ; the dignity of her 
deportment, her dress, her language, her 
occupations, and above all, the profound re- 
spect with which every one approached her, 
— all contributed to foster his enthusiasm, 
till his imagination, separating her from every 
other class of beings, formed an ideal world 
filled by her image. It is not therefore sur- 
prising that Norman, though tormented by 
the first importunate cravings of curiosity, 
feared to trouble her about the " lady buried 
at Kilechan." His heart hovered round the 
theme, as standing by her side, he tried with 
a piece of chalk to delineate her little cot- 
tage, its mossy roof, and woodbine porch. 
The Lady was always kind, and indulgent, 
but on this day she was so peculiarly soft, at- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 91 

tentive, and solicitous to dissipate the slight 
cloud of uneasiness which obscured his sunny 
features, that Norman began to forget the 
exalted being in the endearing mother. He 
had ever been such an exclusive object of at- 
tention so inexpressibly dear, that though he 
complained not, he keenly felt the coolness 
with which Mary had seen him depart for 
Eleenalin, and the Lady understood these 
feelings. 

" Poor thing !" thought she, gazing sor- 
rowfully on the child. — " Mary has found 
another object to occupy her kind heart ; — 
but what excludes you from all others brings 
you nearer to me." — The Lady was so con- 
descending, so full of little gratifying marks 
of attention, so warm in praise of the draw- 
ing, that Norman at last gained courage to 
make his inquiry. The Lady gazed on him 
with melancholy tenderness ; but desirous to 
avoid every appearance of mystery, replied, 
— " The lady you inquire about came from 
a distant country, and died at Dunalbin ; and 
we laid her here. She left a little boy, but the 
God who took her to himself will be a father 
to her little boy, and all men will be his 
friends." 



92 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Norman wept. — " And where is the little 
boy that has no mother? — Ah Lady I have 
two mothers ; — poor little boy !" — Lady Au- 
gusta felt the necessity of anticipating the 
inquiries his dawning reason would suggest, 
and yet she was unable to shock his infantine 
sensibility. Norman had wept the death of a 
favourite robin, and shed on its span-breadth 
grave the tribute of pure and artless affection ; 
he had mourned the fading flowers ; he had 
even been strangely affected by Moome's 
tales, though hardly conscious of their im- 
port ; — but a little boy who had no mother I 
The sphere of his sympathies was as con- 
tracted as that of his wants. Norman soon 
forgot the lady, but he mused long and sadly 
on the fate of the little boy. . 

" Ah Lady, 1 ' said he, after a long pause — 
" Who will love him, and kiss him, and say, 
My child ! God bless you !" — Norman fixed 
his desponding eyes on the face of Lady 
Augusta. 

"That good God who is the orphan's fa- 
ther I" replied the Lady. The idea was too 
abstract to console the grief of Norman. — - 
" God is not a mother I" cried he with sorrow 
so emphatic, that Lady Augusta much struck 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 93 

with the boldness of the expression he had 
used, hastily added, — " He has given him a 
mother ! and the father of the fatherless is his 
father." — Norman looked the image of child- 
ish joy. 

The " gentle Mary," in common with all 
the inhabitants of the glen, felt her happiness 
incomplete till it had received the sanction of 
the Lady. Gentle is an epithet sometimes 
applied to individuals among the Highland 
peasantry by their superiors, as denoting 
peculiar mildness of manners and disposition, 
for even in the lowliest rank among this pri- 
mitive people, many a " gentle lad," and 
" gentle girl," are found worthy of it. — 
Mary attended by her mother and her lover, 
had stolen from the scene of festivity, and 
in the evening visited Eleenalin. The Lady 
shook the hand of the soldier, and affection- 
ately embraced Mary, around whom Norman 
clung, while he led her to see " what he had 
done 1" and Mary examined the drawing with 
pleasure more exquisite than she could have 
derived from all that art has accomplished. 
- Every care was now lost in the bustle of 
preparation for the wedding of Mary ; and as 
she was an only child, and daughter to the 



94 CJLAN-ALBIN, 

richest man in Dunalbin, very magnificent 
expectations were entertained. Nor were 
they disappointed. The friends and relatives 
of Allan and Mary vied in splendour on this 
important occasion ; not only all the people 
of the glen, but all the people of the count?y, 
were invited to Mary's wedding, which was 
kept up for eight days with the true Highland 
spirit. And from every quarter were nuptial 
presents sent in, to add to the plenty or 
luxury of the continued feast. Hugh piper 
gave venison, and moor-game, and fish, all 
of his own killing, and pipe music in abun- 
dance; — the Lady presented a sheep, and 
tea, and sugar, and biscuits, and ornaments 
for the bride, and the first tea equipage that 
had ever been seen in Dunalbin ! — Even 
Moome insisted on killing one of her three 
white hens, and on presenting the bridegroom 
with mittens of her own knitting. — Not that 
Ronald needed these liberal contributions, — 
they were given to his worth, and to the worth 
of his daugnter, — to his pride, rather than to 
his necessity, — in the spirit of Highland 
courtesy and sociality, — of clannish custom 
and kindness, were they given,; and in the 
same spirit were they received. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 93 

But Mary's wedding was more peculiarly 
honoured, for the Lady on the second day of 
the feast visited Dunalbin ! An infant swarm, 
at the head of which was Norman, flew to 
the landing place, followed by all that nume- 
rous wedding party, to hail the approach of 
the Lady. So seldom did she visit the hamlet, 
unless in cases of sickness or death, that her 
presence excited a general and tumultuous 
joy. Those whom age or infirmity prevented 
from visiting the island, crawled to the door 
of their huts to see, and to bless as she passed 
the last of Macalbin's line. For every one 
she had a soothing word, a cheering smile, a 
gratifying notice, or a considerate inquiry ; 
a trifling something, which, flowing from her 
own heart, never failed to reach the heart to 
which it was addressed, dilating it with the 
pride of clanship, and the glow of grateful 
affection. With Norman clinging to her 
robe, the Lady went to the dwelling of Ro- 
nald. As she bent her fine form beneath the 
humble door, pronouncing her emphatic 
" Peace be to this house !" the spirit of peace 
seemed to descend, and hover around the 
little mansion ! — And how lovely did Mary's 
April countenance seem, when the Lady kissed 



96 CLAN-ALBIN, 

her, and gave her joy ; and in compliance with 
national custom, drank the health of " the 
young wife" 

This was the second, and most splendid day 
of this standing festival, and the Lady headed 
the board spread in Ronald's barn. At her 
left hand sat the bride, at her right Moome ; 
and next to Moome Allan's mother ; and to 
Mary a very important personage who shall in 
due time be taken notice of: — and with the 
exception of this personage there was no soul 
assembled round that board but boasted the 
blood of Clanalbin; — heroes for his ances- 
tors, and glory as his inheritance ! — How 
powerful beyond all other conceptions of 
earthly power must that man have been, who, 
when thus surrounded, might have been ad~ 
dressed, — 

** And not a clansman of thy line, 
But would have given his life for thine !" 

Hugh acted both as butler and piper during 
dinner; and Moome related all the circum- 
stances of her own wedding. But when 
Ronald had " returned thanks" never did a 
piece of finer pipe music burst on Highland 
ears than that which Hugh had composed for 



A NATIONAL TALE. 97 

this occasion ; — and never had arms been 
crossed and entwined with greater cordi- 
ality, or swung with greater animation, than 
those around Ronald's board ; and in the pause 
of the pipe never had clapping of hands and 
acclamations been louder or more joyous at 
any wedding in the glen. * 

The Lady staid to witness the commence- 
ment of the ball, and saw Hugh dance with 
the bride, and Ronald with Allan's mother; 
— for in that country when this cherished 
amusement is going forward, it is " alike all 
ages." Attended by Ronald she then with- 
drew to his cottage. 

* At a Highland wedding feast of the real kind, the piper 
with his instrument ready inflated, catches the Amen, at the 
end of the grace. Every one crosses his arms on his breast, 
and gives a hand to his right and his left hand neighbour. 
The entwined arms are swung with abundant violence, till cer- 
tain pauses in the music, when they are disengaged, and the 
pause filled with clapping of hands and joyous acclamations. 
The party are again and again alternately entwined by the 
arms, or engaged in clapping and acclamations, till the 
music ceases, and the performance terminates. 



VOL. 1. 



98 CLAN-AI.BIN, 



CHAP. IX. 



'* The village all declared how much he knew, 
'Twas certain he could write and cipher too, 
Lands he could measure, terms and tides presage, 
And e'en the story ran that he could guage. 
In arguing too the parson owned his skill, 
For even though vanquished he could argue still ; 
While words of learned length and thund'ring sound 
Amazed the gazing rustics ranged around, 
And still they gazed, and still the wonder grew, 
That one small head could carry all he knew." 

Goldsmith. 

JN ORMAN had hitherto conned his " fairy 
lore" to the Lady, and had made so good pro- 
gress that he could already make out a chap- 
ter in the Gaelic bible, to the great edification 
of Moome, who had predicted much future 
good to his soul from the time that, in read- 
ing a very pathetic story, at the words — " and 
the cup was found in Benjamin's sack!" — he 
had burst into tears. Few young hearts can 
stand that terrible enunciation, and Norman 
wept and sobbed as if his heart would have 
broken. But even Moome, partial as she 



A NATIONAL TAXE. l>il 

was, could not say that the education of 
Norman was completed ; for she was a great 
admirer of the clearness of the Jewish genea- 
logies ; — those chapters going on- — " which 
was the son of Solomon, which was the son 
of David, which was the son of Jesse," — ■ 
were particularly favoured, from their strik- 
ing resemblance to the rhyming genealogies 
of her country ; — now Norman could not 
make out these ; though with a volubility 
which might have confounded and provoked 
an unbeliever in Ossian, he could run over 
the genealogy of the bard ; as " Oscar mach 
Ossian, mach Fingal, mach Comnal," &c. &c. 
— and of many of the clans. — But every child 
in the hamlet, in the glen, and indeed in the 
Highlands,* could do the same ; and Moome 
confessed that a little more learning would do 
the boy no great harm. 

The Lady wished to consult Ronald in the 
future arrangements her generous concern 
for the orphan boy suggested ; and the affec- 
tionate regard Ronald had ever evinced for 
the child, well entitled him to such a mark of 
attention. Ronald, Moome, and the Piper, 
were therefore summoned to a conference on 
the merits of the important personage who 



1 00 CLAN-ALBIN, 

had sat next to the hride at the wedding 
feast. — In different hamlets throughout that 
widely extended, and then populous parish, 
there were little schools where the reading of 
Gaelic was taught, and something like English 
attempted ; but George Buchanan, the parish 
schoolmaster, was reputed a person of very 
great learning. He was not a native of that 
part of the country, and the Lady had seldom 
seen him : but she had often heard him men- 
tioned with great approbation by the inhabi- 
tants of the hamlet. The country rung with 
the fame of his learning, but in the country 
learning was not much understood, and still 
less valued. The Lady, unable to judge of 
any thing else, could only give him full credit 
for the virtues attributed to him ; — every 
heart could estimate their value, and his tem- 
perance, piety, and primitive simplicity of 
manners, were universally acknowledged. 
Yet these were not precisely Highland vir- 
tues, and Buchanan had obtained the respect 
of his neighbours long before he had inte- 
rested their affections. But now he was loved 
as much as any man " who was not a drop of 
blood to them," possibly could be ; and the 
Piper, who delighted to praise, though he 



A NATIONAL TALE. 101 

disdained to flatter, was eloquent in his 
eulogy. 

" At the argument, as I am told, the parson 
is a mere joke to him," said Hugh. — " He 
will make you believe the world is all a notion ; 
and that we just fancy that we hear, and see, 
and smell ; — then he holds forth on essences 
and spirits, (which shows there are spirits in 
the low country as well as in our own) — and 
the genealogy of vibrations, and the propaga- 
tion of vibrations, and vibratiuncles, — which 
no doubt among the Saxons is a namely clan. 
Then (by your leave) he use such strange 
words it would make you wonder to hear him, 
for the Gaelic nor the Saxon neither won't 
hold him again, he's off to the Hebrew and 
the Welsh in a minute ; and tells you the 
name of every star that shines ; and what the 
merry dancers are made of; and how many 
miles it is to the moon, and how many barley- 
grains would go round her ; and how the big 
Bens were once all on fire. Now I said no- 
thing to him, so you may believe that or not 
as you please ; and likewise as to things being 
fifty times less than nothing, and sixty times less 
than nothing, which may be great learning for 

aught I know, though sure enough Well, 

K 2 



102 CLAN-ALBIN, 

it does not become me to doubt the word of 
a gentleman and a Christian, whom, — (though 
neither kith or kin of mine I won't belie him) — 
I never heard find fault with son of woman, 
save the Pope, and the natural wife of one 
Babylon. Now I think he might as well let 
the poor girl alone, and not be exposing his 
own countrywoman among strangers; for God 
help her, though I never saw her between the 
eyes, she is perhaps called as bad as she is : 
we all know the power a great gentleman has 

over a poor creature." The Lady faintly 

smiled at the mistake of the Piper, who inti- 
mately informed of every thing connected 
with his own country, its poetry, traditionary 
history,, superstitions, usages, and even inte- 
rests, knew nothing beyond the mountains. 

Lady Augusta would certainly have been 
as well pleased that the tutor she designed 
for Norman had let the poor Pope and Lady 
Babylon remain at peace, but she did not 
perceive that his hostility augured any of that 
want of candour which Hugh insinuated. 
Mr. Buchanan was called in, and it was finally 
settled that on the following Monday Norman 
should be sent to Ballyruag for education. 

This place was four Highland miles distant 



A NATIONAL TALE. 103 

from Glenalbin ; and many tears were shed 
on all sides at the idea of separation. The 
Piper busied himself in working a parting- 
present for his favourite ; Moome loaded him 
with pious counsel, and when the terrible day 
came, wept over him ; and Mary fondly kissed 
her darling ; while the Lady, scarcely less 
affected, bestowed her heartfelt benediction ; 
— and ail the women and children of Dunal- 
bin accompanied him a great way. Even 
Moome went farther than she had been for 
many years before, — the length of the lovely 
fountain near which she had seen the spirit. 
This spot, where a limpid stream gushed from 
a mossy rock, might, to Grecian imagination, 
have suggested a presiding Naiad. It was 
one of those springs so common in the 
Highlands to which many virtues are ascribed, 
and which bear the name of some patron saint. 
Moome washed the face of Norman in its 
waters ; and bathed her own eyes for a dim- 
ness of sight ; and Ronald laved his arms for 
the rheumatism ; another took a mouthful to 
cure the toothach ; and several poor women, 
with whom potatoes were become scarce, 
took large draughts from " Mary's Well" to 
cure the "craving of the hearty'' a disease 



104 CLAN-ALBIN, 

painfully common in the Highlands in the 
springs and summers succeeding scanty 
harvests. And now Moome implored the 
protection of every good being for her 
" darling," and to make assurance doubly 
sure, tied round his neck a green charmed 
thread as a defence from bad ones ; for 
a boy so lovely was peculiarly liable to 
evil-eye ; the fairies would be delighted with 
such a subject ; and Norman was going where 
he would frequently be seen by persons of 
the abhorred clan ; in whom Moome, to say 
the least, had no confidence. But he solemnly 
promised that night nor day the green thread 
should never for a moment leave his neck, 
and Moome was somewhat consoled. When 
the last moment arrived Norman manfully 
struggled with his feelings, and tearing him- 
self away, gave his hand to the Piper, who 
acted as sumpter-muk. And many a blessing 
and expression of endearment followed him 
who durst not trust himself to look back till 
he had attained the head of the mountains. 
And then one last look of the glen, the ham- 
let, and the island ! — Norman's sorrow was 
now at the heighth ; he sobbed so bitterly 
that the Piper could no longer stand it, and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 105 

he proposed to go back. — " For what, after 
all, is the worth of any thing you will get 
from him. I don't see but that Moome and 
myself might teach you as well every thing a 
gentleman ought to know." 

But Norman, with more judgment than 
his conductor, recalled the precepts of the 
Lady, and heroically withstood the powerful 
temptation. The glen which spread at his 
feet was to him a new object : he saw the 
school-house, the church, and twenty differ- 
ent things to engage attention. Now, in a 
Highland glen, every rock, every bush is 
storied ; and Hugh could tell all the local 
wonders that depended on the scenes around. 
So the spirit of Norman rose till compelled 
to part with this last cherished friend. 

Hugh too was gone ! — and when Norman 
had dried his eyes, he began to survey his 
future abode, and the man whose wonderful 
wisdom was the cause of tearing him from all 
he loved. Norman's observations were by no 
means favourable. Mr. Buchanan might have 
much latent kindness of heart, but there was 
in his manners nothing of Highland warmth, 
courtesy, and softness. Norman thought him 
very ungainly, ungracious, and ungraceful ; 



106 CLAN-ALBIN, 

very learned indeed, for the Lady said so -, 
but very tiresome, and he yawned the rest ; 
for after the first five minutes Buchanan had 
resumed his studies, and was busied with a 
large book, — far larger than Moome's bible. 

George Buchanan was the son of a small 
farmer in the western parts of Stirlingshire. 
An early display of quick parts had procured 
him the name of a genius, and he was de- 
voted to the ministry from his tenderest years. 
There is one species of ancestral pride enter- 
tained by some of the Lowland peasantry, 
and it was the boast of Buchanan's family. 
Above the fire place hung a " rusty rapier," 
which a hero had wielded at the " Brig of 
Bothwell." It was not without reason that 
Buchanan boasted of his humble ancestor, 
illustrated only by undisguised hatred, and 
fearless opposition to the tyranny of a worth- 
less prince. From the era of the Scottish per- 
secution the first-born son of this family had 
always been named George, in honour of the 
martyred ancestor, and solemnly dedicated to 
the promulgation of those principles in sup- 
port of which he had shed his blood. Such 
had been the high destiny of Norman's tutor. 
His father, a sturdy champion of the covenants, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 107 

a dogmatical, intolerant, and fiery zealot, had 
trained his infancy in all the rigour of ancient 
Presbyterianism. His mother was likewise of 
the " seed of the martyrs ;" and with his 
milk he had sucked in the troublesome con- 
troversial spirit, which, with a smatterirfg of 
divinity, is very often the unpleasant distinc- 
tion of a Lowland peasant. Buchanan had 
fed on the " Marrow, 1 '' from his infancy ; 
the " Cloud of Witnesses" had been to him 
what fairy tales are to other children. From 
his tenderest years he had gone ten miles 
every Sunday to hear a Cameronian preacher, 
and had visited, — with the same feelings ex- 
cited in the bosom of a patriot on viewing 
Marathon, or Bannockburn — those memora- 
able spots where his forefathers, skulking from 
the ferocity of the moss-troopers, 

" Had erst hymned praise, their right hands on 
their swords." 

High were the hopes entertained of the 
young saint, who promised to turn out a Car- 
gill, a Peden, or a Cameron ; and great was 
the disappointment he inflicted on his family. 
His education was not completed, when hap- 
pening to be engaged as tutor in the family 



108 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of a Highland gentleman, he fell in love with 
a dependent female, who distantly related to 
the lady of the mansion, acted as a sort of 
housekeeper. Buchanan had struggled through 
many difficulties in the course of his attend- 
ance at the university of Glasgow ; he had 
now surmounted them all, and almost grasped 
those clerical honours, the inspiring object 
of so much toil, and hope, and ambition. But 
the eyes of Flora were indeed irresistible, for 
they subdued even ecclesiastical pride. Love 
and matrimony had the same meaning in the 
vocabulary of Buchanan ; and hopes of church 
preferment could not maintain a wife and 
family. For these some permanent provision 
was necessary, however humble ; and the 
high-destined Buchanan sunk into the condi- 
tion of a schoolmaster among a race who 
neither knew nor cared about the martyrs, the 
covenants, nor the nursing-fathers, nor nurs- 
ing-mothers of the church, — a race whose 
religion consisted more in deeds of mercy 
than in dogmas of belief. 

Immured for twenty years in the very centre 
of the Highlands, Buchanan was in every 
sense an isolated being, shut out from every 
hope of intellectual intercourse. Of what 



A NATIONAL TALE. 109 

avail was his subtlety in argument, and skill 
in controversy, among a people " that could 
render no other reason of the hope that was 
in them," save that they feared God, and 
loved his creatures ; and humbly trusted in 
liis mercy. 

Buchanan had long despaired of extending 
the empire of the faith he professed in the 
Highlands, and even of being at all under- 
stood by his neighbours ; and as few care 
about what they do not comprehend, his 
peculiar talents were held in little estimation. 
In a situation so barren of resources it may 
naturally be presumed that Buchanan still 
retained a love of study, and the strong bias 
of early education, when no longer coun- 
teracted by the influence of society, predo- 
minated over every other: Buchanan was 
poring, disputatious, visionary, and devoted 
to the Fathers. But every man is said to 
have a favourite hobby, and Buchanan had 
his ; — for some years he had bestrode with 
much zeal and triumph " the Beast with 
the seven heads and ten horns, and upon the 
horns ten crowns," — a somewhat formidable 
Rozinante. 

Mystery Babylon, Antichrist, Gog and 
vol, I. L 



110 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Magog, the vials f and seals, and trumpets. 
the great battle of Armageddon, and finally 
the earthly Millenium, formed the magic 
circle round which the mind of Buchanan 
revolved with ever new delight. The whole 
force of his naturally strong mind was directed 
to explain the prophecies of Daniel, and to 
elucidate the mysteries of St. John's Revela- 
tion. Never had the prophets a more zealous 
expositor, for Buchanan now abandoned 
every favourite and liberal science, unless it 
served to develop his darling mysteries ; and 
might even have neglected his cherished 
algebra, had he not contrived to employ it in 
the calculation of " a time, times, and a half 
time ;" and " the thousand and two hundred 
and five and thirty days." Many other very 
learned and ingenious men had devoted them- 
selves to the prophets, but allowing them all 
the praise they merited, Buchanan could not 
help thinking he had got the start of them ; 
for he could now demonstrate to every one 
who chose to attend, and believe, the exact 
place where Gog and Magog should gather 
the nations together to the great battle of 
Armageddon. Yet a character of benevo- 
lence pervaded all Buchanan's systems ; his 



A NATIONAL, TALE. Ill 

wars and rumours of wars, and vials of wrath, 
were but prelusive to times of unalloyed hap- 
piness, to those days when the wolf shall lie 
down with the lamb, when Justice and Truth 
shall meet together, and Mercy and Peace 
embrace each other. 

Such was the person to whom the educa- 
tion of Norman was committed ; a man to 
whom the words of the poet might be truly 
applied, — 

" His conduct still right, with his argument wrong." 

In spite of the smiles and caresses of a 
sportive and lovely little girl, — all that now 
remained to Buchanan of that beloved Flora 
for whom he sacrificed the " Testimony," and 
the " Covenants," and his birthright, Nor- 
man longed sadly for Saturday, — for Saturday 
was to bring the Piper to take him home. 

No one could accuse the Piper of laziness 
on that morning, for he was at Ballyruag by 
the " screech ," and every Saturday for eight 
succeeding years found him equally punctual, 
unless the deep defile which was the commu- 
nication between the glens was blocked up 
with snow. Every Saturday and Sunday was 
spent at Dunalbin and Eleenalin ; or at the 



112 CLAN-ALBIN, 

summer shealings of the inhabitants of the 
hamlet. Thus the classical and the Highland 
education of Norman went on together: 
Hugh was his master in every Highland ex- 
ercise, — his companion on the " hill of deer." 
— In common with all the young people of 
the hamlet he shared the lessons of an itine- 
rant dancing-master; one of those humble 
teachers who still go from farm to farm in the 
Highlands, giving instruction in a favourite, 
and indeed indispensible accomplishment. 
And Moome was still the historian and the 
bard, whose spells of potent witchery over- 
came his young fancy, and cherished the 
enthusiasm they had first awakened. 

Norman had been for some years the favou- 
rite pupil of Buchanan. His close attention 
to the improvement of the young scholar 
almost diverted him from the investigation of 
the mysteries; — and their union, cemented by 
protection and indulgence on the one side, 
and by grateful respect on the other, had 
never been for a moment disturbed since the 
first year of Norman's residence at Ballyruag. 
During that period indeed an accident hap- 
pened which had almost cut off Norman from 
all hopes' of acquaintance with Virgil and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 113 

Homer. Buchanan in the course 1 of his 
studies had imagined a very happy manner 
of illustrating his theories by a sort of draw- 
ing. The idea was perhaps borrowed from 
Priestley's chart. However that may be, the 
drawing in question was a master-piece, 
which had occupied many a winter's evening, 
and many a rainy Saturday. It might more 
properly be termed a Chart of the Revela- 
tions, as it was intended to illustrate the whole 
series of the prophecies, and give a compre- 
hensive view of the fulfilling of the types in 
regular succession. The principal figure 
was the Beast with seven heads and ten horns, 
designed from a description given of a water- 
spirit, by the neighbouring Highlanders, 
which was said to reside in a loch not very 
distant. Mrs. Buchanan in person, dressed 
in her red temming gown, had sat for the 
woman clothed in scarlet ; and was seen 
seated on the beast, holding in her hand the 
cup of sorceries. To the right hand the an- 
gels, in well preserved perspective, were seen 
blowing the trumpets, the seals were opening, 
and the vials ranged head downmost were 
pouring out their contents. 

Such was the splendid composition which 
L2 



114 CLAN-ALBIS, 

had often excited the wonder and desire of 
the little blue-eyed pupil of Norman. Flora 
had used every art of babyhood to obtain pos- 
session of the prize, but hitherto unsuccess- 
fully. One unlucky day, Buchanan having 
a little leisure, took his favourite production 
from its place of security to affix some notes 
of reference. The children looked on with 
wonder and admiration, and Norman told his 
little companion the tale of the water-spirit. 
It had made a deep impression on his young 
fancy, for it related to boys of his own age 
and condition. 

"A lwmber of little boys had gone to 
bathe and sport about a dark loch, in a wild 
rugged glen. A beautiful milk-white horse 
came from the loch, so gentle, that it stretched 
itself out, and pawed, and allured some of the 
more adventurous to mount its back. Another 
and another mounted, and the animal still 
stretched itself out to receive its victims till 
they were all in its power, when it suddenly 
plunged into the loch, which swallowed up 
the water-spirit and its riders." * 

* This little tale of the water-horse was current not long 
since among the people of Balquiddef. A dark loch, on the 
top of a mountain, adjoining Glen-Ogle, that savage and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 115 

Flora was listening to this narrative when 
her father for a moment left the room, and 
she clutched at the drawing. Flora was stand- 
ing hy a hiazing turf-fire, her size was small, 
and the drawing unweildy, in a moment it 
catched the flame, she flung it away, and as 
Norman sprung forward to save if possible a 
single horn of the beast, Buchanan re-entered ! 
For a moment he stood as if panic-struck by 
the magnitude of his misfortune ; the child 
ran to hide herself in the garden, and Norman 
was left to suffer the vengeance of the indig- 
nant author. Buchanan, naturally calm and 
serious, knew little of angry passions, but 
on this momentous occasion his rasre was like 
a whirlwind, and the undeserved punishment 
of Norman was rather proportioned to his own 
angry emotions, than the enormity of the 
offence. 

Norman bore his punishment with the for- 
titude of a hero, till the little girl, loudly 
proclaiming herself the offender, rushed into 
the room, followed by the Piper. Buchanan 



gloomy valley through which the high road between Loch- 
Earn-head and Glen-Dochart is carried^ Some children 
were certainly drowned there ; and Highland superstition 
allows none of its. votaries to perish jngloriously. 



1 16 CLAN-ALBIN, 

shocked at his own injustice, and affected by 
the generosity of the boy, and the tenderness 
of Flora, could not articulate a word, while 
Norman flung himself into the arms of Hugh, 
and first gave way to his feelings of insult. 
The little girl also clung to him weeping, as 
if for protection ; and the Piper, his eyes 
sparkling with rage, regarded her father with 
those keen looks which in the days of clanship 
may have preceded the stroke of the dirk. 
All his self-command, delicacy, and habitual 
respect for " a gentleman and a Christian," 
could not restrain the expression of his feel- 
ings. Buchanan then explained ; Flora was 
forgiven at the entreaty of Norman, and a 
peace was restored which was never again in- 
terrupted. The Piper alone was dissatisfied, 
and though he said no more, he thought he 
had never seen any one so like a Saxon 
slounge, a mean-souled mongrel Lowlander, 
as Buchanan, when making his young friend 
suffer for a nonsensical picture. — " I wish he 
were on the back ©f it himself in Loehdow," 
thought Hugh. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 117 



CHAP. 



" Yes ! let the rich deride, the proud disdain 
The simple pleasure of the lowly train, 
To me more dear, congenial to my heart, 
One native charm than all the gloss of art. 

***** 
These were thy charms sweet village, sports like these 
In sweet succession taught even toil to please ; 
These round thy bowers their cheerful influence shed, 
These were thy charms,— but all these charms are fled." 

Goldsmith. 

Norman, now entered on his fifteenth year, 
was gone to spend the Christmas holidays at 
Dunalbin and Eleenalin, accompanied by 
Flora Buchanan. Norman had long regarded 
his fair companion with all a brother's protect- 
ing fondness, and never did sister return a 
brother's affection with greater tenderness. 
One roof sheltered their childhood ; they had 
pursued the same studies, and shared the 
same sports, and even at holiday times they 
lived together at Mary's shealing, or the 
Lady's cottage. 



118 CL.AN-AI/BIN, 

" The Christmas," is now the only stated 
holiday enjoyed by the Highland peasant. It 
is still spent in the manner most congenial to 
his ancient habits. Darkness alone termi- 
nates the animating sports of the field, and 
to these succeed the pleasures of the festive 
board, the delight of social converse, the in- 
spiring song, and the merry dance. This 
holiday is accordingly eagerly anticipated, 
and ardently enjoyed by this warm-hearted 
race. 

An absurd prejudice prevails among the 
people of the low-country, who cannot ima- 
gine a Highlander without the accompani- 
ments of a whisky -bottle and a snuff-mull. 
Highlanders, on the contrary, are, in the or- 
dinary routine of life, the most abstemious of 
all people. The occasional excesses witnessed 
at funerals are solely for the honour of the 
dead, that succeeding generations may tri- 
umphantly tell how much wine, and how 
many casks were drank at the burial of an 
ancestor ; — how many riders attended, and 
how many miles they came to honour the ob- 
sequies of a namesake or kinsman. With 
supreme contempt for unmanly epicurism, 
and inordinate fondness of comforts , the High- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 119 

lander has his own cherished pleasures, — nei- 
ther degrading nor selfish, nor brutal, — but 
social and joyous ; valued only as they enliven 
society, — pursued to brighten and exhilarate 
the man, — not to gratify the brute. He has 
small delight in sharing the cup of him with 
whom his soul refuses to mingle, — and shrinks 
from intercourse with those who cannot un- 
derstand and participate in all his peculiar 
feelings. Even in the very focus of conta- 
gious brutality, in the ranks of an English 
regiment, shielded by his national habitF, 
wrapped up in himself, grave, austere, and 
unsocial, he preserves his integrity ; and re- 
turns to the land of his nativity — to the glen 
of his fathers — to the betrothed of his youth, 
— high in fame, pure in honour, and enriched 
by generous self-denial, — to lavish his fortune 
on those who possess his tenderness. Now 
within the magic circle of kindred and affec- 
tion, he surrenders himself to their influence, 
and is again frank, social, and humorous ; 
and gaily pledges the cup with those who 
share his soul. 

" The Christmas" at length arrived, and 
by the grey dawn the maidens, the young 
men, and all who thought themselves young 



120 CLAN-ALBIN, 

enough to share or enliven the sport of the 
day, were met on a flat of considerable extent 
at the head of the glen. It was the first of 
Norman's fields ; and the triumph of the 
youthful champion of Dunalbin might have 
been read in the looks of Mary, and Flora 
Buchanan, or heard in the cheering shouts of 
Ronald. And as Norman bounded after the 
ball with the fleetness of a roe, the Piper, 
who had entered into the national sport with 
all the fire and alacrity of youth, confessed 
that he was surpassed. — " Though in running 
he had never before yielded to any man who 
spelled his name Macalbin, far less any thing 
else." However Hugh shared by reflection the 
triumph of Norman : — " For it was himself 
first put a shinny into the boy's hand." 

When the sun had gone down on the vic- 
tory of Norman's party, the conquerors and 
the vanquished withdrew together to the feast 
and the dance j and Ronald embraced Nor- 
man with tears in his eyes, and blessed the 
Lord " that one had arisen in Glenalbin to 
maintain the honour of the clan, and to show 
the lads from the other side of the hill what 
real play was." — Never was Norman so much 
endeared to the heart of Ronald as at this 



A NATIONAL TALE. 121 

moment, and with an air of exultation he 
kept spanning the wrist of the tall, blooming, 
and graceful boy, who largely endowed with 
the enthusiastic feelings, and glowing affec- 
tions of his countrymen, warmly returned 
the fondness of his venerable friend. 

" Sure enough the lad is but slender ; 
shooting up, as one may say, like a willow 
twig, yet show me in Glenalbin one of his 
years with such a bone," cried Ronald. — 
" And now, my dear boy, you are very 
learned, as I am told, in all manner of Saxon 
learning, which may be all very good, for 
what I know, seeing I know nothing about it; 
but do you remember what I am- telling you — 
keep such things in their own place : for 
after all comes to all, the man who putts the 
stone, throws the hammer, and takes the 
heath, the hill, and the water, all alit;<e as 
they cast up, — with a warm heart, a fleet 
foot, and a strong arm, — that's the man !" — 
And to enforce his advice, Ronald, in the ful- 
ness of his triumph, added another cow to 
Norman's stock. 

Moome had always had visions of future 
greatness for her favourite, but from this dis- 
tinguished day they thickened round her. 

VOL, I. M 



122 CLAN-ALB1N, 

One night she dreamed of seeing him with 
the claymore of Macalbin ; the next, all 
Macalbin's sons passed before her, and last 
came Norman, led by the Lady. When any 
very impressive vision had blest her slumbers, 
the boat was ordered for Eleenalin, and the 
Lady (who hearkened to all her revelations 
with the most gratifying attention) was made 
the confidant of her expectations. The Lady 
would sigh and smile ; and gently checking 
the flights of Moome's fancy, lead her back 
to sad realities. 

There is a custom of very remote antiquity 
still observed in the Hebrides and West High- 
lands, on 'the last night of the -new year. 
The Lady had ever declined going to Dun- 
albin on that occasion j but as Moome and 
many of her neighbours would have been 
miserable if the Lady did not eat of the 
cheese of the Cooling she usually had a large 

* There is an imperfect account of this singular custom in 
Dr. Johnson's Tour. On the last night of the year the 
gentlemen and men-servants are turned out of the house, and 
the females secure the doors. One of the men is decorated 
with a dried cow's hide, and is provided with cakes of barley, 
or oat bread, and with cheese. He is called the Coolin, and 
is belaboured with staves, and chased round the house by his 
roaring companions. To represent noise and tumult seems the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 123 

party of the clan at Eleenaliu, and the 
strange ceremony was followed by a ball. 

Eagerly was the day anticipated which 
brought to these devoted clansmen all that 
now remained of the festal hall of their chiefs. 
And this year the sage and erudite Buchanan, 
tired of being always wise and solemn, joined 
in the Coolin, and ran roaring round the 
house with the promiscuous crowd ; and re- 
peated a rhyme for admission like any other 
superstitious Highlander ; only indeed that 
he was distinguished by his rhymes, which 
abounded in Gods and Goddesses, and clas- 
sical allusions, which for the first time figured 
in Gaelic poetry. The rhymes of Hugh and 

principal object in this stage of the ceremony. The door is 
next attacked, and stout resistance made from within, nor is 
admission granted till the assailant has shown that his savage 
nature is subdued by the influence of the humanizing muse. 
When he has repeated a few verses the door flies open. 
Others rush in, but are repelled, till all have proved their 
fitness for civilized life. When the whole company are ad- 
mitted a new ceremony begins. A piece of dried sheep-skin, 
with the wool still on it, is singed in the fire, sme't to, and 
waved three times round the head. It is again and again 
singed, and waved, till every individual has three times held 
it to the fire, three times smelt to it, and nine times waved it 
round his head.— The bread and cheese of the Coolin are 
next divided and eaten ; and thus are the calamities of the 
expected year provided against. 



124 CLAX-ALB1N, 

Norman were of another character. They 
spoke of the fame of heroes, and the scenes 
of their glory ; — the glen of Albin was their 
Elysium ; Lochuan, their Helicon ; and their 
Olympus, the " Hill of the close fight" 

When every one had eaten of the cake 
and cheese of the Coolin, and gone through 
all the ceremonies requisite to prevent the 
calamities of the expected year, the ball was 
opened by Norman and Flora Buchanan, and 
the violin of the Piper gave an electric im- 
pulse to the spirits of old and young. The 
Lady, thus surrounded, looked on with calm 
and chastened joy, and Moome, seated by 
her side, snapping her fingers in time with 
the lively Strathspey, declared she was " al- 
most as happy as she could have been in the 
hall of her Chief." Never indeed had the 
Lady beheld a gayer group assembled in the 
hall of her fathers, — never had she heard its 
lofty roof echo to mirth more heart-felt than 
that which shook her lonely cottage, when 
the electrifying shout of the Piper from time 
to time gave inspiration to the dancers. 

As the springing airy forms of Norman 
and Flora flitted before the eyes of Buchanan, 
it is probable his mind reverted to the Milk- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 125 

nium, for in the exultation of his heart, ges- 
ture and attitude appropriate, suiting the 
action to the word, he began to expatiate on 
its joys ; and not a little gratified by the polite 
attention of the Lady, he might have been 
betrayed by the warmth of his feelings into a 
discourse of most unconscionable length, had 
not one rushed in, " whose face was as a book 
where one might read strange matters." It 
was Allan, the husband of Mary. 

" Aye dance, — dance your last ;" he wildly 
exclaimed — " for you must leave Glenalbin IV 
— the music ceased, the dancers stopped. — 
M Leave Glenalbin I" — was echoed on every 
side in that deep despairing voice which issues 
from the heart. 

But it was even so. The lease of these 
conjunct farmers expired at the following 
Whitsuntide. On learning that their present 
landlord was spending the Christmas holidays 
at the seat of a gentleman about twenty miles 
distant, they had sent Allan to solicit its re- 
newal, and had empowered him to offer such 
an advance of rent as must have doomed 
them to still greater penury and toil ; — but it 
was luxury even to starve in Glenalbin ! 

The lease of Glenalbin had been for some 
M2 



126 CLAN-ALBIN, 

months in the possession of a stranger, who 
was to cover with sheep that country where 
hundreds of human creatures had lived, and 
enjoyed life. The banishment of the last of 
the clan was now fixed and inevitable ; and 
the tears and shrieks of the women, the deep 
and hopeless grief of the men, the wailings 
of feeble age, and helpless infancy, the dig- 
nified sorrow of Lady Augusta, formed a 
spectacle of woe which might have touched 
even the cold heart of him whose selfish luxu- 
ry had produced misery so wide-spreading 
and extreme. 

f* Oh God !" thought Norman, — " since no 
man can have the right, why, why, should he 
have the power of making hundreds mise- 
rable !" and he hid his face on the shoulder 
of Hugh, weeping over the fate of his coun- 
trymen. 

Torn at once from home and country,— 
that delicate and mysterious union which con- 
nects the human mind with the scenes of its 
early joys, in a moment rudely dissolved ! — 
every cherished association which had imper- 
ceptibly twined round the heart, binding it 
to home and happiness, severed at once from 
that bleeding heart ! — driven forth from the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 127 

place where the ashes of their fathers reposed, 
that spot, hallowed by every affection which 
is sacred in death, or endearing in life, — ex- 
iled to a new world, a land of strange speech, 
in whose vast territory the remnant of Macal- 
bin's clan would be swallowed up like a drop 

of water in the extended ocean ! Pride, 

patriotism, regret, home, and a thousand 
painful feelings, combined to agonize the 
bosoms of the wretched emigrants. 

When the first paroxysms of grief had 
abated, this insulated community began to 
think of their future destination, and means 
of life. The Highlanders, with much less 
present comfort than the peasants of England 
or the Lowland Scots, have always more pro- 
perty. The custom of portioning daughters 
is common, and assisting in the establishment 
of sons. A sum is also hoarded for a splendid 
funeral ; and as they are somewhat in the 
habit of looking before and after, they are 
seldom reduced by their own improvidence to 
that sudden dependance and beggary which 
sometimes overtakes their neighbours. Their 
stock of cattle, and the small funds hoarded 
for purposes so honourable, were now a dis- 
posable capital. Much depended on its 



128 CLAN-ALBIN, 

prudent application, and many consultations 
were held. A condition similar to that which 
habit had rendered dear, and almost neces- 
sary, appeared most desirable. Many little 
colonies of Highlanders were scattered over 
the continent of America. One of these little 
knots of clansmen was now settled on the 
banks of the Mohawk river. It consisted of 
people who had been driven out from Ken- 
anowen and Dunulladale, the south side of 
Glenalbin, many years before this period. 
In that desolate tract, now turned into plan- 
tations and sheep-walks, fifty smokes had 
been put out in one morning. The affec- 
tions of the Highlanders naturally pointed to 
the spot inhabited by their kinsmen and for- 
mer friends ; and as some rich, though uncul- 
tivated land was still on sale, Allan was sent 
out to America as the agent of the emi- 
grants. 

These arrangements were all conducted by 
the Lady. Lady Augusta detested war, — its 
spirit, its institutions, and not unfrequently 
its object. The days of clanship were gone ; 
and she saw what is termed martial spirit, and 
enthusiasm of glory, as powerfully excited, 
and as bravely exerted, in the basest, as in 



A NATIONAL TALE. 129 

the most just and honourable cause. The 
army appeared to her a poor resource for a 
Highlander, — a poor exchange for the glen 
of his fathers, domestic joys, and kindred 
charities ; — the freedom of the citizen, and 
perhaps the virtues of the man. But ad- 
mitting war to be ever so fine, and ever so 
glorious ; — the spirit-stirring drum and the 
martial pipe, and fame and victory, ever so 
animating, — neither old men, nor women or 
children can be soldiers. Now the greater 
part of the inhabitants of Dunalbin consisted 
of these helpless and beloved beings, depen- 
dant in a great measure on those who were 
welcomed to glory, and tacitly told, that 
though driven from their paternal fields, ano- 
ther field was opened where they might toil, 
and fight, and bleed, in defence of the lives, 
properties, and freedom of those who had 
torn them from all they loved. Lady Augusta 
wished to see her countrymen remain in their 
own land, to live and prosper in its prospe- 
rity ; or, if necessary, to die in its defence. 
But this was not permitted ; and she con- 
ceived it of more importance that men should 
live in freedom and in comfort, than in this, or 
that degree of latitude. 



130 CLAN-ALBIN, 

The dark lanes of a manufacturing town 
appeared even worse than the army. The 
present generation of Highlanders could 
never he made manufacturers, and her gene- 
rous heart revolted at the idea of her high- 
spirited countrymen sinking into the abject 
condition of hewers of wood, and drawers of 
water to a people they had hitherto shunned 
and despised. — America opened her arms to 
the exiles of Scotland ! — Much of hardship 
was to be encountered, many cherished feel- 
ings were to be sacrificed ; but Lady Augusta 
indulged a well-founded and cheering hope, 
that the honest pride of property, the advan- 
tage of a rich soil, and above all, a free go- 
vernment, would, in that land of the exile, 
abundantly compensate her expatriated clans- 
men for all they were forced to abandon. 

The emigrants vainly solicited the Lady to 
accompany them across the Atlantic, to con- 
tinue their lawgiver and their judge. Eleen- 
alin had never been estranged from her family, 
the graves of her ancestors were still her pro- 
perty, and that little island the world which 
bounded her wishes. Moome and the Piper 
devoted themselves to the fortunes of their 
ancient mistress ; and the inhabitants of Dun- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 131 

albin erected for each a separate hut, which, 
with the central cottage of the Lady, formed 
three sides of a square, in the little retiring 
bay of Lochuan. Norman, the adopted son 
of Lady Augusta, was another member of 
this solitary establishment. Hitherto he had 
believed himself the son of a distant rela- 
tive of Lady Augusta, and her entire silence 
had confirmed his delusion. She had long, 
in defiance of her judgment, preserved the 
painful secret of his birth, still fostering a 
latent hope that something might transpire to 
soften the calamity of the youth feeling him- 
self at once an orphan, and a dependant on 
those to whose blood he was a stranger. But 
concealment was no longer justifiable, yet 
fearfully and reluctantly did the Lady intro- 
duce this sorrowful theme. — She spoke of her 
extreme age, of her deserted condition, and 
the solitude to which the emigration must 
consign the remaining period of her life. 
She hoped that Norman would remain in 
Eleenalin as her stay and comfort ; the sup- 
port of her downward years. She could not 
leave the ashes of her fathers ; in Eleenalin 
she awaited that immortality to which her mind 
had long been directed ; on which all her hopes 



132 CLAN-ALBJN, 

were placed. — Alarmed and uneasy, Norman 
often attempted to interrupt the Lady. He 
felt that she ought not to have doubted of his 
willingness to have devoted himself to her, 
and that she should have known that nothing 
on earth could tempt the child of her bounty 
to abandon her old age to the desertion and 
solitude she painted. But the swelling of his 
heart prevented utterance ; he could only 
bathe the hand he held in tears of gratitude 
and affection. Lady Augusta perceived all 
the generous emotions of his heart. 

" Noble and generous was he whose name 
you bear;" said she — " Norman, twin brother 
of my soul ! the heaven which claimed thee 
as its own has bestowed on me this precious 
child. From the hand of Mercy have I re- 
ceived thee, last cherished blessing of a 
desolate heart. — No ! thou shalt never leave 
me : the presentiment of my heart was true, 
— thou my second son ; the child of my love, 
of my prayers, and of my cares, wast sent to 
pillow my aged head, to soothe my aged sor- 
row, to make glad the childless and the widow. 
Yes, my Norman thou art all to me now ; — ■ 
the staff of my age. When the name of Au- 
gusta shall long have been forgotten among 



A NATIONAL TALE. 133 

the sons of her people, they will still remem- 
ber with blessings the friend of thy orphan 
childhood." — The Lady then cautiously in- 
formed him of the sad circumstances attend- 
ing his birth, and of the fate of his mother. 
Norman stood the mute inbreathed image of 
hopeless sorrow, with his glaring eyes fixed 
upon her. Had new worlds arisen at his 
bidding, Norman could not have articulated 
one word ; till the Lady, alarmed by his wild 
appearance, hastily gave him the picture 
found in the possession of his mother. He 
gazed on it with deep and sorrowful attention. 

" I will seek him through the world !" — he 
at last exclaimed. — " Oh the luxury of one 
embrace from a father ! — But I have no father ! 
— among the myriads that people the globe, 
no heart claims affinity with Norman." 

" Norman, my son, does your heart then 
disown me ! — Never, oh never, was child more 
tenderly loved." 

" Forgive me Lady ; — my mother, my 
friend, my all — forgive me, pity me, for my 
heart is bursting." I 

He hid his face on the shoulder of his 
venerable friend ; he shed his sorrows on her 
bosom, and she led him forth to the grave of 

VOL. I. N 



134 CLAN-ALBIX, 

his mother. It was that spot which had so 
often excited his infantile curiosity, the scene 
of many a childish sport. 

" How often," cried Norman, — " have I 
frolicked around this spot, while she to whom 
I owe existence mouldered beneath, cold, 
cold and forgotten. Oh Lady that I too lay 
here, — for I feel that I shall never again be 
happy !"— and he threw himself on the grave. 
" Norman, my love, you shall long be hap- 
py; you are but entering the threshold of 
life." 

" My tears have fallen on its threshold 
Lady ; — it is darkened by a mother's misery." 
The Lady, who believed that afflictions 
are sent for good, and that there is a smiling 
face hid behind the darkest providence, 
endeavoured to point out their uses to her 
young friend, and to lead his mind to the 
source of all consolation. Yet she said little; 
he listened in silence, and she left him to 
deepen in sorrowful reflection the impression 
she had made on his young mind. A lesson 
of piety so given was ndt soon to be forgotten; 
yet the mind of Norman young, impetuous, 
strong for suffering, clung to the cause of its 
grief, and was jealous of suffering too tamely, 






A NATIONAL TALE. 136 

or too briefly. Night brought new horrors to 
his fancy. He started from distracting visions, 
which represented his mother pale and hag- 
gard,' supported in the arms of Ronald, or 
leaning her unsheltered head on the ivy-cliff, 
a homeless, wretched being. The howling of 
the blast rose on his ears, mingled with her 
dying groans. He started up, big drops of 
perspiration stood on his forehead ; he paced 
the chamber in phrenzied agitation, and blest 
the first beams of the day which closed this 
night of horrors. — But the young and buoy- 
ant mind of Norman gradually became more 
tranquil. He had much to love, though he 
was robbed of much ; — time imperceptibly 
stole the first vivid glow from the colouring 
of sorrow, and mellowing into those soft hues 
which mark pensive dejection, it sweetly har- 
monized with all the gentler sensibilities of 
his nature. 

Often would he gaze for hours on the re- 
semblance of him he had ventured to call 
father ; gaze, till imagination rebelling 
against the evidence of sense, gave life and 
motion to the inanimate features. A short, 
soft sigh dispelled the illusion, and the pic- 
ture was laid aside till another opportunity 



136 CLAN-ALBIN, 

occurred for the indulgence of this solitary 
enjoyment. In the meanwhile every prepa- 
ration was making for the purposed emigra- 
tion ; and spring advanced decorating Glen- 
albin with new charms, as if to render the 
pang of separation more poignant. 



' / 



A NATIONAL TALE. 137 



CHAP. XI 



" Alas, what sorrows gloomed that parting day 
Which called them from their native walks away, 
When the poor exiles, ev'ry pleasure past, 
Hung round the bowers, and fondly looked their last j 
And took a long farewell, and wished in vain 
For seats like these beyond the western main; 
And shudd'ring still to cross the distant deep, 
Returned and wept, and still returned to weep." 

Goldsmith. 

1 HE Highlanders go up to the summer sheal- 
ings in the remote glens, about the first of 
May, and do not return till Lammas. These 
pilgrimages are always begun very early in 
the morning, that the cattle may not be an- 
noyed by the heats of noon. The children, 
who depend on milk for the most of their 
nourishment, always follow the cattle to the 
shealings, and contribute not a little to enliven 
and endear these joyous processions. To see 
in the clear-obscure dawn of a May morning, 
herds of domestic animals slowly winding up 
a Highland glen, to view the wild flight and 
N 2 



138 CLAN-ALBIN, 

return of happy childhood, to hear the young 
women singing their pastoral strains as they 
carry their rude dairy utensils, and the young 
men chiming in the chorus as they guide the 
cattle, and lead forward their little pictu- 
resque horses, laden with rustic goods, — to 
behold all these, and many other pleasing 
circumstances appropriate to such a scene of 
peacefulness, is delightful indeed to a feeling 
mind. Often had Lady Augusta viewed this 
pastoral spectacle, and recalled the age of 
love and innocence, the plains of Mamre, and 
the herds of Laban. 

It was now the first of May. The morning 
was still, warm, and dewy. Norman saw the 
last blue smoke that would ever rise from the 
hamlet of Dunalbin, slowly ascending in the 
liquid and balmy air of that lovely morning, — 
for the dreaded day had arrived ! A soft 
shower had fallen in the night, and lucid 
drops twinkled on every bud, and bathed 
every blossom : the birds flitted from bough 
to bough, quivering their wings with excess 
of life, and bursting into songs of joy : the 
wild swan was sporting on the lake, and the 
wild duck leading out her young family ; the 
first note of the cuckoo came floating down 



A NATIONAL TALE. 139 

the glen. Over the head of that glen the 
sun was rising beautifully ; — throwing his 
slant beams athwart the green slope on which 
hung the hamlet, and slowly drawing up the 
curtain of mist which floated around the 
mountains. That spirit of joy, and freshness, 
and inspiration, peculiar to the hour of sun- 
rise, and the animating season of spring, was 
diffused through the air; — nature wore her 
first bright bloom, and the invigorated soul 
of man was awakened to all the bliss of exist- 
ence. Again and again was heard " the voice 
of spring among the trees," — the cheering 
note of the cuckoo. Moome heard that note, 
but superstition drew no augur : there was 
little more to fear, there was nothing more to 
hope ; — the emigrants had surrendered them- 
selves to decided misery. And now the sun had 
dispersed the light wreaths of mist which hung 
on the cliffs, and unfolded all the beauties of 
Glenalbin. Beautiful was this pastoral valley 
even to the eye of the dullest stranger; but oh 
how inexpressibly dear and lovely to that peo- 
ple to whom every cliff, and cavern, and copse, 
and stream, told a tale so wild and remote, or 
tender and overcoming, or inspiring and glori- 
ous ! — Clan-Albin alone could feel and ap- 



140 CLAN-ALBIN, 

propriate all the charms of their storied glen. 
To them, at every advancing step, on this side 
and on that, started up the records of former 
triumphs, and the monuments of departed 
glory ! What to the cold and tearless eye of 
a stranger the castle of the chief ; the rock of 
the gathering ; the hill of the beal-fire ; the 
grey stone of the humble dead ; and the ga- 
thered heap of the fallen hero ! 

But these were the relics from which they 
were to tear themselves, — this the glen whose 
every echo was ringing — " We return, we re- 
turn, xve return no more /" * 

* This is a wild desponding strain, sung or played by the 
Highlanders on leaving their country. Verses expressive of 
local regret are adapted to this melody by the inhabitants of 
different districts. This very popular national lament, wail- 
ing and devious, may to some appear of small value as a 
piece of music, yet it possesses a soul-harrowing, indescrib- 
able influence over the feelings of Highlanders. It is indeed 
the appropriate 

" Lament of men 
That languish for their native glen." 

It is the " Flowers of the Forest," of the low country, and 
the '* Ranz des V aches" of the Swiss mountaineers, but it is 
•till more. With it Highlanders of every rank and clan have 
the most interesting associations. 

The great bulk of the Highlanders, at least in these dege- 
nerate days, appear to have little sensibility to the exquisite 
beauty of their national melodies, considered merely as pieces 



A NATIONAL TALE. 141 

The exiles were already assembled ; they 
had taken their last meal, they had beheld 
the extinguishment of the domestic fire, — 
the demolition of the altars of their household 
gods. They had commenced their journey ;■ 
mothers were seen clasping their babes in 
their arms, and mingling tears with caresses, 

of music. To them their charm arises solely from powerful 
associations : yet music both instrumental and vocal is uni- 
versally loved and cultivated. The national music of the 
Highlander melts his heart, or gives glee to his motions, but 
does not tingle his ears. A person whose musical taste is in 
any degree cultivated, must be shocked at the rapid, strange, 
and ungraceful manner in which the Highland girls give the 
most pathetic of their airs, when singing singly ; and <hey, on 
the other hand are disgusted with what they think the drawl- 
ing expression of those who sing them i.i a better style. Yet 
the rowing songs, the songs at the waulk : ng-, at the quern, 
round a kelp-kiln, and in short all that cheer social labour, 
and heighten social enjoyment, have a picturesque, and highly, 
pleasing effect. 

There is a higher species of lyric known in the Highlands, 
the power of which no one can understand who has not felt 
the rush of clannish blood. These hymns to departed great- 
ness are designated by a particular name. The only one of 
them (so far as I know) that has found its way into English 
is in the notes to " The Lady of the Lake." It is the hymn, 
if I may so call it, of the Chief of Maclean. No company 
of the name of Maclean could sing that dirge without such 
transports of enthusiastic grief as would appear quite inex- 
plicable to a cold-blooded Saxon. I have often fancied some- 
thing inexpressibly sweet and soothing even in the strange 



142 CXAN-ALBIN, 

while the fathers were helping forward the 
tottering steps of children, whose little limbs 
could ill sustain the fatigue of travelling, 
though they had often wandered whole days 
through the wilds of Glenalbin. Young 
women, weeping as they went, supported the 
steps of feeble age, whose querulous sorrow 
was mournfully expressed. 

voluntaries with which Highland women lull their children to 
sleep j and even these baby-songs and lullabies are indicative 
of the strongest feature of the national character— pride of 
birth. I will not presume to translate any of these effusions, 
which are probably alike silly in every language, and aliko 
untranslatable. I recollect one of them which is in very com- 
mon use, and goes on, 

" Sleep my daughter, my darling, my daughter, 

Macleod and Maccallin are your kinsmen. 

Sleep my daughter, my darling, &c. &c. 

Macdonald and Maclean are your kinsmen," &c &c. 
And al! the Highland chiefs are strung up in a rude rhyme, 
with abundant terms of endearment, and declared to be kins- 
men to the nursling : and when the list is run over, it is again 
and again begun. Now if a Highland child won't sleep upon 
that, it surely deserves to be whipped. I shall put an end to 
this rambling note with an anecdote, which, though trifling, is 
somewhat illustrative of the Highland character. 

A boy, from his appearance about six or seven years of 
age, was coming on a message to the house of a gentleman, 
and was met at a short distance ftom the door by a large 
swine. An animal of the size, in a part of the country 
where they are rare, must have been very alarming to a child 
of his years, and he betrayed many symptoms of terror. An 



A NATIONAL TALE. 143 

This slow-moving procession was no joyous 
pastoral pilgrimage to the summer s healing. 
It was indeed a heart-rending spectacle : at 
every succeeding step some object started up 
to endear Glenalbin, some lovely scene of 
infant sports or youthful loves rose smiling on 
every hand, to embitter the pang of separa- 
tion. They had reached the rustic cemetry 
belonging to the hamlet. It was bordered by 
the rude path which wound up the glen, and 
its opposite boundary was the lake. Here 
they made an involuntary pause : grief burst 
forth afresh, and each threw himself on the 
grave of the parent, the child, or the brother, 
to pour forth the last tribute of affection, — to 
pull the wild- flowers that grew on the hallowed 

English, or a Low-country boy would in such circumstances 
either boldly have fought his way, or run off; but the little 
Highlander did neither. Assuming a very soft and caressing 
tone- of 'voice, and throwing a strange mixture of respect and 
complacency into his perturbed countenance, he cautiously 
sidled past the swine, complimenting her all the while on her 
high birth, and landed property. — " Madam yourself the 
sow, all M**#h is yours ! all Q * * h is yours, Madam your- 
self the sow ! Machcallin is your own cousin, Madam yourself 
the sow !" and with this flattery he got fairly past, and took 
refuge in the house. 

Machcallin is the name by which his Grace the Duke of 
Arg3 r le is known among the clans. 



144 CLAN-ALBIN, 

sod, that in a strange land they might be pre- 
served, and loved, and wept over; and 
valued far beyond all its pomp of floral 
beauty. Affliction had now reached its acme, 
— the last tie was severed which bound them 
to Glenalbin ! Yet long, long they lingered, 
— and then slowly and silently proceeded. 

The grief of Norman was lively and dis- 
tracting : — Mary, the gentle being who had 
protected his infancy, — Ronald the good old 
man ! — every little sharer of his infant sports, 
and every young companion of his boyish 
enterprizes, — never again to be beheld, — all 
torn at once from the clinging embrace ! 

Mary fondly lingered, leaning heavily on 
the arm of Norman, who carried her little 
bundle, and they mingled their tears in 
silence till the exiles had reached the ivy-cliff, 
where Ronald stopped to take a last farewell ! 
— " He would leave the boy where he had 
found his mother." — All the party repeated 
the same melancholy ceremony, and he was 
again left alone with Mary. They sat down 
together at the base of the cliff, and she drew 
from her bosom the long ringlet of hair which 
she had taken from the corpse of his mother. 
Norman pressed it to his lips, and his heart, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 145 

u Mother ! Mother IV was the cry of the be- 
reaved orphan, who, at that moment, thought 
only of a mother's suffering. Mary, in silence, 
cut a rich, glossy curl from the head of "her 
dark-haired darling," to replace that which she 
had given away. 

And now the emigrants had reached the 
" crag of yews," where an angle of the moun- 
tains must hide the glen for ever from their 
sight. They again paused to take a last look, 
— a last farewell of Glenalbin ! Hugh blew a 
few notes of that air so agonizing to the feel- 
ings of exiled Highlanders. It thrilled on the 
inmost pulse of Norman's heart: — He flung 
his arms around his " little mother," — it was 
a last, a severing embrace ! He darted rapidly 
back towards the glen, — threw himself in 
agony on the grass, and again started has- 
tily up, lest affection should miss the last 
look ; — the last look, so cherished by the ten- 
der heart; on which memory fondly lingers, 
when years on years have revolved, and all else 
is forgotten. Impressive, indeed, was that last 
look ; — years rolled away, and it was still pre- 
sent to Norman. Women, half kneeling and 
weeping ; men stretching forth their arms, as 
if to embrace, for the last time, the glen of 
their fathers ; every attitude and every movc- 

vol. i. o 



14t) CLAN-ALBIN-, 

ment expressive of strong passion and vehe- 
ment sorrow.— Norman turned away his head, 
and, when he looked again, they were all gone! 
and a faint swell of female 'voices rose on the 
air,, wailing, " We return, we return, we return 
no more!" 

Slowly did Norman wind round the lake, 
shunning the deserted hamlet with that deli- 
cacy which the wounded heart involuntarily 
displays towards itself; and sadly did he re- 
join the aged and solitary inhabitants of Eleen- 
alin. 

The emigrants had taken leave of the Lady 
on the preceding evening, when she visited 
the clan for the last time. It was a solemn 
scene. On each individual did she bestow her 
energetic benediction ; and standing up, sur- 
rounded by her clansmen, she prayed, " That 
the God of their fathers would be their Guide 
on the deep waters, and in the land of the 
stranger ! That the Lord- God of Israel, who, 
with his pillar of lire and of cloud, had led his 
people through the wilderness, would go forth 
with the remnant of her race to the strange 
land whither they journeyed. " They lament- 
ed, and bitterly wept ; and the Lady likewise 
wept, but was silent. 

When. Norman returned to the island, he. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 147 

found the Lady gently comforting the discon- 
solate Moome. She entreated him to seek 
repose, as he had watched all night with 
Mary. Their common loss was still too recent 
for conversation, and he gladly retired, and 
leaned on his sleepless couch till evening. 

When he rose he found that the Lady had 
walked out, and he intended to follow her. 
The evening was glowing and balmy. The 
rich tints of gold and purple which illum- 
ined the western sky were reflected by the 
waters of the lake with mellowed and magic 
lustre : a rosy light was effused on every pen- 
dant cliff, and waving tree, pictured on its 
smooth bosom. Moome sat on a low stool in 
the woodbine porch, trying to spin. Norman, 
with folded arms, leaned against an old elm 
that grew r near the door of the cottage, and 
strove to give his mind to the lovely scene 
around him. Something still was wanting ; 
involuntarily he turned his eye to the hamlet; 
he looked for its curling smoke, he listened 
for the doubling clink of Ronald's hammer ; 
the hum of infant voices, or the song at the 
evening-fold, which, in such an evening, 
might be distinctly heard across the lake. 



148 CLAN-ALBIN, 

All was still. It was a stillness which chilled 
the heart, and froze all the pulses of life. 

" I have seen the blue smokes of Glenal- 
bin," said Moome, — " rising every morning 
for fourscore and ten years. This morning I 
looked, and they were all gone !" — she sighed 
deeply, and a long pause followed. 

A ?7iavis y that sweet songster of the Scot- 
tish glens, was perched on a neighbouring 
birch tree, cheering his mate with a " soft 
loved" song, and awakening all the fairy 
echoes of Eleenalin. Moome looked mourn- 
fully round. — " O well may y on sing," cried 
she — " you still nestle in Glenalbin !" — Nor- 
man burst into tears, and darted away, his in- 
dignant spirit soaring beyond the passions of 
a boy, as in bitterness of soul he cursed the 
mercenary temper which had exiled his 
countrymen. 

On the following day the Piper returned 
to his Lady : he had escorted his clansmen to 
their first stage. He talked to Moome of 
their parting ; and, in a few days, Norman 
and the Lady joined in the conversation. 

But Hugh hung his pipe against the wall, 
and many, many months elapsed ere he could 



A NATIONAL TALE. 149 

draw a note from it. Even then Norman 
fancied it still sounded — " we return no mare;'' 1 
— and during many months nothing was heard 
of the emigrants ; but at last Allan wrote, and 
they learned that their feelings were enviable 
when compared with those of the expatriated 
band. It was Glenalbin, it was the blue and 
distant mountains that sheltered their home, 
— it was the rugged shores of Caledonia, and 
the last of her isles, to which their hearts 
clung in melancholy succession. Allan simply 
described these feelings, and the grief of Nor- 
man was renewed. 

But by the end of the winter they had so 
far recovered their tranquillity that Moome 
sung to the Lady all the particulars of the 
emigration in Gaelic verse of her own com- 
position ; and Hugh played a pipe tune, 
which he had composed, and called — " The 
Departing Day" It was a wild, irregular, 
but very plaintive strain, and to it was adapted 
the first effusion of Norman's muse, entitled 
— "A Farewell to Kenanowen" — Dunalbin was 
a theme too delicate even for the language of 
song. 



02 



150 CLAN-ALBIN, 



A FAREWELL TO KENANOWEN. 

Caledonia ! my country, forever adieu ! 
And adieu Kenanowen thy mountains so blue, 
Tho' rude, yet beloved, from thy shades we are torn. 
And in sadness we go for we never return. 
As light shall the breeze wave thy blossoms andbowers, 
As soft shall the gale kiss thy wild mountain flowers, 
As bright mid thy heaths shall the wild berries glow, 
As clear through thy valleys the hill-torrents flow ; 
But banished the race who would dote on thy charms^ 
Who would love thee in peace, and defend thee in arms. 
No sound Kenanowen is heard in thy glade, 
All is silent and sad as the sleep of the dead, 
Save the howl of the hill-fox, the raven's hoarse wail, 
Which start the lone echoes of Dunalladale ! 
Why wakes not the horn of the hunter of deer ? 
Why flows not the song of thy daughters so fair ? — 
Ah ne'er shall their whispers breathe soft mid thy rocks, 
Nor, thy gales Eleenalin sigh in their dark locks. 
Thou loved Eleenalin ! green gem of the wave ! 
Where the Chiefs of the Clan find the rest of the brave, 
What pensive enthusiast shall lean in thy shade 
To weep and to worship the ghosts of the dead? — 
Ah ne'er shall the harp to the breeze give their name, 
Nor the song of the bard tell the deeds of their fame. 
With the clan of my fathers O who could compare ! 
Ever matchless in peace and resistless in war j — 



A NATIONAL TALE. 151 

But past all our triumphs, our glory is fled, 
And the voice of our fame only tells of the dead; 
Thou moon that now lean'st on the wild Craig-na-ru, 
Unheeded thy beams will our wanderings pursue, 
For ne'er will they play o'er thy hills Kenanowen, 
Nor brighten the scenes where our glory was known. 
Caledonia ! oft dyed with our forefather's blood, 
When their souls claimed the right, and their swords 

made it good, 
When they rushed from their mountains with dirk 

and claymore, 
A rampart of fire round thy rock-girdled shore, 
Forever farewell ;— from thy shades we are torn, 
And in sadness we go, — for we never return • 



152 CLAN-ALBIN, 



CHAP. XII. 



" How various his employments whom the world 
Calls idle, and who justly in return 
Esteems that busy world an idler too ! 
***** 

He that attends to his interior self, 

That has a heart and keeps it : has a mind 

That hungers and supplies it j and who seeks 

A social, not a dissipated life, 

Has business." 

Cowpbr. 

1 hat part of Norman's education which 
Buchanan superintended, was now finished. 
He returned no more to Ballyruag, but Flora 
Buchanan fixed her residence in Eleenalin 
for the benefit of the Lady's instructions in 
the several female accomplishments that were 
deemed necessary for her condition. 

Lady Augusta originally intended to give 
her adopted son a medical education, and 
from her slender annuity had long been mak- 
ing provision for that purpose. But the emi- 
gration intervened, and the Lady, who valued 



A NATIONAL TALE. 153 

money only as the instrument of benevolence, 
and expended it in the way likely to produce 
most good, gave that sum to the necessities 
of her poor neighbours which had been set 
apart to train her young friend to a liberal 
profession. As it now was, she was in no 
haste to launch her pupil into the world. He 
was still very young, and she perceived that 
he had a strong bias to a military life. Arms 
was not the profession the Lady coveted for 
Norman, yet no other was open to his hopes, 
and she flattered herself that his principles 
would preserve him from the dangerous im- 
pressions to which the young soldier is always 
exposed, and that talent and integrity would 
enable him to rise in the army, though desti- 
tute alike of interest or fortune. For some 
years after her retreat from the busy haunts 
of life, Lady Augusta had been visited by the 
neighbouring gentry ; but a new race had now 
sprung up who knew not " the Lady," con- 
sequently her interest was as slender as her 
acquaintances were few, yet she might have 
procured him an opportunity of entering on 
the profession he panted after even thus early. 
But to leave him to himself at so tender an 
age, — or rather to expose his unsuspecting 



154 CLAN-ALBIN, 

innocence to the contagion of evil example, 
without one friend to direct, — with moral 
habits still unformed, and those stronger 
powers of the mind which prove the guardian 
of honour and the guide of condiict still un- 
developed, — Lady Augusta shrunk from the 
rash experiment. 

Educated among a martial people, and 
taught to consider arms as the only profession 
worthy of a gentleman destitute of fortune, 
Norman felt an early and strong vocation 
to glory. His first lessons had been the mili- 
tary exercise ; while yet a child he had been 
an ideal soldier ; the habit of him he fondly 
called father was military, and all pointed one 
way. Yet with all the impatient ardour in- 
cident to his age and character, with all his 
impassioned desire to rush into life and action, 
he cheerfully submitted to the will of her 
whom it was his happiness to obey. She said 
he was too young to be left alone, and Nor- 
man felt that she was too aged to be consigned 
to solitude. 

But the present carelessness of his life was 
not without design on the part of his enlight- 
ened protectress. Hugh was his companion 
in field sports ; and on the hills and moors of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 155 

his country he was inured to tile toils he 
might hereafter encounter in its defence. 
By the same universal genius he was instructed 
in music. On the violin he played the 
wild, devious, heart-breathing strains of his 
native mountams with exquisite feeling ; into 
them his soul was transfused. This indeed 
was a talent he possessed with many a poor 
Highlander ; for in every farm of the Isles 
and remote Highlands, some tuneful enthu- 
siast may still be found, who has had no in- 
structor save ardent feeling, and native taste. 
Music, which in wealthy societies is the ele- 
gant occupation of the rich and great, is here 
the amusement of the lowly. In the former 
it is chiefly cultivated by females, here, by 
the men, but from the same motive in both, 
— abundant leisure, and a certain degree of 
refinement. In no northern country is music 
so generally cultivated. 

Lady Augusta, whom long residence abroad 
had given an intimate acquaintance with 
several continental languages, became the 
assistant of Norman in mastering their first 
difficulties. The witchery of Ariosto, and the 
sublimity of Corneille did the rest. Norman, 
who had abundance of youthful ambition, and 



156 CLAN-ALBJN, 

a peculiarly active imagination, was also a 
painter ; but in this difficult and delightful 
art he had no aid, no guide, save a lively 
fancy, rectified by the highly cultivated taste 
of Lady Augusta, and the inspiration caught 
from views of nature in her most striking at- 
titudes. But reading, — social reading, was 
the charm of the domestic evening, — " glean- 
ing the spoils of time," — the most delightful 
occupation of the young mountaineer. — The 
Lady had nothing which deserved the pom- 
pous name of a library ; but she had an ex- 
cellent collection of books, the better per- 
haps that her means of procuring this, her 
only luxury, were extremely limited, and 
that much thought was employed in selecting. 
The early misfortunes, and consequent habi- 
tudes of her life had made books necessary 
to her comfort, and if ever the equable, and 
all-enduring spirit of this hard-fated woman 
was ruffled by trivial matters, if ever she was 
betrayed by personal feelings into any cen- 
sure of the expensive tastes of the age, it was 
when luxury precluded her favourite indul- 
gence, and pursued her in the shape of broad 
margins, and all those typographical, and other 
embellishments, which make modern publica- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 157 

tions accessible only to the wealthy. She 
could not forbear to protest against the taste 
which tries to degrade the intellectual trea- 
sures of mankind to the level of furniture and 
equipments for the ignorant and ostentatious. 
It was perhaps a very natural taste which 
made the Archbishop of Granada delight in 
seeing his homilies written out in a fine and 
fair hand, but it would have been most alarm- 
ing to other people, had any one else cared 
about them. 

Happily, however, for Lady Augusta, the 
best books are also the lowest in price ; — and 
still more happily, the purest and most lasting 
pleasures are those which are open to all men ; 
— the sweets of the domestic affections, the 
ever-varying, exhaustless, and cheap delights 
that flow from a cultivated taste. The ele- 
ments of beauty, and grandeur, and happi- 
ness, were profusely scattered around the 
inhabitants of Eleenalin ; and they possessed 
that exquisite mental perception which can 
discover, select, and arrange ; — and find 
pleasure in each nicely adapted part, and 
rapture in every harmonious combination. 
They were poor it is true, if those can ever 
be called so, who possess the magical power 

vol. I. p 



158 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of extracting good from every thing, and in 
all things perceiving beauty. Can they in- 
deed be truly poor to whom belongs the wide 
charter " that appropriates all it sees." — 
" The stranger," it is true, possessed the 
mountains, and the woods, and the streams, 
of Glenalbin ; but what was the vulgar claim 
of the distant stranger ? He possessed, — but 
they alone enjoyed who could cast around the 
glance of taste and feeling,— -who could lift 
to heaven the eye of devotion and say — 

* My Father made them all." 

As the Lady could never hope to endow 
Norman with the gifts of fortune, she was 
doubly anxious largely to endow him with 
better, and more imperishable riches ; and 
by her wise and generous cares, without being 
either a miracle of wit, or a prodigy of learn- 
ing, he grew up with a manly and ingenuous 
mind, a warm and candid heart ; and, as his 
distinguishing characteristic, a fine enthu- 
siasm for his country, and his countrymen — 
for truth, for nature, and simplicity. 

The sequestered islanders lived in the most 
harmonious union, which was never disturbed 
except by some affair of precedence between 



A NATIONAL TALE. 159 

the Nurse and the Piper: — for Moome made. 
a point of considering " her who suckled 
Macalbin's son with her own milk," as a much 
more important personage than Macalbin's 
piper, — or a disputed point of genealogy, 
which Moome would not yield to Lady Au- 
gusta herself. But"' these altercations were 
never carried to any height, for Moome was 
rather jealous of the privileges of her high 
station, than of individual power; and Hugh 
humbled himself as became him, for Moome 
" was his own aunt, and also his own half 
cousin by the mother's side, and his third 
cousin by the father's side," and he loved 
her. Besides she remembered before he was 
born ; — " so who had the best right to know, 
—him?— ox Jwr?" 

To every one was alloted his own depart- 
ment. The Lady was Queen of the island, 
and Moome was prime-minister, and Flora, 
who still resided in Eleenalin, and sung like a 
Muse, and danced like a fairy, and spun al- 
most as well as Moome herself, — Flora was 
the notable workwoman of the little commu- 
nity, and Hugh was fac-totum ; and as for 
the maid-servant ? — Moome herself was forced 
to confess that " she did very well, consider- 



160 CULN-ALBIN, 

ing that, after all, she was one of the Macdon- 
nels of Glengary," a crime Moome could 
hardly pardon. Norman alone had no osten- 
sible business : he could only lighten or share 
the labours of his friends. 

No state of existence is however without 
some mixture of alloy. Moome, who perpe- 
tually carried on manufactures of coarse linen, 
and tartan, and clo, was often meeting with 
perverse accidents. And the Lady perceived 
that it would be cheaper to purchase these 
stuffs ; and besides she hated the bustle of 
spinning, and carding, and winding, and 
wasping. But without such displays of good 
housewifery Moome would have thought her- 
self idle and useless, and so have been mi- 
serable ; and the Lady could submit to 
any inconvenience rather than that Moome 
should be miserable. Then when Hugh 
went with clews to the weaver, or to the 
smithy to have the spade mended, Hugh, 
who was the most social of all created be- 
ings, would stay very long ; and when a 
letter came from the emigrants, he would 
wander over the country for days toge- 
ther, to communicate the glad tidings ; and 
still made a practice of attending every wed- 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 161 

ding or funeral he could hear of. Besides he 
still retained all his original fondness for small 
childer, still laid out his odd pence on mouldy 
gingerbread, and still made little stools and 
shinnys. He was consequently a welcome 
guest in every solitary hamlet that the gripe 
of monopoly had spared. The evening which 
brought " Uncle Hugh" and his pipe, 
brought mirth and pleasure in its train ; and 
the hut where he took his potatoes and heath 
couch was honoured by his presence. 

Yet Hugh was the most active member of 
the little community ; he possessed the uni- 
versal talents of his countrymen. Hugh could 
brew ale, and distil whisky con amove ; he 
could tan hides, and make brogues, and build 
boats and huts, and twist osier baskets of all 
kinds. Indeed with any odd piece of wood 
and a knife Hugh could make any thing, or 
rather a substitute for any thing ; and to the 
ingenuity of Robinson Crusoe he united the 
docility of his man Friday. Then Hugh 
raised an annual crop of potatoes, and cut the 
natural grass on the island to make hay, and 
managed the garden, and Moome's flax field, 
and worked and mended fishing nets, and 
practised a hundred other mechanic arts. Jn 
P 2 



162 CLAN-ALBIN, 

brief, to use his own phrase, Hugh could 
" turn his hand to any thing;" though it must 
be acknowledged that he in general preferred 
doing nothing, unless it was roving over the 
hills in quest of game, or blowing his pipe in 
an evening " to make the place sound like 
Dunalbin." 

Insulated as was the family of the Lady, 
she was not condemned to absolute solitude. 
Her visitors indeed were not among the rich, 
the gay, and the fashionable ; but the sick 
came to Eleenalin for medicine and advice, 
and the unhappy for consolation. Wherever 
there are poor Highlanders left, there is still 
kindness, gratitude, and unbounded venera- 
tion for high birth. During the spring and 
summer months many poor women would 
come from very distant places to visit the 
Lady : each with her little offering of humble, 
unbribed, unbought kindness; — game, or 
fowls, or eggs ; the berries of the juniper or 
arbutus ; or if every thing failed, they brought 
Hugh the liquorice roots Highlanders are ac- 
customed to chew instead of tobacco. — A 
Highlander will suffer any privation for the 
pleasure of presenting some little gift to his 
superior ; girls will often expend the greater 



A NATIONAL TALE. 163 

part of their wages in presents to their mis- 
tresses and their families ; and servants very 
frequently leave the children of their master 
heirs to the saving they may have amassed in 
the long and faithful service of the family. 
Lady Augusta loved to encourage this kindly 
intercourse ; it was among the last relics of 
a better age ; and she returned the symbol? 
of affection presented to her with such cheap 
and useful gifts as might ke^ p alive generous 
feeling, without stimulating avarice. The 
chief value of her gifts was that she bestowed 
them. Women are always the agents in the 
endearing intimacy thus kept up between the 
lowly and the exalted. They have more deli- 
cacy of feeling, a nicer sense of propriety, 
and more ease and gracefulness in expressing 
attachment. A Highland gentleman gives 
his hand to his namesake, however lowly, and 
freely converses with him without door?, 
where the levee is always held ; but females, 
however dissimilar their rank, never meet 
nor separate without the most cordial em- 
braces, and tender demonstrations of affec- 
tion. 

When the Lady had conversed long and 
intimately with these humble visitors, inquired 



161 CLAN-ALBIN, 

into all the details of their family affairs, — 
said all that was kind and fitting, and seen 
them take the tea, which is the rare and much 
esteemed treat on such occasions, she would 
consign them to the care of Moome. And 
in her hut they would sit from evening till 
dawn, conversing on all that was once most 
dear ; weeping over the fate of expatriated 
clansmen ; — gentlemen of the country fallen 
in battle, or respectable families dispersed in 
consequence of the new system of farming, 
and dwindled into insignificance. Many an 
early- fated, and gallant soldier, who has long 
been banished from the memory of great and 
fashionable relations, by the hard-hearted 
selfish bustle of the world, still has a being, 
in the warm and faithful hearts of his Moome, 
his cho-alt, and his poor clansman. 

To persons delighting in society, and now 
nearly cut off from its pleasures, — skilled in 
all the arts which enliven social intercourse, 
and in many of the graces by which it is 
embellished, nights of this kind were |pecu- 
liarly precious. They were the dearest luxury 
of Moome and the Piper. Spinning, and 
carding, and piping, were all forgotten ; — 
sleep was unthought of, and the night was 



A NATIONAL TALE. 165 

devoted to the " joy of grief. 1 ' Matters of 
immediate and temporary interest naturally 
occupied those who now so seldom met, yet 
the darling prejudices and fictions of a High- 
lander are so intimately blended with all his 
associations, that loftier themes would often 
intervene, and self-complacency would bor- 
row from the splendid hues of the past, to 
smooth or embellish the ruggedness of the 
present, and to illuminate the darkness of the 
future. 

But the grey dawn would terminate these 
stolen pleasures. The visitor would then return 
to her distant home, having first perhaps 
received a charm from Moome for her cattle 
or her children, and having bedewed the 
graves of her kinsmen in the burying-ground 
of Dun alb in with the tears of no ungrateful 
sorrow. 

Sometimes too a funeral from a great dis- 
tance would be brought to the now desolate 
glen ; those who connected with Clan-Albin 
had made it a dying and last request to be 
buried in Glenalbin, that they might sleep 
with their fathers, and rise up to judgment 
and mercy in a future state, surrounded by 
all they had loved in this. 



166 CXAN-ALBIN, 

All these events, though trifling in the 
world's esteem, diversified the life of the isl- 
anders, and prevented that stagnation in the 
flow of the social affections, which is the 
worst effect of solitude. Norman also some- 
times met in his hunting excursions on the 
moors, old school-fellows, and former com- 
panions; and while Flora resided at Eleenalin, 
every Saturday brought Buchanan and the 
newspaper, and gave rise to a long, and some- 
what tedious discourse " on the signs of the 
times ;" for he was still a zealous commenta- 
tor, still making war on the Pope, and de- 
faming Lady Babylon. He would also gravely 
rebuke various opinions held by Moome and 
the Piper, which " smacked strongly of 
Popery ;" and often checked that propensity 
to " profane swearing," particularly by the 
Virgin, which many good Presbyterians still 
practise in the Isles, and in that part of the 
Highlands. * The conversation of Highlan- 
ders is much more bold and exclamatory than 

* Among the many relics of Popery still extant among the 
remote Highlanders are their oaths. The common oath of the 
natives of Mull, Coll. Tyrie, Sec. is " By Mary." The 
people of Sky swear by " The Book itself;" meaning the 
Bible; those of Lewis by " The Great Sabbath;" and al- 
most every district has its peculiar oath. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 167 

that of their neighbours in the Low-country, 
and if their lively exclamations maybe termed 
swearing, men, women, and children are all 
alike obnoxious to Buchanan's censure. 

The islanders were indeed little versed in 
the refinements of Calvinism, though they 
were by no means aware of their own defi- 
ciencies, and Buchanan often turned up his 
eyes at hearing " such notions in a land of 
light." Long arguments consequently ensued, 
or rather dogmatical assertions on the one 
side, and warm exclamations on the other. 
Moome and the Piper denied the imputation 
of Catholicism, for the Chief had converted 
the whole glen one Sunday morning by dis- 
missing the priest, and driving them to the 
Presbyterian minister with a yellow-stick ;* 
yet they affirmed that sufferings in this 
life would abrogate future punishment, had 
no small reliance on " works," persisted 
in giving alms in sickness to purchase 
the prayers of the poor, and firmly be- 
lieved, notwithstanding all Buchanan could 
affirm, that certain relics in the posses- 
sion of Moome would cure all manner of 
diseases, though their politness would not 

* Religion of the yellow-stick. Vide Dr. Johnson's Tour. 



168 CLAN-ALBIN, 

permit them to give him a flat contradiction. 
Buchanan would groan at the discovery of 
such ignorance and idolatry, and trembled 
even for the daughter of his love, who, in 
spite of his cares, imbibed many of the pre- 
judices of the country, and in particular 
evinced a strong predeliction for " promis- 
cuous dancing," and " profane minstrelsy." 

The Lady never entered into those disputes, 
though she was often amused with their pro- 
gress. The Piper, who never sat down in 
her presence, generally hung behind the 
door, while, with the help of Moome, he 
conducted the argument. One evening when 
Hugh had listened for three whole hours 
with a patience and suavity of manner that 
might have extorted the approbation of Ches- 
terfield himself, he at length exclaimed, — 

" Son of God ! Mr. Buchanan, you must 
excuse myself, but I think you might believe 
what we say ; — no Papists are we, being turned 
from that way long ago by those who had a 
good right to know what was best for us. 
Though it is a very good religion after all to 
those who think so. You are proud enough, 
and great right you had, — of your own grand- 
fathers who fought for their religion — for 



A NATIONAL TALE. 160 

which I think the better of them and of you ; 
why then not let alone the poor Irish Catho- 
lics ; — and again, as to the Man of Sin, God 
help us, we have all our sins more or less as 
it may happen : — and for the Pope himself, 
you cannot deny that he is a gentleman and 
a Christian ; and, by your leave, what is more 
than that, a stranger, who never did you 
harm, so far as I know. So I hope and believe 
we will have done of it." 

Nothing could have been more provoking 
to the wriggling lubricity of Buchanan's con- 
troversial spirit than the through-going un- 
derstanding of the Piper, whose whole moral 
code was comprised in the short maxim, " Do 
as you would be done by ;" and who firmly 
insisted on the Catholics having the benefit 
of the very letter of that wide statute. 
Buchanan was violently recapitulating all his 
arguments, at a loss whether to pity the 
Piper's want of understanding or of logic, 
when a truce was again craved. 

" Mary yes !" cried Moome, — " have done 
of it ; — for as our ould minister — God give his 
soul its peace ! — was wont to say,'*- 

" O woman ! woman !" interrupted Bu- 
chanan — " purgatory, purgatory ;— -prayers 

VOL. L Q 



170 CLAN-ALBIN, 

for the dead — God give his soul its peace ! — 
poor blind idolaters ! — I could not have peace 
in my conscience if I did not lift up my 
feeble testimony against such abominations." 

" God's grace and mercy now," cried Hugh 
in a louder tone than he had yet used — " sure 
it was herself had no thought of offending 
you or yours, Mr. Buchanan, — it would ill 
become her. — Well ; pardon myself forgetting 
so hot upon it: — Son of God! — send us all 
to meet in heaven at last, Papist and Protes- 
tant." 

Buchanan's eyes gleamed with holy zeal 
while he said, — " Impossible." — In similar 
circumstances his father had often declared 
— " That heaven would be no heaven to him, 
were such men in it." — So he regarded him- 
self as tolerant even to weakness. 

These worthies differed as much in politics 
as in religion. The Piper, if any thing, was 
a Jacobite : the misfortunes of the house of 
Stuart, the sufferings of many gentlemen 
who had devoted themselves to its fortunes 
with that generous enthusiasm which is re- 
spectable even in error ; and, above all, the 
cold-blooded cruelties which followed the field 
of Culloden, interested in the deepest manner 



A NATIONAL TALE. 171 

the feelings of Hugh. Yet he had a strong 
instinct of loyalty, a natural veneration for 
all Chiefs ; and as these vassal affections had 
no chosen object by which they might be en- 
grossed, they readily embraced the nearest. 
Buchanan, on the contrary, detested the whole 
line of the Stuarts ; — never honoured his le- 
gitimate Prince with any other epithet than 
" The Occupant on the throne ;" and made 
conscience of denying any sovereign who had 
not sworn the covenants, — who was not " the 
nursing father of the Scottish church ; and 
above all, who " wore the sword in vain ;" — 
that is, did not use it to produce universal 
conformity to the creed of Calvin. 

The Lady had another annual visitor of a 
loftier and more uncommon character. From 
early infancy Norman had heard of "Hector 
the hunter," at first with childsh wonder, 
and superstitious dread, and still with a mixed 
feeling of awe and curiosity. He could 
scarcely indeed be called a visitor who was 
never seen by the Lady or any of her family. 
A deer left on the threshold was all that an- 
nounced the visit of the hunter. This had 
been the tribute paid by his ancestors to the 
Chief for the lands they possessed : these 



172 CLAN-ALBIN, 

lands had long been forfeited by rebellion^ 
but the annual deer was still paid to the las* 
descendant of Macalbin. This mysterious 
being lived in a, solitary Arrie on the north 
side of Bennevis, many miles distant from 
any human habitation ; and in that inaccessi- 
ble region of tempests and snows, his reign 
was undisturbed even by the adventurous foot 
of the hunter. He followed the chase, and 
kept some goats, for his sole subsistence ; and 
had been known to inhabit the same spot from 
the memorable period of 1745. The reason 
assigned for this uncommon life, and the vow 
he was reported to have made, never to speak 
to any human creature, was more calculated 
to inflame, than to allay the curiosity of Nor- 
man. It was said and believed that he was 
beloved by a female fairy, or spirit, for whose 
sake he had renounced the world, and who 
had bound him by that vow never to discover 
their intimacy. When questioned on his his- 
tory, Moome would sigh ; the Piper would 
shake his head, and pray for peace to his 
soul ; and Norman did not presume to inter- 
rogate the Lady, who only told him in general 
terms that great domestic calamities, falling 
on a mind of high enthusiasm, and singular 



A NATIONAL TALE. 173 

ardour in all its affections, had produced the 
visionary character of " Hector the hun- 
ter." 

Norman had never heen so fortunate as to 
see this mysterious visitant, though he had 
often watched for that purpose ; and as this 
year was perhaps the last he might be in the 
country, he resolved to be doubly vigilant in 
noticing his approach to Eleenalin. 

In the meanwhile Flora grew up under the 
care of the Lady. The romp of fourteen, 
who used to disturb the meditations of the 
sage commentator with mirth and laughter, or 
to derange his manuscripts through the love 
of order, or of mischief, was changed to a 
lovely, gentle, and companionable girl of 
seventeen, who sat by Buchanan's fire-place, 
while he pursued his studies, as quietly as any 
piece of furniture. As soon as Buchanan had 
made this discovery he became impatient for 
her return to Ballyruag, and the society of 
Eleenalin was deprived of one of its principal 
attractions, in wanting the charm of female 
youth and loveliness, and innocent gaiety. 
Universal regret was felt at parting with 
Flora. 

" Who will dance to my own pipe on an 
Q2 



174 CLAN-ALBIN, 

evening," said Hugh, as he led Moome home 
from the boat which conveyed Flora from 
Eleenalin. — i( And who will read the scrip- 
ture to myself on a Sunday," said Moome, — 
" since the darling creature is gone. — For my 
own part iiow, Hugh Piper, I think her father 
might have let her remain, with all his great 
learning ; — and to be sure I have, and well I 
may, a great respect for learned men. Many 
of our clan were learned in their day — though 
that got out of repute since — there have been 
bishops in France of the Macalbin family — so 
I have a great right to prize learning. — But 
I tell you now Hugh Piper," — added she, 
halting, and placing her hand on his arm. — 
" I tell you now, that Flora Buchanan, and 
none but Flora Buchanan, shall get my big 
silver broach, and my amber beads, die when 
I will. Were Norman a girl indeed, — but his 
shall be my plaid to make him a hunting 
jacket to wear for my sake, — my garnet 
broach, a gift from the Lady the day I got 
Donald, my darling foster-child — and what 
is more the claymore of Alister-more, my brave 
grandfather, who was gillie-more to the then 
Macalbin. — Piper you think much of your 
own strength and your liveliness , because you 



A NATIONAL TALE. 175 

can launch the skiff; but Alister-more could 
have thrown such a currach across his shoul- 
ders, and carried it from one loch to another 
like a nut-shell. — And no wonder — you know 
his size yourself — nine feet six inches, — still 
cut on the gillie-more' s oak, as it is called, 
where he was measured." 

Hugh had no wish to dispute, or even to 
disbelieve the strength and prowess of his 
clansmen, though Norman had once insinu- 
ated that the gigantic size of the gillie-more 
had increased with the growth of the tree. 
But he was silent, and Moome went on to dic- 
tate iier will, and to appoint him sole executer. 
" Do you mark my words now, Hugh Piper, 
and remember them," said she, sighing deeply 
— " we ought to have all these matters settled, 
for we know not the day nor the hour." 



176 CLAN-ALBIN, 



CHAP. XIII 



•' O life how pleasant is thy morning, 
Young Fancy's rays the hills adorning, 
Cold-pausing caution's lessons scorning, 

We frisk away, 
Like school-boys at the expected warning 
To joy and play." 

Burns. 

IN OR man had now completed his nineteenth 
year, and his conversation often turned to 
that world in which his imagination had long 
been wandering y and as often would Hugh 
remark, — " that it was a shame for himself to 
have lived so long without getting one skitch 
of the world, and regret that his countrymen 
should suffer so much from the French with- 
out himself having one spell at them." — Hugh 
generally kept his eye fixed on the Lady 
when he delivered these sentences, and though 
she gave no direct reply, she believed that his 
fidelity and affection might supply the want 
of experience, and that Norman on his outset 
in life could have no better attendant. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 177 

The hopes of the ideal soldier were now 
about to be realized. The Lady had written 
in his behalf to a gentleman through whom 
she hoped to procure him a commission, and 
with this important letter Hugh was^on the 
following day to travel ten miles to the post- 
office. — " And Norman will take his fowling- 
piece," said the Lady, — " and cross the hill 
with you, — I long to see Flora. If her father 
can spare her to us, her society will cheer 
these long evenings." — Norman was very 
much of the same opinion, and it was agreed 
that they should rise very early next day. 

The first object that struck the eye of 
Moome next morning was Hugh digging in 
the potatoe field. — " Hugh Piper up so early 
and digging !" exclaimed Moome, " this will 
be a day of good luck." — The omens of this 
morning were very important, and luckily 
they were favourable. Moome had stept to 
the door of her hut to draw the presage of the 
day from whatever first met her eye. It is the 
custom of every Highlander in her sphere of 
life. The very morning Sir Norman Macal- 
bin died, she had seen a favourite cow 
stretched dead on the green plat beiore her 
door, choked with a potatoe ; and the day 



178 CLAN-ALBIN, 

the clan was warned she had seen a surly 
strange dog chase her favourite white hen. 

Hugh was only waiting for Norman, who 
at the same moment advanced, equipped in 
the garb of his native mountains. Moome 
gazed, with the honest exultation of artless 
affection, on the graceful figure, and blooming 
countenance, of her youthful friend, and 
vowed " there never was a handsomer fellow 
of his clan, and never would be ;" — for Moome, 
who divided all mankind into tribes, had long 
considered him as a Macalbin. Hugh flung 
his slip-on around him ; (for the Highlan- 
ders of the Isles and West Highlands wear 
their upper garments exactly in the good 
easy way of their brethren in Ireland, the 
sleeves dangling over the back) — and accom- 
panied by Moome, they set forward. Norman 
however recollected that he had no book for 
Flora, in case she was not permitted to visit 
Eleenalin, and he ran back. Moome was 
certain, from this commencement, that the 
journey would be unpropitious, — " For she 
never knew good come of any thing when 
people turned back;" and she loved Flora 
too dearly not to feel chagrined at not seeing 
her. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 179 

But for once Moome's prescience failed. 
Flora was permitted to visit Eleenalin,andher 
sparkling eyes spoke her joy. — " I shall be 
so happy to see the Lady, to make Moome's 
caps, to learn Hugh's new tune, and to nurse 
the pet lamb !" — cried the delighted girl ; — 
" Norman I shall not make you wait two mi- 
nutes ;" — and she flew to prepare for her visit. 
And in that two minutes Buchanan would read 
the fifty pages he had composed since he had 
last seen Norman. Buchanan's great work 
was now brought down to the puritanical age 
of Cromwell. It commenced with the Queen 
of Sheba, and briefly touched on every mo- 
narch of Babylon, Egypt, and Assyria, dur- 
ing many centuries. It was divided into three 
grand parts. — " The prophecies as connected 
with ancient times, the prophecies as con- 
nected with modern times, and the prophecies 
as presently fulfilling, or as about to be ful- 
filled." " I mean just to touch upon the 

reign of Queen Anne, the Tory ministry, 
and Protestant succession ; for the life of one 
man is not adequate to the task I have under- 
taken. And our own age Norman demands 
attention. From the age of the Babylonish 
captivity, even to that of the glorious Refor- 



180 CLAN-ALBIN, 

mation, such a shaking of the nations has not 
been witnessed. We live in an alarming 
crisis; and you would do well to give heed to 
the signs of the times." Buchanan then pro- 
ceeded to illustrate every recent change on 
the continent of Europe by some dark and 
fanciful allusion, discernible to no mind but 
his own ; and was pulling down a folio copy 
of Josephus's history in support of some fact, 
when Flora luckily re-entered, and Norman, 
glad of an opportunity to escape, started to 
his feet. 

" I have just been wondering who this Bo- 
naparte may be," added Buchanan, as he 
dusted the Josephus with his red worsted 
night-cap. — " I did look for some great man 
to arise about this time, though I question if 

this be he." " You will perhaps be able to 

say by the time I bring home Flora," cried 
Norman. — " Then you may keep her three 
weeks at least ; — these matters my young 
friend, 

" Indeed father," interrupted Flora, " in a 
matter of that importance you ought to give 
yourself time for reflection. You recollect 
your late mistaken hypothesis about Tipoo." 

Buchanan reddened and exclaimed — " My 



A NATIONAL TALE. 181 

hypothesis, — hypothesis girl ; and what know 
you of an hypothesis ? — talk of matters you 
comprehend ; — you, explain my hypothesis 
that can neither tell what the word signifies, 
nor whence it is derived." 

" Well, well, four weeks then," cried 
Flora, with a vivacity that declared she fully 
comprehended whence the pleasure of resid- 
ing at Eleenalin was derived. Buchanan, 
whose anger lasted but a moment, gave his 
consent, and charged her to write over by 
the Piper what the Lady thought of the pre- 
sent aspect of affairs. 

" 1 should prefer the hill-road," said Flora 
to her companion, — " were it equally plea- 
sant to you. There is something so springy 
and animating in the air of the mountains at 
this season, that I feel new life when inhal- 
ing its pure breath. My soul is more free, 
my spirits more buoyant ; my heart leaps with 
the wild joy I have so often felt in infancy 
when we roamed over these hills togetherj 
Perhaps there is no period of life so perfectly 
happy as childhood." — Flora sighed softly, as 
she cast an inquiring glance on her young 
companion. 

" I trust every period of life will have its 

VOL. I. R 



182 CJLAN-ALBIN 



«» 



peculiar joys for Flora," said Norman smiling. 
— " That tlie pleasures of after life will be 
brightened by the recollection of her infant 
and youthful years. With what enthusiasm 
do I recal those days of careless innocence. 
They return to my mind clad in hues far 
brighter than reality ever gave. In child* 
hood we are happy, and we know not why, 
we are delighted, and we know not whence 
our felicity springs ; — but the reflection 
which accompanies our progress in life gives 
a new impulse to our feelings; we turn to 
survey the blissful period of infancy ; we trace 
the purest feelings of human joy to a source 
of purity, and are delighted to find that our 
innocence constituted our felicity. This is a 
retrospection which must soften the most 
callous heart, and influence the most cor- 
rupted ; for surely there exists no being so 
depraved, who, in viewing his early life 
through this hallowed medium, will not ac- 
knowledge that purity is the best ingredient 
in the cup of felicity. Indeed Flora, not- 
withstanding your father's doctrines, I am 
often induced to believe that the complacency 
one feels in recalling those halcyon days, is a 
strong proof of original goodness of heart. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 183 

Why should the mind revert with such delight 
to those pure and happy days, if it did not 
feel a natural and intimate sympathy with 
the innocence which made them blest. Why 
exert the powers of memory to assemble 
around us every long-fled image of infant 
virtue ? And why, as we advance in life, does 
the heart, shrinking from its bustle and fer- 
ment, nauseated by its vanities, turn to find 
a resting place, a haven of retreat, amid the 
scenes of its early happiness. Does it not 
long to return that it may renovate its powers, 
recover its original impulse, learn anew the 
elements of virtue, and assimilate to that in- 
nocence which in every stage of existence 
it finds necessary to felicity. Man is indeed 
weak, the creature of error, the being of 
habit; but this longing, this looking back, 
those pensive regrets, or rapturous feelings 
with which we recal past scenes, are alike in 
my estimation proofs of original purity, and 
pledges of future renovation." 

The young mountaineers had now reached 
a hill-top which commanded a view of Glen- 
albin, and of the glen in which Buchanan 
resided. 

" This summit," said Flora, " is the usual 



184 CLAN-ALBIN, 

boundary of my solitary rambles. 'Tis here 
I give to the winds all the cares contracted in 
yon lower world ;" and she smiled while she 
pointed to Ballyruag. My spirits become 
elastic as the mountain breeze, my heart tri- 
umphs over all its petty troubh s. I look 
alternately to Eleenalin and Ballyruag ; my 
heart vibrates between its homes ; — 'tis a fluc- 
tuation so pleasurable, — O how I pity those 
who have been born in great towns ; who never 
knew the happiness of loving and gazing on 
a native glen, and a native mountain !" 

" Should I," exclaimed Norman, — " at any 
future time mingle with the world, be seduced 
by its follies, or corrupted by its vices, and 
imbibe all the pernicious maxims ascribed to 
its intercourse, — the sight of these^hills and 
glens, the haunts of my child*9k,in days, 
when happiness walked hand in hand with in- 
nocence, — the recollection of those whose 
lives, even more than their precepts, formed 
my heart to sentiments of virtue and honour, 
— O how powerful must be their influence ! — 
Thou loved Eleenalin ! sweet retreat of peace 
and innocence; — at sight of thee every vicious 
impression must vanish ; — I would regain the 
energy of virtue, I would resume my ori- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 185 

ginal character, and become, what he ought 
always to have been, who was the son of Lady 
Augusta, and the pupil of Buchanan." 

" Welcome, a thousand times, darling 
Flora," cried Moome, saluting her young 
friend, — " much did I fear you would not 
come ; — but Norman has such luck ; — go, or 
return, all things thrive in his hands j" — and 
she repeated a Gaelic proverb. 

" I am come, — happy girl that I am, — for 
four whole weeks ! — Now I shall make the 
caps Mary left you ; and Hugh's shirts, and — 

" O, no hurry of that," said Moome. — 
" But see, darling, how the Piper bound up 
your woodbine ; and stuck twigs to support 
the pinks you planted ; — and how the roses of 
your own bij.sh are blowing.— I believe my 
own bees know Flora's flowers to be sweetest." 

" All that is delightful, — but we forget the 
Lady," said Norman. 

Lady Augusta was now become the friend 
and companion of the young Highlanders. 
She exerted all the talents she so eminently 
possessed, for their instruction and amuse- 
ment ; and her conversation became daily 
more interesting to her auditors. With strong 
powers of observation, she had viewed life in 
K2 



186 CLAN-ALBIN, 

all its different aspects, and was intimately- 
conversant with man as be exists in every di- 
versified situation ; — from the rude cottage, to 
the magnificent palace ; — from the moun- 
taineers of Scotland, to the polished nobility 
of France. To Norman the conversation of 
the Lady was an exhaustless source of plea^ 
sure. It possessed an ascendancy over his 
feelings he understood only by its effects. 
Lady Augusta, like a skilful musician, drew 
from the pliant chords of his mind what tones 
she chose. Norman was alternately roused 
to indignation, or melted to pity, animated 
with courage, or thrilled with horror, sub- 
dued by sorrow, or rapt in enthusiasm, as the 
magical power of Lady Augusta swept over 
his imagination. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 187 



CHAP. XIV. 



•• 111 fares the land, to hastening ills a prey, 
When wealth accumulates and men decay ; 
Princes and lords may flourish and may fade, 
A breath can make them, as a breath has made, 
But a bold peasantry, their country's pride, 
When once destroyed can never be supplied. 

******* 
Ye friends to truth, ye statesmen who survey 
The rich man's joys increase, the poor's decay, 
'Tis yours to judge how wide the limits stand 
Between a splendid and a happy land." 

Goldsmith. 

In the evening of that day Lady Augusta 
rejoiced to see her family assembled round 
her parlour fire ; — their hearts expanding in 
that endearing confidence peculiar to the 
warm and friendly region of the domestic 
hearth. Flora busily plyed the " threaded 
steel ;" the Lady sat with her knitting, while 
Norman carelessly touched his violin ; for on 
the entrance of Moome he had ceased read- 
ing. Moome was employed with her distaff, 
and in teaching Flora an old Gaelic jorram, 



188 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and at intervals she stopped, to chide the 
delay of the Piper. 

" Darkness will bring Hugh," said Moome, 
— " Nay, for that matter, he minds darkness 
as little as light ; — I wonder he has not met 
something to give him a fright when crossing 
Craig -na-calliach under the cloud of night. — 
I warrant he has fallen in with some wedding, 
or christening, or interment, on the other side 
of the country ; — or is helping some one with 
the potatoe-ground, — for Hugh would go six 
miles for a dog sooner than one for himself ; 
— while a smithy or a mill was known in Glen- 
albin, Hugh never lay out of one or t'other." 

Norman smiled at her wrath, while he said 
— " the gable of the smithy has fallen down at 
last. — Poor old Ronald ! — how will he regret 
the scene of his early happiness, and cheerful 
toil ; — the blaze of Ronald's forge, — the clink 
of his hammer, — which in a night like this 
we were wont to hear, — how much does the 
heart miss them !" 

a There will soon be no stone left to tell 
where Dunalbin stood," said Flora. — " But I 
hope they will still spare us the lovely tuft of 
trees. — I never come to Eleenalin but I feel 
anew the desertion of the hamlet. When 



A NATIONAL TALE. 189 

running down the glen, eager to reach the 
island, I see the once happy Dunalbin, — my 
gay hopes vanish of a sudden, 'tis a feeling 
so painful ; — I never fail to recollect these 
sweet lines of Goldsmith : — 

" When many a year elapsed I turn to view, 
Where once the cottage stood, the hawthorn grew, 
Remembrance wakes, with all her busy train, 
Swells at my heart, and turns the past to pain." 

" All things are well ordered my children," 
said Lady Augusta, whose habitual confidence 
in the goodness of Providence forbade her to 
despair of the fortunes of the human race.— 
" The emigrants have by this time found a 
generous mother. I hope they have ceased 
to regret her who spurned them from her 
bosom, and rejected their embraces. God 
grant that at no future period of calamity she 
may ever feel the want of their aid." 

" I know little," continued Lady Augusta, 
— " of the political interests of kingdoms, but 
I would gladly think they are not incompatible 
with the happiness of men. I should be sorry 
to believe that in any country there could 
exist a difference between political prosperity, 
and individual welfare, — relative ascendancy, 



190 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and solid internal strength. Luxury must be 
a very fine thing indeed, if the accumulation 
of wealth be an object of greater importance 
to the welfare of states than a numerous, and 
above all, a happj/ population. And that part 
of the system from which the sufferings of our 
friends have sprung must also be good ; — let 
the Highlands be made grass parks for Eng- 
land. The revenues of great proprietors will 
be increased ; they will undoubtedly realize 
their rents more easily, as it is easier to col- 
lect money from one or two individuals, than 
from some hundreds of tenants, — a plea many 
have coolly urged in vindication of their op- 
pressive measures. The cravings of their newly 
acquired tastes will for some time be more rea- 
dily supplied, till, by indulgence, their ficti- 
tious wants become so exorbitant that no rise of 
rents can satisfy their increasing avidity. There 
was formerly an ascertained, and permanent 
relation between the necessities of our proprie- 
tors, and the real produce of their estates. They 
enjoyed that distinguished condition of life to 
which birth and property entitled them, and 
their swarming tenantry procured a frugal 
livelihood under their protection. But they 
have imbibed new opinions, and acquired new 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 191 

tastes ; and luxury advances with rapid strides 
into a country nature never intended for its 
reception. Our proprietors happily disco- 
vered how they might obtain a temporary ad- 
vance of rent, and it cost them little to decree 
that the selfish luxury of one family should be 
mantained by the misery and exile of hun- 
dreds. But the increasing value of their 
bleak possessions can never keep pace with 
the progress of luxury ; and the punishment 
that awaits them will be fully adequate to their 
offence. They will have drained the life's 
blood of their country, and will behold it a 
desert, without increasing either its wealth, or 
power, or honour. 

" But if the. best riches of a state consist 
in the number of its industrious and useful 
members, this new system must be perfectly 
inimical to the true interests of our country ; 
— its sinews must be weakened, — its strength 
undermined ; — it will soon resemble a splendid 
building whose cumbrous decorations are not 
proportioned to the solidity of its foundation, 
— it must speedily totter, and fall to ruin. 

" I do not pretend," continued Lady Au- 
gusta, — " to settle the interests of nations. I 
am neither a politician nor a casuist. But I 



192 CLAN-ALBJN, 

have seen my native land populous and 
happy, and I now behold it a desert. From 
the castle of Dunalbin I have seen a wide 
tract of country gaily diversified with cottages, 
where humble worth, and humble happiness 
found shelter. I have seen a hundred blue 
smokes rise in this desolate glen. Wherever 
I turned my eyes images of felicity rose to 
greet them. I beheld a poor, but contented 
people, peacefully enjoying the fruits of their 
labour, and ready to drain their dearest veins 
in defence of those to whom they owed the 
blessing of security. This was a prospect in 
which my heart revelled, — for it is most grate- 
ful to witness the universal diffusion of happi- 
ness. — But I am no economist: my mind ever 
derived more pleasure from contemplating 
the simple manners, and humble joys of my 
countrymen, than in beholding the facility 
with which new modes enables our land- 
holders to pay heavy taxes, or the nicely ad- 
justed plans of rural economy, which are co- 
extensive with the kingdom. The price of 
mutton may be somewhat reduced ; and a few 
modern landholders may be indulged in ming- 
ling with the motley inhabitants of squares in 
the capital, or with the promiscuous visitors 



A NATIONAL TALE. 193 

of fashionable watering places. They may- 
be initiated into the manners of wealthy 
England ; gratified for a time with all the 
luxurious enjoyments of highly accommodated 
life ; and imagine themselves rich in possess- 
ing the trappings prized by factitious refine- 
ment, little known, and less valued, by their 
rough ancestors. But admitting these things 
to be all very innocent and desirable, the 
mind involuntarily reverts to the price at 
which they are purchased : we hear the groans, 
we behold the tears, of exiled multitudes ; 
and turn from the spectacle of modern splen- 
dour with horror and detestation. But I can- 
not help bewailing the degradation of the 
great, as well as the misery of the humble ; — 
what so humiliating as lordly, needy vanity, 
contending in the lists of fashion and expense 
with purse-proud vulgarity. The coarse and 
insolent triumphs of the one, the affected dis- 
dain, and ill disguised repinings of the other : 
—how miserable this struggle of paltry pas- 
sions ; — how despicable the poverty of spirit 
indicated by the piebald, beggarly state af- 
fected by a Highland family of narrow fortune, 
when renouncing every legitimate claim to a 
real superiority, they hasten to another 

YOL. 1. S 



194 CLAN-ALBIN, 

country, and condescend to vie with over- 
grown tradesmen, and bloated contractors." 

The conversation languished for a few 
minutes, and was then resumed by Norman. 
— " The patriotism of our countrymen is 
much stronger than that of any other class of 
the British public. What must be a feeble 
sentiment amid the bustle of crowded society, 
is a vehement passion in our insulated glens. 
But oppression gradually weans the affections 
of our countrymen from that land from which 
it is driving them forth. — One cannot help 
rejoicing that so many have reached another 
region, where the woods will afford that cle- 
mency and protection which are denied at 
home. There, I hope, they will long retain 
those ancient manners, which are so intimately 
connected with all their characteristic virtues. 
I trust they will ever preserve that ardent, 
and unsubdued spirit of independence, which 
has in every age been their ennobling dis- 
tinction, — the national tongue, and the war- 
like garb, — fondly cherish the remembrance 
of their heroic ancestors, and yet teach the 
wilds of America to echo the Songs of 
Selma." 
Lady Augusta smiled at the warmth of her 



A NATIONAL TALE. 195 

young friend, while she replied. — " It is ex- 
tremely improbable that the generous wish 
you have expressed can ever be accomplished. 
That state of society which originally formed, 
and afterwards preserved, our national cha- 
racter, can never be realized in the new world. 
Our countrymen, I fear, will soon forget that 
1 Fingal has lived, or Ossian sung.' — But that 
land of the poor man affords an ample field 
for their persevering industry. Their activity 
will be stimulated, by holding in real property 
what they formerly only possessed by a capri- 
cious tenure. They wiill learn to exult at 
having arrived at a land of plenty ; — the 
strong operation of individual interest, will 
rouse them to permanent exertion, — the ac- 
quirement of a taste for the comforts of life, 
will soon produce their enjoyment: — if any 
baneful effects follow emigration, this country 
alone can feel them, — 

" If in some future hour the foe should land 
His hostile legions on Britannia's strand, 
May she not then the alarum sound in vain, 
Nor miss her banished thousands on the plain." 

" The Highlands and Isles have long been 
a nursery to the British army," continued 



196 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Lady Augusta. — " Exempted by our local 
situation from the hazards of foreign warfare, 
or the possibility of foreign domination, we 
have long poured forth our hardy clans to the 
■aid of our more exposed neighbours. Our 
brave mountaineers have long been justly 
esteemed the flower of the Britis \ army. 
P2nterprising in danger, of unshaken fidelity, 
persevering under reverses, prodigal of life, 
patient of fatigue, of hunger, of cold, and 
every hardship incident to war ; — the excel- 
lencies of our soldiers begin where those of 
others terminate. 

" Through the representations of interested 
individuals, government at length seems aware 
of some bad consequences from the rapid de- 
population of the Highlands. An act has been 
passed to restrain emigration. Our people 
are condemned .to starve at home, or to ex- 
haust, in conveying themselves to a more for- 
tunate soil, the slender savings which might 
establish them in a mode of life similar to that 
which they are forced to renounce in this 
country. The mind revolts at a measure 
which so cruelly aggravated the sufferings of 
the Highlanders. A feeble and spurious hu- 
manity pretends to alleviate the consequences, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 197 

while the cause exists and gains strength. 
Emigration is restrained, but the oppressions 
of landholders must be tolerated. 

" But it would be as unjust as indecorous to 
impute to the legislature, what in truth springs 
from the selfish passions of interested indivi- 
duals. 

" There are some great proprietors, who, 
with an ostentatious display of generosity, 
still retain a numerous tenantry. By afford- 
ing men to the army, their political import- 
ance is heightened ; and they readily procure 
patronage, and find resources, for needy re- 
latives and dependents. Thus are these lord- 
lings handed to preferment, purchased by 
the blood and toil of men whose families are 
groaning at home under the lash of servile 
factors, striving to force from an ungenerous 
soil what may satisfy the increasing demands 
of a more ungenerous master. If they dare 
to whisper their discontent ; — if every refine- 
ment of petty tyranny at length arouses their 
desperate energies, and they venture to 
breathe a purpose of abandoning at some 
future period the protection of a man who 
exacts such services, and holds out such re- 
wards 5 — cruelly anticipated in their wish, 
S 2 



198 CLAN-ALBIN, 

they are stripped at once of their little posses- 
sions, — compelled to embrace a mode of life 
to which their prejudices and habits are alike 
repugnant ; their families are dispersed and 
abandoned to the various sufferings of an un- 
feeling world, often refused a hovel to give 
them shelter on the surface of that country 
which poverty and an emigrant act forbid 
them to leave. I now allude to those persons 
whose interest or pride, demands a numerous 
population ; and who would, at the same time, 
enjoy the advantages of increased rents. 
There are some individuals of another class, 
whom (as they happen to possess glands which 
require different modes of culture) we have 
lately seen remorselessly driving the people 
from a farm adapted for a sheep-walk, while 
those on a grazing farm were furiously perse- 
cuted for indicating the slightest wish to ac- 
company their expatriated neighbours. This 
is no exaggerated statement," continued 
Lady Augusta, — " many instances may be 
found at this dreary period, which too fully 
establish the truth of what I assert. Nay, 
we have lately beheld this species of perse- 
cution carried to an extent at which huma- 
nity revolts, The despicable vengeance of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 199 

cruel men extending its power as far as the 
fears and helplessness of its victims, strives 
to dissolve every bond of social affection, and 
to eradicate every natural sympathy. By a 
decree, as odious as any papal interdict, we 
have seen wretched creatures forbidden all 
intercourse with their nearest and dearest 
relatives, if these have unfortunately ren- 
dered themselves obnoxious to their lairds by 
purposed emigration. On some estates, the 
crime of giving a morsel of food, or a night's 
shelter, to a father, or a brother, in these cir- 
cumstances, is expiated by instant forfeiture 
of the patch of land from which the poor fa- 
mily derives subsistence. These hard-hearted 
men have a complicated interest ; by over- 
turning every obstacle, and, at whatever ex- 
pense of suffering, they would reconcile in- 
compatible advantages ; — by human sacrifices 
they would propitiate fortune." 

" And how cruelly," exclaimed Norman, — 
" are those evils aggravated by the insulting 
manner in which many affect to derive them 
from the characters and habits of Highlanders. 
How often has my blood boiled to hear my 
countrymen stigmatized with idleness and 
laziness, — branded with a roving, unsettled 



200 CLAN-ALBIN, 

disposition, — a propensity to wander over the 
face of the globe ; — can any reproach be 
more unmerited. Where is a people more 
assiduous in labour, when labour produces 
advantage, or more patient under fatigue and 
hardship ? — But above all, is there any people 
more fondly attached to home than the moun- 
taineers of Scotland ? — Do they not cling to 
the ungrateful bosom of that country which 
shakes them off with contempt ?" 

" Highlanders have long been loaded with 
these imputations," replied Lady Augusta. — 
u I remember when, as a redress for every 
grievance, they were told to live on fish. 
They have often been upbraided with neglect- 
ing so valuable a branch of economy ; and 
the fisheries might indeed, through time, be- 
come a means of improving their condition. 
But will the ocean spontaneously yield up its 
treasures to beings cut off by poverty from 
all the means of availing themselves of the 
local advantages which Providence has placed 
in their power ? — No one thinks of accusing 
the French and Sicilian peasant of laziness, 
though he be wretched in the midst of nature's 
abundance. The blame is frankly imputed 
to the genius of the government, and to want 



A NATIONAL TALE. 201 

of education ; — Ireland, — that unfortunate 
country which God has made, and man has 
marred, — Ireland alone and the Highlands of 
Scotland, are the soils of original and indi- 
genous laziness and idleness. — But I forget 
our patrons of the fisheries, — and they seem 
to forget that the proper cultivation of land, 
by demanding continual attention, is incom- 
patible with the successful prosecution of 
fishing. Should our poor people give exclu- 
sive attention to the fisheries, — for a few 
months of employment, at best precarious, 
they forfeit the hopes of the year, and ensure 
no adequate provision for their families. I 
never heard a Highlander complain of personal 
fatigue or privations, but I have often been 
compelled to give my unsolicited pity to the 
condition of a solitary fishing party in the 
western seas, — I mean those engaged in the 
white fishery. There was something animat- 
ing and grateful to human self-complacency, 
even in the severest toils of the hunter. But 
these solitary fishermen, without plan, and 
without combination, living from week to 
week on some desert rock, daily pursuing 
their dangerous avocation, subsisting on fish, 
without either bread or vegetables, — liable to 



202 CLAN-ALBIN, 

be impressed ; indeed these ingenious 

men who speculate at their ease for the ad- 
vantage of their poorer fellow-creatures, must 
have singularly wise heads, or remarkably 
cool hearts. However, this resource is only 
open to those living in the Isles or on the 
coast ; — the inhabitants of the inland districts 
may supply their wants in any ingenious man- 
ner they can devise." 

" There are still," said Flora, " some High- 
land gentlemen, whose generous conduct 
exempts them from censure, and even entitles 
to praise." 

" Nay, I do not blame indiscriminately," 
replied the Lady. — " Thank God there are 
still left among us many honourable instances 
of high birth, ennobled by virtue, — many who 
have not bowed the knee to the Baal of mo- 
dern idolatry, — but in the modest retirement 
of the hall of their fathers, dignify their ex- 
alted station, and redeem the sinking reputa- 
tion of their country. These noble men 
derive their happiness from the prosperity of 
those who flourish under their paternal sway ; 
— they delight in dispensing peace, plenty, 
and comfort, to all within the bounds of their 
influence. Would that their influence were 



A NATIONAL TALE. 203 

more extensive ! — Such Highland gentlemen 
are the genuine representatives of the ancient 
Chieftain. Stripped of his unbounded power, 
they still retain all the great qualities which 
made the character of a hereditary Chief so 
noble and interesting. Their benevolence 
may even be traced to a more exalted source, 
as their generous attachments are neither ex- 
cited by clannish vanity, nor influenced by 
old habits and necessities. These gentlemen 
appropriate small farms to industrious fami- 
lies. With them the claim — " My father, and 
my father's father, lived under you and yours," 
is more powerful than — " I will give you a 
pound more of rent." Yet they encourage 
every practical plan of liberal improvement ; 
they stimulate the industry of their tenants, 
and they enjoy their success. They reap the 
sweet fruits of benevolence, and feel all the 
genuine pleasures of the soul. These excel- 
lent men would rather be the benefactors of 
one honest family, than the possessors of all 
those baubles and trappings with which others 
bribe the stare of the multitude, — that indif- 
ferent, contemptuous stare, which, in the im- 
becillity of their hearts, they call admira- 
tion." 



204 CLAN-ALBJN, 

After a long pause, Lady Augusta added — 
" An imprudent attempt to reconcile the mo- 
dern style of living, with an indulgent treat- 
ment of dependents, has ended in the ruin of 
several families in this country. Of that num- 
ber was my father's. His clannish pride could 
only be surpassed by his clannish generosity ; 
the sacrifice of his family splendour, or of the 
happiness of his people was required ; he 
preferred the former, and incurred both." 

Another long pause ensued. The Lady 
seldom mentioned her family, and never with- 
out betraying feelings in which the heart of 
Norman was not slow to sympathize. 

The silence was at last interrupted by the 
blowing of a horn, which announced the 
Piper, and summoned Norman to the boat. 
He started up to obey the signal ; while 
Moome commented on the delay of Hugh, the 
Lady requested Flora to accompany him 
across the lake. The moon shone clearly as 
Norman slightly touched the oar on which he 
leaned, and gazed on the lovely western star, 
which shone alone in the " purple zone of 
evening." He had not uttered a word, when 
the rough voice of the Piper dispelled his 
reverie. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 20<5 

" What will Moome be saying to myself," 
inquired Hugh, as he shook the hand of Flora. 

" O, all that you fear," said Flora, laughing 
— " She must be faced however ;" and Hugh 
seized an oar, which he plied so lustily, that, 
in a few minutes, they reached Eleenalin. 

" Not a word now Moome," cried Hugh as 
he entered, — " not a word from your lips, or 
my news is gone." What Moome called nexvs 
was as necessary to her comfort as the tobacco 
she smoked. An inquiry after news is the 
first question put to every stranger among a 
people sequestered from the world, and pos- 
sessed of imaginations of the liveliest order. 
This inquiry is, however, very different from 
indelicate, and impertinent curiosity about 
the personal affairs of others. The High- 
landers, particularly the inhabitants of Morven, 
have a saying — "That thestra?ige?l\ived a year 
and a day in the hall of Fingal, before his 
name was asked." — A saying which enforces 
delicacy to strangers. 

Moome remained silent, and Hugh began 
to relate, with characteristic humour, many 
stories he had just invented for the occasion. 
At times she laid down her pipe, and regarded 
him with a scrutinizing glance ; but her 

YCXL. I. S 



206 CLAN-ALBIN, 

faith was unlimited, besides., so young a man 
durst not venture to sport with her credulity. 
Hugh was ordered to repeat several of his 
supernatural tales, and Moome seemed pecu- 
liarly delighted with one of a flight of birds 
which appeared like ravens, but were in reality 
witches, flying off with the lambs of the 
" great new sheep farmers," in the isle of Sky, 
and spreading dismay and ruin wherever they 
went. This story happened to be in actual 
circulation at the time, and had obtained 
universal credit throughout the country. 

" Nay, for that matter," said Moome, — 
u Sky was always namely for witches. — I re- 
member, while you were in France, Lady, 
that the Chief (by your leave) went to Dun- 
vegan, and was storm-staid for six weeks. 
The Christmas was coming on, and he was 
so anxious to get home to his own country, 
that he resolved to try his fortune at sea, 
happen what would. — Well, they got out 
Macleod's twelve oared boat,-^-for there were 
few sails in those times, when a gentleman 
had plenty of people proud and happy to 
attend him. — It would not do, — so they next 
tried the boat with sails, — and Angus-breachk, 
who always sailed with Macalbin, and was a 



A NATIONAL TALE. 207 

very decent commoner, thought of applying 
to " Shelas the bearded," * — whose grand- 
mother sunk the great Spanish ship at Tober- 
morey ; — she it was who could command the 
wind and the tide. — Well, she gave Angus a 
thread and on that thread were three knots. 
* Loose the first,' said she, * as you pass the 
point ; — if the breeze is not strong enough, 
loose thes econd, — but, as you value your own 

* Such specimens of Highland stiperstition as are inter- 
spersed in these pages are genuine, and of recent date. The 
people of the three countries, as the islands of Mull, Coll, and 
Tiree are called, have a belief that the Florida, a ship of the 
Spanish Armada, was destroyed by the agency of a witch, 
still held in great reputation for this patriotic exploit. The 
Spanish Captain is reported to have possessed considerable 
skill in dark arts himself, but the Highland woman had su- 
perior powers. The myrmidons of each assumed the form of 
cats : six cats belonging to the witch were seen climbing the 
rigging of the ship. — " I will match her yet," cried the 
Spaniard. Three auxiliary cats were sent out. ** I am now 
undone," cried the Spanish Captain, and Ihe ship imme- 
diately foundered. — There is a wild and remote tradition of 
the clan of Maclean, sometimes confounded with the exploit 
of the witch. A Princess of Spain was urged to marry, and 
uniformly refused, alleging that in a dream she had seen a 
gentleman with whom she was deeply and hopelessly in love. 
Her father fitted her out a gallant ship, and this errant dam- 
sel sailed round the world in quest of the man of her love. 
In her voyage she halted at Duart, and of course, he was 
found to be the Chief of Maclean ; but unfortunately be was 



208 CLAN-ALBIN, 

life, or the life of Macalbin, — beware of the 
third.' — Angus accordingly loosened the first 
as they passed the point, and a gentle breeze 
sprung up, — he loosened the second, and it 
freshened to a gale ; — urged by a fatal curi- 
osity, he loosened the third, — and, Lady, 
such a hurricane arose, that none thought 
they would ever make land. — To be sure, had 
Macalbin himself not been in the boat she 
had never escaped. — I have known many to 
apply to that witch for fair winds, — and only 
last year a drover going to Uist was tossed 
about for six weeks, driven to every harbour 
in the north, — and at last obliged to return 
and make his peace with her daughter whom 
he had offended." 

" The gentlemen of Sky are attempting to 
shoot these black-winged witches," said Hugh, 
— " And as well might they shoot at the fly- 
already married. The beauty of the Princess, however, 
seduced his affections. He paid daily visits to the ship, 
which is described as being nearly as splendid as Mr. Sou- 
they 's ship of heaven. This soft intercourse was at length dis- 
covered by the Lady of Duart, who, fired with jealousy and 
revenge, immediately plotted against the life of her husband 
and her beautiful rival. The catastrophe of the Spanish 
Princess is very tragical, but through the fidelity and attach- 
ment of his people Duart is saved. 



A NATIONAL TALK. 209 

ing stars," cried Moome — " There is indeed 
one way of shooting a witch, — a silver button, 
or a silver sixpence will do it, — but should 
their last lamb go for it, (by your leave) I 
would not tell them that secret. 

" Wonderful power of silver !" cried Nor- 
man, smiling at her bitterness, — " But I am 
sure Moome you could not be so ill natured 
as keep the secret." — Moome replied by re- 
peating a long Gaelic rhyme, lately made 
against " black faced s/ieep, and enterprising 
sheep farmers ," concluding with desiring the 
landholders to march out their flocks against 
French troops j and Hugh went on with his 
adventures. 

" Macpherson of the New Inns," said he, 
" promised to forward the letter, and requested 
me to show the marches of Glenalbin to a 
short, low country, or English gentleman, 
who was along with him, riding over the pro- 
perty ; — I had no great mind to go," continued 
Hugh, il yet one could not refuse a stranger." 

" You had little to do, Hugh Piper mach 
Piper," exclaimed Moome, shaking her bead 
angrily — " You had little to do to point out 
your master's marches to any son of woman. 
— " Och, my heart ! and it was myself little 
T 2 



210 CLAN-ALBIN, 

thought the day you were whipped round 
these marches, that ever the stranger would 
get footing in Glenalbin. Well do I remem- 
ber that day, — the very day it was after 
Drimigha saw Finlay-roy. * — But perhaps the 

childer never heard me tell it. Finlay-roy 

had been confined to a sick-bed for some 
years, and was not expected to rise again ; — 
Drimigha, — and a worthy man he was, — was 
walking out in the twilight about the farm, as 
was his custom, when all at once he saw Fin- 
lay-roy. — Pale indeed, and ill he looked ; — 
but (by your leave) to see him at all was as- 
tonishing ; and the good man said — ' I am 

glad to see you so well Finlay,' 6 I am 

very well now,' said he; and they passed 
each other. But you may guess the heart 
Drimigha had when he entered his own door, 
and met the people seeking an old shirt to put 

on the corpse of Finlay-roy !' 1 do well 

remember that the old Piper was telling me 



* This apparition, taisch, or wraith, was seen or imagined, 
by a very respectable old gentleman in one of the Western 
Isles, the father of a physician who has attained considerable 
celebrity in the world. It is the practice of Highlanders in 
similar circumstances to solicit from some generous neighbour 
a shirt of finer texture than those used by themselves. 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 211 

the story, when Hugh and some other boys 
who had been led round the marches, came 
the way. Alas, alas, for a wide march 
Macalbin then had, and many a blue smoke 
rose on his property. Do you not remember 
now Hugh, how I gave you a kaper, and a 
crogan of milk. — Och hone, och hone / to show 
the stranger these marches, — it is the wound 
of my heart, never to forget it." 

The shock Moome's spirits had sustained 
betrayed her into a strength of expression 
against which she carefully guarded when in 
presence of the Lady. Lady Augusta how- 
ever, discovered no extraordinary emotion ; 
but Norman, anxious to spare her feelings, 
tried to change the conversation. 

" But why was the Piper whipped ?" cried 
he, — " Surely our good Uncle Hugh was 
guilty of no offence meriting such an odious 
punishment?" 

" Jt was, till lately," replied Lady Augusta, 
" the practice of this part of the country, that 
boys, on attaining a certain age, should be 
taken round the marches of the gentlemen on 
whose property they were born, and undergo 
a fashion oi flogging at particular landmarks, 
Having no inciosures, nor any precise mode 



212 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of ascertaining boundaries, we had recourse 
to this rude plan ; and it served the purpose. 
Hugh will always remember the landmarks at 
which he was whipped." 

* A most sensible and impressive way of im- 
printing the truth," cried Norman laughing, 
and Hugh proceeded in his narrative. 

u No one will believe me now, — but it is 
as true as I spell my name Macalbin, — the 
New Inns is as full of workmen as it can hold, 
— all come from the low country, to fall to 
the old castle, and have it in order before the 
shooting season, — as I am told." — The Piper 
looked anxiously round to see the effect of his 
information. No one spoke, — but Moome 
dashed the ashes out of her pipe, and rose to 
retire. The whole party followed her ex- 
ample, each musing in silence on the infor- 
mation of the Piper. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 213 



CHAP. XV. 



N O'er the still lake the bell of ev'ning tolled, 
And on the moor the shepherd peuned his fold, 
And on the green hill's side the meteor played, 

When hark, a voice sung sweetly through the shade. 

* # # # # 

She left the shade, nor marked the stranger there, 
Her pastoral beauty, and her artless air, 
Had breathed a soft enchantment o'er his soul, 
In every nerve he felt her blist contronl." 

Rogers. 

1 he preparations at Dunalbin for the recep- 
tion of new inhabitants, and even their arrival, 
were but little attended to in Eleenalin ; for 
some months had passed, and the Lady re- 
ceived no answer to the letter which was to 
decide the fortunes of Norman. His impa- 
tience of inaction, and extreme unwillingness 
to remain any longer a burden on her gene- 
rosity, made him earnestly solicit her per- 
mission to enrol himself as a volunteer in a 
fencible regiment then raising in the country. 
Such a measure had been by no means un- 
common among cadets of respectable families 



214 CLAN-ALBIN, 

in the Highlands, before the amazing increase 
of the military establishment had made com- 
missions so very plentiful. The Lady put a 
mild negative on his request, but promised 
that if nothing more eligible offered, he should, 
in the following spring, have her approbation 
to his favourite project, romantic as it seemed. 
Norman kissed her hand in rapture. His 
young and sanguine imagination promised the 
most unbounded success, — the most enviable 
distinction. To conceal the transports of his 
joy he ran to the lake, promising to procure 
Flora trout for supper. 

The day was so sultry that he rowed his 
skiff to a small creek in Kenanowen, and 
sought shelter in its dark woods. He wan- 
dered along an irregular path, which wound 
up the lower range of the mountains, now 
untrodden save by some solitary shepherd, 
and nearly obstructed by tangling thickets of 
honeysuckle, hawthorn, broom, and eglan- 
tine, around which luxuriant climbing weeds 
had hung many a blooming wreath. Norman 
threw himself on a couch of fern, and lingered 
long under the grateful shade of the slender 
birch trees which skirted the cliffs; and found 
amusement and pleasure in gazing on the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 215 

bright blue light that quivered through their 
undulating branches. As the day became 
more cool, he pursu d his ramble. Masses 
of many coloured granite, which composed 
the declivity, starting at his feet, or hanging 
ruinous over his path, were embossed with 
mosses of every vivid tint. Every crevice 
was adorned with rich tufts of the golden 
cinque-foil, or stately fox -glove,— every ledge 
ornamented with the juniper, the alpine ar- 
butus, and the aromatic shrubs peculiar to 
the mountains, — the whole exhibiting a pomp 
and warmth of colouring which has seldom 
been surpassed, even amongst the rich corn- 
fields, and green pastures of a softer land- 
scape. While climbing this steep path Nor- 
man often paused to survey the varying pic- 
ture; — to feast his eyes on nature's loveliness; 
— to enjoy the pure elastic gale which wafted 
aside the leaves of the arbutus, and discovered 
its glowing clusters of scarlet, or purple 
berries, — swept over the copses, and the lake, 
and brought to his bosom the spirit of fresh- 
ness and inspiration. And often did he turn 
to gaze on the desolate residence, of humble 
worth. 

In Glenalbin, now consigned to its original 



216 CLAN-ALBIN, 

wildness, every trace of cultivation was al- 
most effaced. In vain did the wearied eye 
wander along the stupendous mountains in 
search of some green spot on which it might 
rest ; — in vain it explored the thick copses 
■which skirted their hase, in quest of some 
smoking cottage to relieve the solemn emo- 
tions which the deep repose of nature awakens 
in the mind ; and to refresh the heart with 
those joyous sensations excited by the view of 
human bliss enjoyed amid the simplicity of 
rustic life. 

How deep was the slumber of nature in 
that once breathing glen ! — Every trace of 
society that now remained exhibited the 
gloomy image of desolation. The decayed 
cottage wall, the mouldering roof, resting in 
heaps on the cheerless hearth, where the hare 
had left her young ; — the grass-grown path, 
and the grey stone of the dead, were all the 
vestiges of man that could now be seen in 
Glenalbin ; — emblems at once of his power 
and mutability. These objects in succession 
claimed the attention of Norman, and awak- 
ened many an interesting association con- 
nected with his infancy, his youthful years, 
and that dim, portentous futurity, which his 



A NATIONAL TALE. 217 

fancy was ever busy in portraying with a bold, 
though extravagant pencil. 

" Would that I could read the destiny which 
awaits me in yon distant world!" would he 
exclaim, while his eye ran along the aerial 
mountains that bounded the southern point of 
the horizon, — " Would that the hour were 
come, when in some corner of yon mighty 
theatre I might struggle to realize the inde- 
pendence to which I aspire, and contribute 
to the happiness of those I love." 

Norman was now filled with a desire to rush 
into the active scenes of life, which daily 
became more importunate. A mind singu- 
larly ardent in all its conceptions, and san- 
guine in its hopes, levelled every obstruction 
in the path to glorious distinction ; and the 
ingenuous simplicity peculiar to unsuspecting 
youth, promised the rapid accomplishment of 
every wish his fancy could form. The felicity 
of those he loved was the object of them all. 
Never had the social heart of Norman con- 
ceived an exclusive plan but of the dangers 
he would encounter, the efforts he would 
make, — the hardships he would despise, and 
despising conquer, to evince the warmth of 
his affection to his friends, and his worthiness 

VOL. I. U 



218 CLAN-ALBIN, 

to be called the son of Lady Augusta in soul, 
if not in blood. But all the phantoms which 
flitted before the mental vision of Norman, 
stole their splendour from the enthusiasm for 
military glory with which his soul was imbued* 
A brilliant imagination, a romantic education, 
a lonely residence in the wilds of a picturesque 
region, thinly inhabited by a martial people, 
were circumstances well calculated to inspire 
and foster the love of fame in the bosom of 
youth, and already were the brows of the 
embryo hero entwined with the laurels of 
glory. Often too would the ingenuous diffi- 
dence of his nature shrink back from the 
splendid creations of his fancy ; his young 
cheek would glow with the blush of shame, 
while he whispered to himself, — " Surely I 
am very vain, what right have I to expect 
that he should notice me." 

There is no young visionary who does not 
propose to himself some object of hopeless, 
though anxious imitation ; — some Brutus or 
Cato, — some Nelson or Moore, who shall be 
the guiding star of his soul ; and Norman al- 
ready had his hero, whose notice was distinc- 
tion. He had read that narrative in which 
the most amiable of fathers records the ex- 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 219 

ploits of the most gallant of sons. How ex- 
quisitely are the honest triumphs of the parent 
chastened by the modesty of the man ! Nor- 
man devoutly kissed that book, pressed it to 
his throbbing heart, and bedewed it with his 
tears. " This, this is my hero," he exclaimed, 
" in whose footsteps I will tread, at however 
humble a distance." 

But our young hero, who retained some- 
what of the sobriety of common sense, amid 
all his enchanting reveries and chimeras of 
war and glory, — now recollected the trout > 
and his promise to Flora, and hastened to 
regain his skiff. 

Darting through every tangling thicker 
and overleaping every rocky barrier with the 
wildness of exuberant spirits, he had arrived 
at the banks of an alpine stream, fringed with 
natural wood, smiling with the freshest ver- 
dure, and overhung with many a fantastic 
rock, and airy summit, when his ear caught 
the soft murmurs of a female voice. With a 
feeling of surprise he stooped down to listen, 
and stretching himself on an overhanging cliff, 
beheld a female seated many feet beneath 
him, in a compartment of the crag, which 
was canopied by a waving mountain-ash. 



220 CLAN-ALBIN, 

With all the lisping endearments of baby lan- 
guage, he heard her address an unseen com- 
panion, whom he at first fancied a child, but 
soon discovered to be a tamed bird, which 
she was teaching to sing. There was so much 
of the innocence, simplicity, and warmth of 
early youth discovered in her fondling expres- 
sions, and so much pretty childishness in the 
idea of carrying a bird into the woods, that 
Norman, half charmed, and half amused, con- 
tinued to observe this " very young lady," 
as he fancied her, till she repeated the musical 
lesson of her winged pupil, in a voice that 
thrilled every nerve of his frame, though it 
extorted no sign of admiration from the favou- 
rite. Norman had a lively sensibility of the 
charms of harmony, and he heard for the first 
time that sweet and tender ballad, 

'* Drummossie moor, Drummossie day." 

" What melting tones ! what soul-breathing 
expression !" thought Norman. His soul hung 
on the lips of the syren. The goldfinch 
seemed to have no sentiment. Though dumb 
to the pathetic ballad, it gaily tried to imitate 
its young mistress as she carolled a blithe 
strathspey. Enraptured with its performance, 



A NATIONAL TALB. 221 

she rose to load the little pet with caresses, 
and discovered a face and form which far ex- 
ceeded the fairest painting of Norman's fancy. 
Light, graceful, blooming, bewitching, — 
young indeed, but not the child he had ima- 
gined, — the fire of her eye, the vivacity aud 
play of her exquisite features, proclaimed all 
the newly awakened, and fine sensibilities of 

life's most enchanting era. " Surely I 

dream 1" thought Norman ; and the vivacity 
of his emotions had nearly betrayed his situa- 
tion. 

The young stranger opened the gilded 
prison of the favourite, which was suspended 

from a branch of the tree. " Come kiss 

me my lovely bird ; kiss me my sweet play- 
mate." — She held out her hand, to which it 
familiarly hopped. She fondly pressed its 
little bill to her dewy lip : it flew from side 
to side, it perched on her shoulder, it nestled 
in her hair, it wantoned in the sweets of free- 
dom. " Happy little bird !" thought the 

concealed spectator. " We shall return 

home," said the young stranger, stretching 
out her arm to convey it to the cage. It flitted 
from her head, and perched among the foliage 
of the tree which waved above her. She 
u 2 



222 CLAN-ALBIN, 

stretched out her arms, but the little traitor 

eluded her grasp. " Oh, can you leave me," 

she exclaimed, half fearful, and half fond- 
Norman was flying to catch it. " Return, 

return, my lovely bird," cried she, in a cares- 
sing voice, but it flew to a higher branch. 
She held up the cage, with tears in her eyes ; 
she sung its favourite air ; she tried a thousand 
expedients, while the ungrateful pet, heed- 
less of her blandishments, looked on askance, 
or flitted from bough to bough, quivering his 
wings with the instinctive joy of new found 
liberty. A loud scream announced a bolder 
flight. The bird had flown to the summit of 

the cliff on which Norman leaned. " Oh, 

I have lost him ! lost, lost for ever !" — But 
the words died on her lips, when her eager 
eye, pursuing the favourite, she first beheld 
Norman. 

" I will find your bird lady," cried Nor- 
man,—" you shall not lose him ;" — and he 
bounded after tbe fugitive, which gathering 
new courage from every flight, often made 
long excursions, and left his pursuer far be- 
hind. 

Norman was no sooner out of sight than the 
young stranger felt her cheeks tingle with the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 22$ 

blush of shame. " What a fool I must ap- 
pear," thought she ; — u A stranger \ a young 
man, — how came he hither ; he may long have 
seen — heard me ! Oh, I shall expire of confu- 
sion. Cruel little bird, thus to betray me. But 
I will run home, and never, never see him more 5 
and abandon thee ! — Sweet companion of my 
solitary hours, I cannot desert thee." — Hesi- 
tating between affection for her little favourite, 
and the shame of again meeting the stranger, 
the young lady began to climb the cliff, secret- 
ly resolving to hasten home, and leave the bird 
to his fate. She was midway up the cliff, 
when the appearance of Norman, darting 
across a yawning chasm, which, by the sud- 
den acclivity of the mountain, seemed, from 
the spot where she stood, suspended in air, 
arrested her steps. This object awakened a 
higher interest. Her shame, her regret, were 
forgotten, and her whole soul absorbed by 
the imminent danger of the young stranger. 

" My God, he will be killed 1" cried she 

wildly. — " Oh Sir, stop; let the bird go; I 
love him not, I want him not 1" 

But Norman heedlessly flew from cliff to 
cliff, while the bird, following the course of 
the stream, crossed and recrossed, and seemed 



224 CLAN-ALBIN, 

to mock his activity. In swinging himself 
from the branch of a tree to reach an opposite 
rock, his foot slipped, and a wild shriek from 
the young stranger expressed her terror. He 
instantly regained his hold ; but the young 
lady, following the strong impulse of her 
fears, sprung forward, and forgetting that 
she stood midway up the cliff, plunged into 
the channel of the stream. Norman flew to 
her assistance, and in a moment she was seated 
on the opposite bank. The stream was fortu- 
nately almost dried up by the long heats of 
summer, but in failing she had wounded her 
head among the loose rocks which the winter 
torrents had torn from the narrow banks, and 
deposited in the channel. Blood slowly 
trickled from her temple ; — her face became 
deadly pale ; — she struggled with her feelings 
of pain and alarm, till incapable of farther 
effort, she sunk into insensibility. Norman 
had never before seen even a temporary sus- 
pension of life, and he was distracted by the 

most dreadful apprehensions. " She will 

die in my arms !" exclaimed he — " die with- 
out assistance ; — wretch that I am, what will 
become of me !"-^-and his hand shook with 
more than feminine tremor, while he tried to 



A NATIONAL TALE. 225 

stop the effusion of blood, and tore his hand- 
kerchief into bandages. The pain of the 
wound, and the powerful feeling of her situ- 
ation, soon recalled the young stranger to 
recollection. She opened her languid eyes. 
— " You live !" cried Norman, involuntarily 
drawing her closer to his breast, for his heart 
claimed kindred with the fair unknown being 
whose solicitude for his safety had produced 
an accident so alarming. The young stranger, 
as if alarmed at her situation, blushed deeply, 
while she tried to rise and to thank him for his 
cares. As if unable to stand, she clung for 
support to a spreading hazel tree which grew 
beside her, while Norman, more delicate than 
gallant, stood back, nor presumed to offer 
his farther assistance. Yet he looked as if 
his soul would have flown to her aid, while 
he eagerly scanned every motion of her eyes, 
and thought how he might offer his services 
with least offence to her delicacy. What were 
his feelings to see those fine eyes swimming 
in tears. She looked to her foot, — attempted 
to walk, — it bent under her. It had been 
sprained in her fall. Overcome by the feel- 
ings of her situation, she burst into tears. 
Norman sprung forward, and while he ear- 



£26 CXAN-AL.BTN, 

nestly entreated her to command his services, 
bitterly accused the rashness and impetuosity 
which had occasioned her distress. 

" Oh no ; I alone am to blame/' cried she, 
— " Often have I been warned against ram- 
bling so far among these cliffs; — foolish, giddy 
creature, what will become of me." — Norman 
saw her anguish of mind with the most lively 
concern ; — the foot too, — that small and deli- 
cate foot, so cruelly hurt. A thousand plans 
rushed through his mind. He offered to run 
to the castle, of which she was an inhabitant, 
but it was two miles distant ; evening was fast 
closing in : to leave her alone in that solitary 
dell, — sick and alone! — It was impossible, 
and this impossibility emboldened him to 
make the offer which for some time had hung 
on his lips. — " To assist her to his skiff, and 
convey her to Eleenalin. Eleenalin was ueaf, 
the castle distant, and the path rugged and 
dangerous ; darkness was fast coming on, 
Lady Augusta was the most benevolent of 
beings ; his skiff was anchored in the creek 
below, and information of her safety might be 
sent to Dunalbin even before she could be 
conveyed thither." — The eyes of the young 
lady brightened at this proposition, for she 



A NATIONAL TALE. 227 

shuddered at being left alone and in darkness 
in that solitary spot, and felt that she was 
unable to walk to Dunalbin. 

" I fear that I must be an intruder on 
the hospitality of that good lady ; — for some 
hours at least," said she — " But I am no stran- 
ger to her virtues ; — I will gladly accompany 
you to Eleenalin." 

But a new difficulty occurred. Norman 
had for years been accustomed to carry Flora 
over swamps, through streams, and peat-bogs^ 
on his shoulder, in his arms, and in all man- 
ner of ways. From the nature of the country 
this is indeed a piece of troublesome gallantry 
Highlanders must often pay to their fair com- 
panions ; — but this was a stranger, young, 
delicate, apprehensive, and unable to walk. 
Whatever were the terms of the agreement, it 
was silently concluded ; and on reaching the 
pebbly shallow, where the skiff was moored, 
the fair stranger flattered herself that she had 
almost walked, while Norman, from the tu- 
multuous throbbing of his heart, now first 
awakened to the delicious thrillings of a power- 
ful passion, felt that he had clasped her in his 
arms when supporting her feeble steps, that 
her breath had blown upon him, when bend- 



228 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ing her head to avoid the boughs that over- 
shadowed the path, and had inspired him with 
a new principle of life. Norman seated his 
fair charge on a rock, and collecting a quan- 
tity of dried fern (which Hugh had luckily 
left to be burnt for some of Moome's manu- 
factures) threw it into the skiff, and with 
some branches of birch and hazel, formed a 
sylvan couch for her accommodation. He 
assisted her (now greatly exhaused with the 
pain she suffered) into the skiff, and pushed 
off from the shore. To his timid inquiry she 
replied that she felt greatly relieved by the 
ease of her recumbent posture ; and now ex- 
pressed some reluctance to intrude on the so- 
litude of Lady Augusta Macalbin. 

" Though I never durst intrude on the 
retirement of that lady," said she — " she has 
often been the subject of my thoughts, since 
I have heard, though but imperfectly, her 
interesting story. Often have I cast a longing 
eye at the little paradise she inhabits. There 
is something in her story, her situation, and 
her way of life, peculiarly interesting to one's 
feelings ; but I presume you know her better 
than I do ?" 

" I do know her" said Norman ; and they 
relapsed into silence. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 229 

The last flush of day tinted the lovely form 
that reclined at the feet of Norman, every 
cliff caught the rosy glow. The lingering 
beams quivered on the lake, which gently 

undulated to the sweep of his oar. " How 

lovely, how still," thought Norman — "This is 
the witching hour !" — and his truant glance, 
which, for a moment had wandered round the 
enchanting scenery, returned to an object a 
thousand times more interesting to his sensi- 
bility. " Were she but well," thought he, 
" how exquisitely w r ould her presence heighten 
every charm of nature." — If love begins with 
the first sigh, this was its era in the bosom of 
Norman. The young stranger was playing 
with the branches that waved around her, as 
if eager to find occupation. He sighed deeply, 
and sunk into a reverie, from which he was 
recalled by the pipe of Hugh. Fortunately 
the melody was in unison with the feelings of 
the moment. Low-breathed, plaintive, and 
almost desponding, it gently harmonized with 
the stillness of the hour, and seemed to lull 
the sweet repose of nature. Norman sighed 
again, that soft strain seemed the living lan- 
guage of his new and undennable feelings. 
But the modern Timotheus suddenly changed 

vol. I. x 



230 CLAN-ALBIN, 

the measure to a bold pibroch, which had 
often roused the spirit of the young ideal sol- 
dier. Even now it struck a sympathetic chord 
in his bosom, his physiognomy took a more 
energetic character, he pulled the oar with 
fresh vigour. His young companion was a 
painter, and somewhat of a physiognomist. 
u The contour of an Alcibiades," thought 
she. The glance of the young disciple of the 
arts was timid and momentary, yet Norman 
caught it, and she averted her eyes with more 
confusion than an artist usually discovers. 

" These sounds must be harsh and uncouth 
to your ears," said Norman, who now wished 
the Piper were less noisy in his greetings — 
" but they thrill the heart of a Highlander, 
and the Piper is not aware of your presence.'" 

" I am glad that it is so, since it procures 
me an unexpected pleasure. I am no High- 
lander, but I love every thing Highland ; — 
there is a warmth and frankness about the 
people of this northern region that no kind 
spirit can resist.'* 

" I am happy you find it so," replied Nor- 
man, — u you give me a new motive to love 
my country ;" — and at that instant the Piper 
bawled in Gaelic, — " Whatluck ? — How many 
dozens ?" 



A NATIONAL TALE. 231 

" Hush," cried Norman in the same lan- 
guage, — " I have had great luck, — caught a 
Mermaid ;" — and he threw out a rope. 

Caught a Mermaid !" echoed the Piper,—- 
" God's grace and mercy ! take care what 
you are about ; — these are dangerous neigh- 
bours. I have heard of them in the North 
with a comb and a looking-glass. O, I know 

you jest with me." "Nay," said Norman 

softly, — " look, when you have fastened the 

boat." " They sing to warn seamen of 

their approaching fate," added Hugh, — " you 
have heard our own Moome tell of one who 
allured a young man into the sea, and drowned 
him at some part on Loch Etive, which the 
people of Lorn call the ' basking place of 
the sea maiden.'" 

The boat was now touching the land, the 
fair stranger raised her head among the 

branches. " Son of God !" exclaimed the 

Piper ; but his terror was only of momentary 
duration ; and twisting up his features to more 
than their usual archness, he added, — " I see 
it is so ; — well, God keep you ; these are 
ticklish fishes, — for my own part a dozen of 
trout — or even flounders — would have pleased 
me as well ; but the skin may be good for 



232 CXAN-ALBIN, 

something." — Norman directed him to an- 
nounce their arrival to the Lady, and to pre- 
pare her for the reception of her guest. 

He was slowly advancing with his fair 
charge, when the inhabitants of Eleenalin 
met their view. A weather-worn, but truly 
Caledonian face, small twinkling merry eyes, 
a mouth puckered into a thousand wrinkles by 
habitual risibility, a complexion darkened by 
the sun of many a summer ; masses of hair, 
hesitating between dingy and grey, and shad- 
ing a neck of the same ambiguous hue ; a 
small Highland bonnet, a short coat, and a 
philabeg of tartan, scarlet hose, a pair of 
genuine brogues, and an exhausted bag-pipe 
hung over the left shoulder, announced the 
great hereditary piper. 

At his right hand stood Moome, her distaff 
stuck in her bosom, the spindle dangling by 
her side. A low, spare figure, kept in perpe- 
tual neatness ; the snowy cap, the many 
chequered tunag, the ample broach, and large 
amber beads ; but above all, the silver locks, 
and the maternal smile, which triumphed over 
the ravages of time and misfortune, made age 
appear amiable, as well as interesting, in the 
venerable nurse of Macalbin. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 233 

Next, leaning on the light form of Flora, 
appeared the Lady, of that height and ma- 
jesty of figure which the imagination loves to 
assign to the last descendant of a noble race. 
The traces which age had furrowed on the 
countenance of Lady Augusta, while they 
stole from its beauty, added to its dignity and 
expression. Her large-orbed dark eye still 
beamed with undiminished brilliancy, — still 
emanated the grandeur of a lofty spirit, and 
sent its keen glance to the soul. 

A shade of uneasiness passed across the 
mind of Lady Augusta, as she approached 
the unexpected visitor, who, leaning on the 
arm of Norman, advanced with pain and dif- 
ficulty. He briefly told the nature of the 
accident, and introduced the fair stranger. 
The countenance of the Lady had recovered 
its wonted serene benevolence, animated by 
the spirit of active humanity. She welcomed 
the stranger in language, that, though not 
modish, was kind, polished, and encouraging; 
and hastened to afford her every requisite as- 
sistance. 

With that propensity to quizzing which 
infects every rank, the Piper had repeated to 
Moome the story of the Mermaid. The flow- 
X2 



234 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ing white robes of the stranger, her long dark 
tresses waving in the breeze, her uncommon 
beauty, and the uncertain light of the hour ; 
but above all, a strong admiration of the mar- 
vellous, confirmed the illusion, and she stood 
absorbed in wonder and speculation. But the 
approach of Norman to solicit her attentions 
to an inhabitant of the castle of her chief, 
gave a new tone to her feelings. Her natural 
prejudices and resentments, though violent 
and decided, were tempered by kindness and 
courtesy, and their expression was restrained 
by a certain humble dignity, and proud sense 
of what every Macalbin owes to himself and 
to a stranger. 

" From the castle," said Hugh, with a very 

expressive look. " From Dunalbin !" cried 

Moome, — " But she is a stranger — ill and a 

stranger." " Mary yes !" exclaimed Hugh, 

accusing his own harshness — " she is a stran- 
ger, and I forgot it ; — so go to her Moome, 
you may do her good." 

Moome went to the Lady, and Norman left 
alone with the Pi:jer, could n t deny himself 
the pleasure of bewailing the beautiful little 
foot. 

" Aye, — it is not good for your low-country 






A NATIONAL TALE. 235 

ladies to be jumping about the rocks like our 
girls, seeing they are not used to it," said the 
Piper dryly. — Norman was almost offended, — 
" However, I am sorry for her foot too ; and 
if Moome manage it as she did mine, when I 
put it out at the peat-bog, — rolling it up in 
lard and black wool, " 

" Lard, and black wool, and your foot!' 7 
cried the impatient Norman, — " On my con- 
science you talk like a fool. I tell you, you 
never in your life saw such a foot." 

" Perhaps not," replied Hugh with perfect 
good humour, — " But my own poor foot must 
live for all that. It is a very useful foot to 

me ;" — and he held it up. " And to me," 

said Norman, laughing; — and just now I must 
employ it." 

The Piper changed colour, — " I cannot go," 
said he earnestly. — " To Dunalbin, — it is im- 
possible." " Nay, dear Hugh, I will do no 

violence to your feelings, — I shall go myself." 

" That must not be," cried Hugh, while a 
solitary tear fell on his cheek, — " It is my 
lady's wish. Ill would it become me to say 
nay to the blood of Macalbin. Yet I hoped 
He would in mercy have taken me to Him- 
self long and long ere I could see a stranger's 



236 CLAN-ALBIN, 

smoke rise from the walls of Dunalbin." — 
Norman, greatly distressed by the Piper's 
sorrow, persisted in going himself ; but Hugh 
was now resolute. His feelings, his wishes, 
all were annihilated by the command of Lady 
Augusta, for Hugh, in common with all his 
clan, felt that — 

" Born for her use, he lived but to obey her." 

He waited to receive the orders of his lady, 
making those generous efforts to suppress his 
feelings, which, with their existence, concurred 
to do him honour. 

By the applications of Moome, and the 
soothing attentions of the Lady and Flora, the 
young stranger was soon relieved from the 
anguish of the sprain. She wrote to inform 
her family of the cause of her absence, and 
the Lady also sent a polite note, expressing 
her satisfaction at being honoured with the 
company of Mrs. Montague (for so was the 
stranger called) and inviting her friends to 
Eleenalin. With these notes, addressed to 
" Miles Montague, Esq." Hugh departed for 
the castle. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 237 



CHAP. XVI. 



He took me up a tender little flower, 
Just sprouted on a bank, which the next frost 
Had nipped ; and with a careful loving hand 
Transplanted me into his own fair garden, 
Where the sun always shines." 

Otway. 



1 he Piper at his return was met on the 
beach by Norman, anxious, yet reluctant to 
interrogate him on all he had seen and heard ; 
for now every thing connected with the castle 
interested his curiosity. 

" I hope I did not linger," said Hugh 
mournfully, while he fastened his boat to the 
stump of a willow that hung over the lake, — 
" You have been very expeditious. I hope 
the friends of the young lady are not greatly 
alarmed. I expected some. of them to return 

with you." " He is afraid of the water, but 

I am to go for him to-morrow." 

" Who?" " The carle that lives in Mac- 



238 CXAN-ALBJN, 

albin's castle ; — I cannot recollect your low 
country names," replied Hugh peevishly. 

" Mr. Montague perhaps." "Very like." 

" You have seen him then ?" " I have 

seen him in Macalbin's hall, whom, had I met 
on a moor, I would have thought fitter for 
Macalbin's kitchen. Your low country people 
do well to tell us what they are, for to look 
at some of them, one would as soon suspect 
myself for a gentleman." — Norman smiled, 
and Moome now joined them. — " I hope I did 
not linger r" — repeated Hugh earnestly. 

" That you did not ; — little reason you had, 
— though I know your way, — still talking with 
every one you meet, — I knew no grass would 
grow at your heels that road." — The presence 
of Norman restrained her numerous queries, 
for she judged of his feelings by her own, and 
feared to touch on a topic so delicate as Dun- 
albin possessed by the stranger. 

As they approached the cottage, Hugh, 
with somewhat of his usual archness, ques- 
tioned Moome about the " beautiful foot," 
while his sly glance pointed the inquiry to 
Norman. 

" Mary yes ! and beautiful it is," cried 
Moome, — " the little tripping foot of a fairy. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 23*> 

And such a darling creature ; I never thought 
any thing' so like a countrywoman could come 
from the Lowlands ; and if she be ordained 
for hwi, how will he get past her 1" 

u Sister of my mother, you too bewitched by 
the stranger V 9 said the Piper in Gaelic, and in 
a voice of reproach : " No, the stem is from 
another hill that will give a scion to Clan-Al- 
BIN !" Hugh seldom assumed so high a tone; 
and smiling and shaking his head, he added, 
" She is a hawk of a bad nest !" Whether 
Norman had more faith in Unah's predictions, 
or whether they best agreed with his own fan- 
cy, cannot be determined ; but certain it is that 
he squired her home, listening implicitly to her 
pious exhortations against H reflecting on what 
was ordained for us by Him who best knew the 
wants of his children" 

The young stranger was by this time almost 
domesticated in Eleenalin." " I know you 
must all consider me a fool," said she ; " but I 
am content, even at this expense, to gain an 
introduction to Eleenalin. You cannot, in com- 
mon justice, Lady, deny me an opportunity of 
redeeming my character, and proving, if pos- 
sible, that I am not quite a fool. You cannot, 
I hope, guess how dearly she may love a little 
bird, who is left with no other living thing to 

VOL. I. 



240 CLAN-ALBIN, 

love ;" — and * the eyes of a thousand mean- 
ings,' as Moome long afterwards called them, 
glistened with tears. 

The Lady, with frank politeness, acknow- 
ledged the obliging request of her insinuating 
guest. It was long since she had seen any 
thing resembling the elegant young creature 
who now solicited her friendship. This ingra- 
tiating stranger gave back the brightest days 
of her life. Though she appeared to have 
the highest grace of polished society, she also 
retained something of the arch simplicit}^ of 
an original character. The buoyant spirits, 
and warm affections of youth, were continu- 
ally bursting through the restraints imposed 
by dawning womanhood ; and the delicacy 
which guided this struggle, gave to her man- 
ners a fascination alike unconscious and un- 
designed. With the Lady and Fiora she al- 
ready seemed anxious to gain all the caressing 
privileges of domestic intimacy $ but as soon 
as Norman joined the party, her manners in- 
voluntarily rose to the winning reserve of culti- 
vated woman ; and no one could have guessed 
that she had, within the last four years, either 
sung to a bird, or frolicked with a kitten. 

Norman joined the female party at sup- 
per. He paid his congratulations to the fair 



A NATIONAL TALE. 241 

stranger in a hurried manner, and had not 
trusted her eyes with gazing on her who filled 
all his thoughts, when he heard the Lady 
address " Mrs. Montague I" Involuntarily 
he started, his heart beat rapidly, and he 
turned his keen eye on the young stranger, 
whose heightened colour reproved his earnest 
gaze. 

" A wife !" thought Norman, — " perhaps 
of the person Hugh described, — who would 
not venture to Eleenalin. O, had I such a 
claim on any one, how happy, how blest, to 
venture life itself, — " But he checked the 
flow of his feelings, and excused their warmth, 
by reflecting — " That she was so very, very 
young ; so very lovely — and to be a wife ! — 
it was so strange 1" 

The moment that the ladies retired, he 
hastened to the Piper, with an increased opi- 
nion of his discernment of character ; and 
more disposed, than was consistent with his 
usual candour, to hear the inhabitant of Dun- 
albin represented as vulgar, awkward, and 
unlike a gentleman. Hugh gave a very lively 
description of the stranger, which, if con- 
sistent with truth, did no great honour to the 
taste and judgment of his young and lovely 

VOL. I. Y 



242 G'LAN-ALBIN, 

wife. " Can she be united to such a per- 
son/* cried Norman. 

" United, — God bless you darling," cried 
Moome, — " The poor child is a wife, and 
what is more, a widow." 

" A widow !" exclaimed Norman, while his 
eyes sparkled, and he put fifty questions in a 
breath. 

" A widow !" re-echoed the Piper, laugh- 
ing at his warmth, — "The small foot forever!" 
Norman also laughed at his vivacity and pene- 
tration - y while Moome replied, " A small 

foot it is, sure enough ; and I hope soon to see 
it following your own pipe ; — I must say I 
never saw a finer head of dark hair on a 
woman." 

" I have seen a finer, and so have you too," 
said Hugh reproachfully.— Moome, her face 
colouring with insulted affection, indignantly 

answered, " Sure Hugh Piper you will not 

say, or think, I ever evened a stranger to the 
daughters of Macalbin r" 

" Mary no ! God forbid ; — I am sure you 
would not," said Hugh, almost weeping ; — 
and Norman, who foresaw a very sentimental 
scene, left the hut, and retired to his attic 
chamber, treading very softly lest he should 
disturb the repose of his lovely neighbour. 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 243 

The various events of the day had chased 
sleep from his pillow, and at an early hour 
lie arose, determined to find the fugitive bird. 
It had returned to its splendid prison in search 
of food, unable to preserve the freedom it 
prized. After tracing every scene of the past 
evening, seating himself in the compartment 
of the rock where he had seen the lovely stran- 
ger, whistling over the strathspey she had 
sung, and leaping from the cliff from which 
she had fallen, to learn the shock she had sus- 
tained, he was taking down the captive to 
proceed to Eleenalin, when looking up, he 
saw the shaggy face of the Piper, like that of 
a mountain goat, peering over a precipice. 

" The leap is nothing to you," cried Hugh 
laughing, while Norman blushed like a girl. 
— " But say, shall I get a hammer, and break 
these cruel stones all to pieces for hurting the 
pretty little foot ?" 

Norman sprang up to join him, affecting to 
laugh ; and, to conceal his confusion, he began 
to devour the bilberries Hugh had been gather- 
ing to present to the stranger ; for he had now 
seen her, and all the still small courtesies of 
his heart were called forth. What had been 
withheld from her beauty, was awarded to 
her sweetness and winning condescension. 



'244 CLAN-ALBIN, 

When they reached the island Flora was 
busied in preparing breakfast, and the Lady, 
with her guest, sat in the porch, enjoying the 
beauties of a lovely morning. At the sight of 
her bird she started up, and uttering an ex- 
clamation of joyful surprise, embraced its 
cage, while she raised her eyes in gratitude 
to the face of Norman. What of toil and 
danger would not such a look have repaid \ 

■* You perceive I am not yet cured of my 
foolish partiality," said she, turning to the 
Lady, — " But this little bird was all I had 
to love. It sung to me, it played with me, it 
cheered my solitude, and I believed it loved 
me more than freedom. — Ah, you little cheat; 
— but I forgive you, since you have led me to 
Eleenalin." 

Hugh now presented his basket of wild 

fruit, and on withdrawing to Moome's hut, 

acknowledged, that next to the ladies of the 

family, the stranger was the loveliest creature 

he had ever beheld. 

When breakfast was over, Norman, who 
could form no excuse for remaining at home 
contrary to his usual practice, took his fowl- 
ing piece, and returned to Kenanowen, while 
Hugh proceeded up the lake with the skiff to 
meet the expected visitor of Mrs. Montague. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 215 

During this absence, that young lady, anxious 
to invite reciprocal confidence, began to relate 
the history of the present inhabitants of Dun- 
albin. 

" I am egotist enough to begin with my- 
self," said she. — " Though I am not very old, 
the lines of my fortune have been striking. I 
have seen but eighteen summers, and already 
have I outlived every friend. 

" My earliest recollection is the death of 
my mother. My father was the cadet of an 
ancient, but much impoverished family in the 
north-west of Ireland. My mother was of the 
same country. An early, and what is called 
an imprudent marriage, while it secured their 
domestic happiness, forbade all hopes of ad- 
vancing fortune. Alas, it was not merely so; 
poverty stared them in the face, and my 
father was compelled to accept of a small ap- 
pointment in India. The bitterest pang which 
poverty can inflict, — separation from the 
cherished object of all his affections, was the 
fate of my father. He left my mother and 
her infant dependent on the bounty of her 
own family. 

" Fortune, wearied of her cruelty, at length 
smiled on hia efforts. A permanent establish- 
Y 2 



246 CLAN-AXBIN, 

ment in Bengal, though it held out no hopes 
to avarice, seemed enough for domestic com- 
fort, and even elegance ; and my mother de- 
parted for India. She was advised to leave 
me in England for education ; but the edu- 
cation which estranges a child from the ma- 
ternal bosom seemed to her little desirable, 
and I was the happy companion of her voyage. 
High in hope, rejoicing in anticipated felicity, 
did my mother leave England : — my father 
had fallen a victim to the fatal fever of the 
country, many weeks before the arrival of the 
fleet. The frantic shriek of my distracted 
mother, when abruptly informed of this melan- 
choly event, still rings in my ears. Her 
death was the speedy consequence of my 
luckless father's. Thus was I left an orphan, 
in a strange land, at an age unconscious of 
an orphan's loss. 

" The excellent man, whose name it is my 
pride to bear, was the friend of my father, 
and to my dying mother he performed a bro- 
ther's duty, with a brother's affection. He 
soothed her last moments with a promise of 
protection to her child. How zealously ! how 
fully has he fulfilled that promise ! 

" Mr. Montague had been sent out to India 



A NATIONAL TALE. 247 

a cadet at the age of fifteen. He had never 
tasted those pure pleasures which flow from 
the sweet charities, and endearing intercourse 
of domestic life, but his heart was exquisitely 
susceptible of their enjoyment. The orphan 
child of his friend first awoke the fine sym- 
pathies of that generous heart, and on my 
happy, and thrice happy childhood, was 
lavished all the tenderness which till then had 
languished without an object. Had my mother 
lived, doubtless he would have felt less warmth 
of affection for his protegee ; — as it was, I was 
all his own ; the pledge of friendship which 
death had sanctified. No one inquired about 
me, no one cared for me, and the indifference 
he resented, brought me closer to his heart. 
When urged by his friends to marry and settle 
in England, — ' I will not have lived in vain,' 
he would say, * if I train this child to virtue, 
and secure for her a portion of that fleeting 
happiness which is all that can be found in 
this feverish existence. No, my Monimia, I 
will never give thee a step-mother, and I 
know that the youth I have cherished will 
never desert my grey hairs. Thou hast lived 
in my bosom, and I will die in thine !' — 
Such sentiments attached Mrs. Montague still 



248 CLAN-ALBIN, 

more closely to the charge he had undertaken. 
The improvement of my talents, the cultiva- 
tion of my mind, and the forming of my heart 
to those noble virtues of which his life was a 
bright example, was at once the business and 
the consolation of his life. 

" It is three years since declining health, 
concurring with a wish for the completion of 
my education, and final establishment in 
England, induced Mr. Montague to return to 
his native country i A half brother, the gentle- 
man who now inhabits Dunalbin, was the only 
friend that remained to welcome him to Eng- 
land, after an absence of thirty years. We 
settled in Bath, and my protector, anxious to 
promote my future respectability and happi- 
ness, cultivated the friendship of my mother's 
family. It is noble ; — proud too, — that is, it 
has all the pride of aristocracy ; but the dia- 
monds, and shawls, and gold muslins, of Mr. 
Montague were very well received, and that 
kindness was vouchsafed to his spoiled girl, 
and reputed heiress, which had been vainly 
solicited by her less fortunate mother. My 
education was completed, and I was brought 
out the heiress of a Nabob ; and during a 
winter in London, and a summer at Bath, 






A NATIONAL TALE. 249 

Brighton, and Tunbridge, run the gauntelope 
of fashion, and was caressed, and admired, 
and flattered, and intoxicated ; and followed 
by lovers in abundance. Let me not conceal 
my mortification, my lovers certainly did drop 
off on being informed that Mr. Montague's 
fortune was settled on his brother, and that a 
moderate provision was all I might expect. — 
Peace to all my fashionable riends! early did 
they teach me wisdom. The illness of Mr. 
Montague put a stop to the career of dissipa- 
tion, or Heaven knows where it might have 
terminated. 1 was hovering round the crater 
of the volcano, impelled forward by that 
feverish restlessness, — that avidity of strong 
sensation, — that unconquerable desire of feel- 
ing one's self alive, at whatever expense of 
mental agony, which makes drunkards, and 
gamblers, and heroes ; — politicians, boxers, 
charioteers, heroic lovers, women of intrigue, 
and men of ambition. My good genius 
snatched me back. The sober and regulated 
tenor of my early life was still dear and fami- 
liar, and I had the most interesting of all 
occupations in watching the declining health 
of the best friend that ever an orphan was 
blessed with. 



250 CLAN-AUBJN, 

u What were my feelings to learn that this 
dear friend was hurrying to the grave, the 
silent victim of a hopeless, and nobly sup- 
pressed attachment to the creature of his 
bounty ! — I flew to him, I threw myself weep- 
ing into his arms. — l My father, my friend, 
let me be wholly, and only yours. Let the 
child of your love be the wife of your bosom.* 
I hid my glowing face on his shoulder ; for a 
moment he pressed me to his heart in silence, 
and then fainted away. When he recovered 
I was summoned to his bedside. I cannot 
even yet develop the nature of my feelings on 
that momentous occasion. Young as I was, 
I had been accustomed to receive the homage 
of my fashionable admirers with sufficient 
ease and indifference, as the tribute due to 
my sex ; but I was now ashamed of my power ; 
mortified to find that generous and lofty mind 
I had ever regarded with awe and esteem, 
dependent for its happiness on a young and 
giddy girl. It was my most anxious wish that 
I might become worthy of the distinguished 
preference I had unwittingly inspired. 

" I found my dear friend greatly altered : 
the hand of death was upon him. But he was 
now quite calm, and with that gentle superi- 



A NATIONAL TALB. 251 

ority which ever marked his manners, he led 
to the subject that throbbed at my heart, and 

held me in indescribable confusion. ' Mo- 

nimia, a cruel and mistaken kindness has 
revealed the secret I wished to carry to the 
grave. Let us forget it : — your tender caresses, 
your innocent endearments, were become fatal 
to my peace. It was no longer the orphan 
child of my friend who imprinted on my cheek 
the kiss of filial affection. Monimia, I trem- 
bled at this discovery, — the happiness of one 
or both seemed at stake. I sent you from me, 
and saw you rush on the world, ardent, lovely, 
attractive, full of all the generous credulities 
of youth. My anxious heart followed you 
with the fond solicitude of a mother, watch- 
ing over the first faltering steps of her infant, 
— delighting in its dawning strength, but 
trembling for its inexperience. Thus as a 
parent did I feel, — but O my Monimia! — yet 
let me not shock your gentle nature with any 
thing so incongruous ; — that season is happily 
past, and it is my child, my darling Monimia, 
I have summoned to the death-bed of her 
parent and friend. 

" You, Lad}', may conceive how much I 
was grieved and shocked by this solemn warn- 



252 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ing of death. He who had never lived but 
for the happiness of those he loved, forgot 
himself in soothing my griefs, — inspiring me 
with fortitude, and giving me good counsel 
for the conduct of my future life. Sacred, 
memorable hours ! — Ah Lady, there are sor- 
rows one would not exchange for all of joy 
the heart can ever feel. When he felt his 
dissolution approaching, he requested that 
the ceremony of marriage should unite us by 
a new tie, desirous, I believe, to sooth my 
feelings, and spare me the pang of bitter re- 
trospection. I began to flatter myself with 
better hopes, — for all that virtue, honour, 
and tenderness could inspire, — all that gra- 
titude and affection could feel, did I feel for 
him. From a flattering dream of future hap- 
piness I was soon awakened, for the same day 
saw me a wife and a widow ! — My father, my 
friend, my guide, my husband, expired in my 
arms. His last glance was fixed on me, with 
his latest breath he blesed me !" 

Here the youthful w idow, overcome by the 
violence of her feelings, leaned her head on 
the shoulder of Flora, and wept bitterly. 
Her auditors, scarcely less affected, disco- 
vered that silent, and unobtrusive sympathy, so 



A NATIONAL TALE. 258 

grateful to a delicate mind. After a long 
pause she proceeded with her narrative. 

" I make no apology, Lady Augusta, for 
troubling you with the little tale of my sor- 
rows. I have long known and revered your 
virtues ; I am very desirous to gain your 
esteem, and to that I have no title, save the 
regard and the name of that excellent man, 
who was worthy of being known even to you. 

" Lady Gordon, the aunt of the gentleman 
to whom this estate belongs, was living in 
Bath at the time of Mr. Montague's death. 
She is respectable for her years, and con- 
dition in life ; and, at this interesting crisis, 
she showed me much attentive kindness. I 
was the more grateful for this kindness, as 
with the dazzle of my fancied prosperity, I 
lost the countenance of my noble relatives. 
He who did all for me in wisdom and in love, 
had no wish to make me a bait to the ava- 
ricious or designing. Instead of a wealthy 
heiress, I was found to be a slenderly pro- 
vided widow. At first my relations railed at 
what they were pleased to term his injustice, 
but ended by recommending retirement, and 
entire devotion to my brother-in-law, to whose 
protection I was left, and who was declared 

VOL. I. Z 



254 CLAN-ALBIN, 

the heir of Mr. Montague's great wealth. 
Their indifference gave me little concern, — a 
solitude where I might weep at freedom, was 
all I longed for, and through the boundless 
indulgence of my brother-in-law, and the 
friendly offices of Lady Gordon, I became 
the tenant of her nephew. 

" Mr. Miles Montague is the half brother 
of my dear departed friend, — older, and in 
every respect his opposite ; but of him you 
may judge when you shall know him. I was 
earnestly recommended to his care in a 
solemn dying hour ; and, amidst all his 
oddities, I am certain he feels for me the 
truest regard. Awkward, and even trou- 
blesome in its expression perhaps, but two 
sincere to be trifled with." 

As Mrs. Montague uttered these words, 
Hugh entered to announce the stranger, who 
was approaching the cottage of Lady Au- 
gusta, attended by Norman. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2.55 



CHAP. XVII. 



A citizen of sober fame, 



A plain good man, and Balaam was his name j 

Religious, punctual, frugal, and so forth, 

His word would pass for more than he was worth. 

One solid dish his week day meals affords, 

An added pudding solemnized the Lord's, 

Constant at church and 'change, his gains were sure ; 

His givings rare, save farthings to the poor." 

Popj*. 

M.R. Montague was to the inhabitants of 
Eleenalin an individual of a new class : — low 
bred, and uneducated, enriched by a life of 
unremitting attention to the petty details of a 
mechanical employment, proud of his wealth, 
but still more vain of the minute economy, 
and the habitual industry by which it had been 
acquired. In figure he was short, sleek, 
" convex and rosy ;" in mind, ignorant, pre- 
judiced, and vulgar; yet distinguished by 
great shrewdness, in matters with which he was 
conversant, and fortunately destitute of that 



'256 CLAN- ALB IN, 

little-minded domineering arrogance which is 
too often the disgusting characteristic of the 
low-horn rich. He was also (luckily for him- 
self) devoid of that sensibility which often 
renders those of his rank jealous and envious 
of the fine accomplishments, and legitimate 
and recognized superiority which they feel, 
but can never hope to acquire. The mistaken, 
but happy consciousness,that wealth had placed 
him on a level with the polite society to which 
accident had raised him, produced a certain 
impertinent familiarity, and ease of manner, 
a fidgetting insignificant activity, an air of 
smirking good humour, and self-complacency, 
as amusing at a first interview, as troublesome 
and provoking on further intimacy. All his 
affections, that were not purely selfish, were 
centered in the lovely young creature con- 
fided to his care. He was zealous for her 
interests, so far as he understood them ; vain 
of her beauty; and had even a vague feeling 
of exultation in those accomplishments he 
only valued as they were prized by society. 

" So, so, Monimia," said the modern inha- 
bitant of Dunalbin, as he entered, nodding to 
his fair relative, — " I always told you what 
would happen you in them woods ; — lost the 
cage too, I warrant ?" 



A NATIONAL TALE. 257 

" Indeed I have both the cage and the bird, 
and what is more, the pleasure to introduce 
you to Lady Augusta Macalbin, and Miss 
Buchanan." 

Mr. Montague bowed round. — " Servant, 
ladies, servant. I hope we shall be better 
acquainted ; or, if not, it shall not be my 
blame. I have, to be sure, little time for 
visiting and revisiting, yet no man is happier 
to see his neighbours now and then in a 
friendly way than your humble servant. I 
lived thirty years in one house, and in one 
street Ma'am, and never had a word with a 
neighbour but once, which was brought about 
thus, " 

" Well, well, of that hereafter," cried Mo- 
nimia, — " just now you shall thank these 
ladies for their politeness to me." 

" Surely Monimia ; it is not more my duty 
than my inclination to thank the ladies, till I 
can make them amends for their kindness ; so 
I hope the ladies, and the young man also, will 
give us their good company to a poor dinner 
at Dunalbin some of these days : till then, we 
must remain their debtors ;" — and he made a 
kind of general bow. 

The Piper at this moment entered with 
z 2 



258 CLAN-ALBIN, 

wine and cake, which he served round ; but 
Mr. Montague declined tasting it, alleging, 
that — " tasting any thing between meals 
put him out of his way, and disordered his 
stomach. — Not," added he, " that I doubt of 
the cake being very good cake ; — so I hope 
you will take no offence upon that score. To 
be sure it is natural for every man to prefer 
his own country, — but I assure you ladies I 
have eat very good cake in Scotland, let 
people say what they will. As to buttering 
toast, every nation has no doubt its own 
fashion ; perhaps butter may be plentier with 
us than you. — Well, — all is fair, I have no 
notion of illiberality ;" — and after many other 
speeches equally delicate and polite, he re- 
tired with Hugh to get his feet dried, as the 
streams and swamps of Kenanowen had made 
him very uncomfortable. In the hut of Moome, 
who received him with all the national courtesy, 
Mr. Montague was lost in new astonishment ; 
and examined every thing he saw with stupid 
curiosity, and ludicrous wonder. In the 
strange manners of the Highlanders this "citi- 
zen pin-maker," found as much to admire 
and wonder at, as if the creature of another 
sphere, some convulsion of nature had thrown 
him on this globe. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 259 

On returning to the cottage he was full of 
" good lacks," and " ods hearts," and " how 
was it possible to live in such a droll, out-of- 
the-way, sort of a manner r" 

" I hope," said Lady Augusta, " you will 
become reconciled to our manner of life wher* 
you know us better." 

" Reconciled Ma'am ! I hope you will not 
take it amiss, but really after a man has lived 
fifty years in London, with all his little com- 
forts about him, to be brought all at once, 
plump, I may say, to this wild country, with- 
out markets, or roads, or bridges, or neigh- 
bours ; and put altogether out of his own way ; 
— let me tell you it is neither easy nor agree- 
able. 

Lady Augusta, for the first time in her life, 
was at a loss how to support conversation. 
Every observation she hazarded, by way of 
experiment, gave rise to details of personal 
adventures, feelings, and regrets, so unex- 
pectedly introduced, and so strangely ex- 
pressed ; — every thing appeared to her guest 
in a light so new and un looked for, that de- 
spairing of being understood, and anxious to 
observe the common civilities of life, she 
began to feel that delicate embarrassment into 



260 CXAN-ALBIN, 

which the easy, coarse confidence of vulgar 
people often throws the refined and polished. 

" Indeed it can hardly be expected, that 
with habits formed by a long residence in 
crowded and wealthy society, any one can be 
easily reconciled to the rough, unaccommo- 
dated life, and dreary landscape of this coun- 
try," said Lady Augusta, — " I am not so 
much surprised at your dissatisfaction, as that 
it should have been your choice to live in the 
Highlands of Scotland." 

" Choice, Ma'am ! by no manner of means. 
This here young lady Ma'am, is my late bro- 
ther's, the Nabob's widow ; — perhaps you 
might think her my daughter, for I have been 
told she is very like me." — Norman and Flora 
could scarce retain their laughter, while 
Monimia putting up her pretty lip exclaimed, 
— u Flattering resemblance I" 

" However, her own father could not love 
her more than I do : and if she behave prettily 
to me," added he, winking to the Lady, " it 
is hard to say if a real father would do more 
for her. So Ma'am, if I came to this country 
with her, it might perhaps be all along from 
the desire to oblige her, and be agreeable, 
and no wish of mine. 1 am a free-born 



A NATIONAL TALE. 261 

Englishman Ma'am, a bachelor — at Miss's ser- 
vice ; and he nodded to Flora — not that I 
have any particular objection to matrimony; 
but in the busy time of my life I had little 
leisure to think of the ladies, and now being 
so long used to a single state, it is hard to say 

Miss how I might take with marriage." 

" You see Miss Buchanan you have nothing to 
expect," whispered Monimia. 

" I clear my own way Ma'am ; pay every 
man twenty shillings in the pound, give the 
poor their rates, and the king his taxes, keep 
a good broad-cloth coat on my back, and a 
plain roast joint and pudding on my table 
every day in the week, — and am beholden to 
no man. So Ma'am I can keep the middle of 
the highway, were the king himself passing ; 
unless it were from civility I might step aside, 
if I chose to be agreeable. Now this is what 
I call being an independent man." 

Lady Augusta was in hopes that this 
declaration of rights would have ended the 
visit, but Mr. Montague, from some obser- 
vation made by Monimia on the romantic 
country she beheld, with all the enthusiasm 
of a native Highlander, was led to draw a long 
parallel between the comforts of a London 



262 CXAN-ALBJN, 

residence, and the savage solitude of his new 
abode. This was a subject of frequent debate 
between himself and his ward ; and he seemed 
happy to have an opportunity of convicting 
her of folly, and wilfulness, in her unaccoun- 
table preference. 

" I'll refer it to yourself Ma'am.' — In Lon- 
don, what ever I wanted, — go to market : — be 
it beef, be it mutton, — a pound or a stone ; 
— all is one for that, — f Hear is my money.' — 
* There is your meat :' — no more about it ; — 
and so on of every article needed in house- 
keeping. Bat here, — if I want a beef-steak, 
why I must kill a bullock, if a mutton chop, a 
whole sheep ; and that, common sense must 
tell you Ma'am, is both troublesome and very 
expensive. Then again, in London, since I 
retired from the pin line, if I wanted to fetch 
a walk to divert me, and get me an appetite for 
dinner, I had a clean dry pavement below my 
foot, plenty of people around me, business 
going briskly on in every corner ; — I could 
take a peep at 'Change, — see and hear what 
was doing in the world, and return dry and 
comfortable to a little snug, well-dressed din- 
ner, piping hot, at my own hour ; — but here, 
I cannot take a step for heath, and stubs, and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 263 

rocks, and lakes : — dark hills closing round 
me, wild cows frightening me out of my sen- 
ses, getting my stockings soiled, and my shoes 
wet quite through, among mosses and moors ; 
and not a soul to be seen save some droll look- 
ing man with a short petticoat, who cannot 
speak a word of my mother's tongue, and may, 
for aught I know, be a Frenchman in dis- 
guise. — I have always been a regular church 
man Ma'am, of a morning ; for it has always 
been a remark of mine, that no man throve in 
business who did not keep church ; — but here, 
should I go, it will take me the whole day, 
throw me behind my dinner hour, and 
put me quite out of my own way. Then 
Ma'am, you see I was always a person of a 
very social disposition, when business per- 
mitted ; but instead of meeting my friends of 
an evening, smoking a pipe, and drinking a 
pot of Calvert's, (which I always chose for 
my own drinking) talking over the news ; — 
cheerfully paying my score, and going home 
as the watch went ten, — which I call a good 
hour for a tradesman, — I must ask a party to 
dinner, and to stay over the night, a practice, 
to say the best, which I never was used to." 
" That was all very agreeable, certainly," 



264 CXAN-AUBIN, 

said the Lady smiling, — " and I shall not 
attempt to balance advantages." 

Mr. Montague now proposed to attend his 
sister to Dunalbin, as his dinner hour drew 
near, and she reluctantly arose. Norman 
anxiously examined the countenance of Lady 
Augusta. It seemed favourable to his wishes. 

" Indeed we cannot consent to Mrs. Mon- 
tague's departure till she is discharged by her 
physician," said she ; and Monimia sat down 

with evident satisfaction. " Here," added 

she, " I am absolute : — no one can leave my 
narrow kingdom without permission, for I can 
at any time lay an embargo on the shipping. 
May I venture to hope that Mr. Montague will 
also remain for this afternoon, and share our 
family dinner ?" 

" Who me, Ma'am ? — I assure you, you are 
vastly polite ; and I hope you won't fancy me 
ill mannered or saucy if I don't stay : — for 
you see Ma'am, unless I had had a previous 
notice, my own dinner will be prepared, and 
I have no notion of meat being wasted after 
it is dressed." 

" You are quite right," cried Monimia im- 
patiently, — " and now, dear brother, be going, 
for you are late enough, and I shall make 
your excuses to Lady Augusta." 



A NATIONAL TALE. 26") 

" Well, Ma'am, I hope you will not be of- 
fended when Monimia has made my excuses. 
It is an easy matter for her to stay, for I told 
her servant to dress no dinner for her till she 
came home. — You see, Ma'am, we don't live 
together at all. She has her own table, and 
servants, and apartments : — her own establish- 
ment ; — though I must think keeping up two 
families under one roof, is extravagance to a 
degree. — Now, Ma'am, if Mrs. Montague were 
as agreeable as I am, one set of servants, and 
one table, " 

" Pray now brother, a truce with our internal 
regulation," interrupted Monimia, — " It can- 
not be very interesting to Lady Augusta ; and 
I am certain it is almost time for you to pay 
your respects to the c plain roast joint.'" 

There was occasionally something in the 
eye of Monimia, that Mr. Montague seemed 
eager to observe and obey. The least indica- 
tion of impatience on her part, instantly 
bridled his eloquence ; and he arose to return 
home again, thanking Lady Augusta for her 
kindness to his sister, and expressing his wish 
for " good neighbourhood," and " better 
acquaintance." 

The chance visit of Mrs. Montague was 
vol. I. a a 



266 CLAN-ALBIN, 

lengthened out to a week, and by that time 
all the inhabitants of Eleenalin considered 
her as a friend of very ancient date. Norman 
had in these few days lived more than in as 
many years of his former existence. There 
was in the manners of Monimia a versatile 
grace, a nameless fascination, which gave to 
the little insulated society a charm, and a zest, 
it had never known till now. Happy were 
the domestic evenings of Lady Augusta, when 
surrounded by her youthful friends. With 
the serene delight of a superior nature, she 
saw their social hours pass gaily away, in that 
endearing, and unrestrained intimacy, in 
which the unpractised heart unfolds its kind- 
est feelings, — in that innocent and fearless 
hilarity, which, shrinking from the frown of 
the world's wisdom, expands only in the genial 
clime of the domestic fire-side. 

" I am too happy to dance to-night," would 
Monimia say, while Hugh walked before the 
cottage, playing his evening service to his 
Lady. 

Monimia had stipulated that Flora should 
return with her to Dunalbin, and leave had 
been obtained from Buchanan, who was at 
this time so much occupied in some literary 



A NATIONAL TALE. 267 

project, that even the society of his daughter 
was become troublesome. 

Attended by Norman, and accompanied by 
Flora, Mrs. Montague returned to Dunalbin. 
Her frankness, gaiety, and warmth of affec- 
tion, had already captivated the hearts of her 
venerable physician and nurse ; also of Hugh, 
who forgetting her country and birth, had ad- 
mitted her within the pale of clannish partial- 
ity. Many friendly adieus were repeated at 
the parting of Monimia and Moome, in indif- 
ferent English, and worse Gaelic, for each 
politely exchanged the language of her coun- 
try- 

" The darling creature !" cried Moome, as 

she returned from the beach with the Piper, 
— " Did you ever now Hugh see any low- 
country lady so like a Highland lady ? — But 
it is herself God has blessed with a warm 
Highland heart. There would she listen to 
my songs, and try to sing our luenigs herself, 
— and to spin with my distaff, — and keep me 
always telling her the tales of the clan, — 
though I am no great hand at translations, — i 
and weep over them she would, as if our clan 
had been her own blood." 

Happy in conscious innocence, the posses- 



268 CLAN-ALBIN, 

sionof an easy fortune, the affection of friends, 
the elastic spirits of juvenile existence, and 
that felicitous fancy which ever views the fu- 
ture in the fairest colours, and gives poignancy 
to every passing feeling of delight, Monimia 
charmed her young companions with her lively 
sallies ; and with all the ardour of Highland 
hospitality, gave them welcome to Dunalbin. 

From Montague their reception was also 
very cordial. He shook the hand of Norman, 

and chucked Flora under the chin. " Glad 

to see you Miss : — how dost think would fancy 
an old bachelor like me, — eh ? — If Monimia 
don't please me, 'tis hard to say what foolish 
thing I may do. 

Flora was covered with blushes at this 
strange address, while Montague, laughing 
heartily at her confusion, begged her not to 
mind him, as he " was only in jest, and had 
no serious thought of marriage." 

" Let me also beg that you will not mind 
him," said Monimia. — " And now, brother, 
let us see how handsomely you will do the 
honours of the castle ;" — and she gave him 
the hand of Flora, while extending her 
own to Norman, she flew up the grand stair- 
case. " My good brother has left the pin- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 269 

line so recently, that he is not yet a man of 
distinguished gallantry," cried Monimia, as she 
looked back in her airy flight, — " But I have 
great hopes that he will improve : the electric 
glance of that blue eye might convey a Pro- 
methean spark to the dullest clay. I have 
been drilling him for some weeks past, prer 
vious tu his debut at the u Northern Meet- 
ing," at which I expect he will be able to 
dance a decent minuet with old Lady Gordon, 
and a lively reel with her humble companion 
Miss Ursula Sinclair, spinster." 

# Indeed Monimia it don't become you to 
speak so slightingly of that good lady, con- 
sidering you are a mighty favourite of her's. 
You see Miss, when the shooting season com- 
mences, we expect a great many of our qua- 
lity friends ; — for all the gentlemen will come 
to the moors ; — and I have remarked that in 
that case the ladies are never far off ;"— and 
he accompanied this civil observation with a 
laugh, which was meant to increase its point. 
Flora, half ashamed, and half provoked, could 
make no reply ; and as Monimia knew that 
his natural vulgarity, and hardness of feeling, 
was an invulnerable shield from the playful 
attacks of witty malice, and the polished darts 
A a 2 



270 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of polite retort, she generally heard him as if 
she heard him not. 

Before dinner, Mr. Montague insisted on 
the strangers walking out to view his improve- 
ments ; and they were compelled to follow 
him. The improvements consisted chiefly of 
a poultry yard and piggery ; a slight painted 
paling and wicket, that formed a strange con- 
trast with the massive pile it meant to enclose. 
The ancient residence of a Highland chief 
needed neither walls nor gates, nor sweeping 
approaches. His invincible barriers were the 
affections, and tried courage of his devoted 
clan ; and bis hospitahle home stood as open 
and unguarded as his kindly heart. But this 
generous and happy confidence was perfectly 
inimical to all Mr. Montague's ideas of police, 
security, and snugness ; and the neat green 
paling, on the model " of a friend's at Hack- 
ney," was exhibited as a splendid trophy of 
tasteful improvement. 

" We expect some very fine compliments 
on our magnificence, said Monimia smiling, 
— " But my dear brother, I believe we must 
forgive our friends ; for they seem not only 
astonished, but struck dumb with admira- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 271 

" Aye, Monimia, no doubt we have done 
something for it. If I agree with Sir Archi- 
bald about a sheep-farm (for you see Miss I 
cannot live without employment) it will go 
hard if I don't get the building white-washed, 
and them stumps and weeds grubbed out, that 
now cover half the walls, and darken the case- 
ments." 

N White-wash Dunalbin!" exclaimed Nor- 
man. — u Root out the ivy and wall-flowers, 
— it would be sacrilege !" 

" Yes Sir," replied Mr. Montague, who 
fancied his astonishment arose from the mag- 
nificence of the design, — " it would no doubt 
be somewhat expensive, yet I grudge nothing 
on good lasting improvements. I had always 
a taste for neatness and comfort ; and truly, I 
would be quite ashamed if any of our quality 
friends surprised us before I had given it a 
decent, clean, snug look." 

" How I hate that Dutch word — snug, and 
every idea connected with it," cried Monimia, 
— M Yet a white-walled cottage, and its green 
paling, is a very pleasing object : — but a 
white-washed feudal castle ! — The tastes of 
my brother, like the opinions of many worthy 
persons, though in themselves just and ex- 



272 CXAN-ALBIN, 

cellent, become absurd and ridiculous, when 
applied indiscriminately to every variety of 
circumstance and character. But this plan 
of beautifying ; — have you calculated the cost 
brother ? — ' Begin nothing of which thou hast 
not well considered the end,' sayeth your 
favourite author." 

" O yes, Monimia," cried he, pulling ap 
old letter from his pocket, and writing on the 
back of it, — " If a thousand square yards 
take " 

" Pray don't include my turret ; — I have 
no intention of living in a pigeon-house." 

" A pigeon-house ! — there now, Monimia, 
you are obstinate to a degree ; ever opposing 
my schemes of improvement ; yet people will 
talk of your taste, and your elegance, forsooth. 

" Not in the white-washing line surely : 
there you stand unrivalled, and I am all de- 
ference. But allowing that this venerable 
ruin should stand the grubbing of the stumps, 
as you elegantly term them, I strongly sus- 
pect that the first hard rain would for ever 
efface that superb monument of English im- 
provement, — a white-washed castle." 

" Od's bob's, now Monimia, you are in the 
right. I must knuckle to you at last, — eh? — 



A NATIONAL TALE. 273 

Would you think Miss there was so much wis- 
dom in this little head ?" — and Norman felt 
more displeasure than the occasion justified, 
at seeing that cherub head shaken betwixt the 
unhallowed paws of the facetious pin-maker. 

Dinner was now announced, and Monimia 
conducted her young friends to the apart- 
ment she occupied in a remote wing of the 
castle. They commanded a view of Eleenalin 
and the further extremity of the lake ; and 
the prospect was only bounded by the lofty 
mountains which sheltered the glen. Another 
opening looked down on the picturesque defile 
which separated Glenalbin from the strata in 
which Flora resided. Every thing that could 
conduce to domestic comfort, and elegant 
accommodation, had been lavished by Mo- 
nimia, on her gloomy, but interesting resi- 
dence ; every tasteful modern decoration 
which could assimilate with its Gothic heavi- 
ness had been bestowed on her solitary home. 

" You see I am no claret-drinker Mr. Mac- 
albin," said Montague, when the ladies had 
withdrawn. — " But I beg you will not make a 
stranger of me. A bowl of punch, or a 
draught of good beer is what I have always 
been used to j and at my age, — not that I am 



274 CLAN-ALBJN, 

an old man either, — a man does not like to be 
put out of his own way. I don't know if you 
are a smoker, but since I retired I have been 
glad to smoke a pipe or two after dinner, just 
to pass the time as it were ; for I assure you 
Sir, I am often more tired of an evening now, 
than when I was packing goods from sunrise 
to sun- set." — Norman told him that he was no 
smoker, that he seldom drank wine, and never 
in any quantity ; and finally begged him to be 
quite at his ease. 

" Well now Mr. Macalbin that is what I call 
being agreeable ; ^s you shall either sit with 
me in my own parlour, for Monimia can't 
endure the smell of tobacco smoke in her 
apartments, which is very extraordinary, for 
I think it very pleasant, — or join the ladies, 
which will perhaps be more to your liking : 
for I have often remarked that young gentle- 
men, before they can well bear the charges of 
a wife, have the greatest hankering after the 
company of the ladies." 

Norman, who had often in the pauses of 
conversation on pin-heads, and points, and 
orders, and the club, listened to the heavenly 
voice which had first awoke his soul in the 
wilds of Kenanowen, symphonizing the chords 



A NATIONAL TALE. 275 

of a piano-forte, heard this observation with 
delight ; yet he coloured at its rudeness, while 
he complimented Mr. Montague on his saga- 
city, and begged permission to join the ladies, 
since the secret bias of young gentlemen was 
discovered. 

In the drawing-room he found Flora re- 
ceiving her first lesson in instrumental music ; 
for Monimia, who was a musical enthusiast, 
had entreated her to acquire as much musical 
skill as might enable her to accompany her 
own soft, full voice, in singing the wild melo- 
dies of her country. On the entrance of Nor- 
man, they arose to examine the most remark- 
able apartments of the castle, as he was very 
desirous to see the scene of some of Moome's 
most interesting narratives. In the dressing- 
room of Monimia hung the portrait of her 
deceased husband. 

" There is his resemblance who was to me 
more than a father," said she, in a voice 
that quivered with emotion. — " Read in his 
open countenance the worth of his liberal and 
manly soul. This likeness hangs constantly 
beside me. I am pleased to think that I live 
under the eye of my dear lost friend ; — that 
he is still my tutelary genius.'* 



276 CXAN-ALBIN, 

Norman gazed with veneration and awe on 
the image of departed goodness ; — and they 
turned to examine another painting. 

" This beautiful painting I rescued from 
the Vandal hands of my brother's house- 
maid," said Monimia, whom I found scouring 
it most notably with sand. It was found 
among other lumber of the castle, and I con- 
fess that in saving some of its antique orna- 
ments I have sometimes sacrificed taste to 
sentiment. Not in the present instance how- 
ever, for this painting is beautiful; and I 
cannot help thinking that I have some recol- 
lection of the faces ;— some shadowy idea, like 
that of a distant dream." 

" Can you not, through the veil of time 
and sorrow, discover in Lady Augusta the ori- 
ginal of this lovely huntress," said Norman. 
" I think I see her in every stage of existence. 
But I do not know the young hunter." He 
removed the painting from its place, and on 
the back, with some difficulty, made out the 
names of Lady Augusta, and Norman her 
twin brother, and that the painting had been 
done in France. 

" It is he whose name I bear," said Nor- 
man. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 277 

" It is you yourself," cried Monimia. Nor- 
man smiled and coloured. This idea, vague 
and illusive as it seemed, gave a throb of 
pleasure to his heart. What an inheritance 
would the blood, the name, and the sword of 
the impoverished Macalbin have been to him ! 

"I dare not so flatter myself," said he 
sadly, — " This was the favourite brother of 
our common mother. I know nothing of his 
story, but that he was in the service of the 
exiled English king ; and died very early in 
life. I know still less of the early life of the 
Lady : her story is doubtless most unfortunate. 
Moome has sometimes hinted to me that after 
her return to Dunalbin she was long liable to 
the most cruel depression of spirits. But 
from that state she recovered with a fortitude 
which nothing can shake, for it is founded on 
the Rock of ages. She now enjoys the 
perennial tranquillity of a being superior to 
human passions. Did not the sensibility she 
discovers to the griefs and frailties of others 
convince me that she is susceptible of human 
sympathies, I could almost fancy her soul 
animated by pure intelligence : but she unites 
the wisdom of age, with the generous affec- 

vol. I. B b 



278 CLAN-ALBIN, 

tions of youth ; her soul is an angel's, her 
heart is a woman's." 

The tears of Flora silently flowed as she 
gazed on the lovely image of the young, 
powerful, and happy Augusta ; nor was it 
without emotion that Monimia contemplated 
the animated features, vivid complexion, and 
elegance of form, that marked the mountain 
huntress. She was represented as leaning on 
a scathed oak, amid a lonely heath ; a bow 
slung across her shoulders, and her fine form 
vested in green. Norman Macalbin, the other 
figure in this interesting picture, appeared 
at that age which unites the strength and 
vigour of manhood, with the blooming graces 
of youth. The mountain dirk glittered at his 
side, his tartans waved on the wind, at his feet 
panted " the grey dogs." 

It was long before the young party could 
detach their minds from the train of senti- 
ment this painting excited ; but Montague at 
length broke the spell by summoning Moni- 
mia to the tea-table. Her spirits soon became 
more than usually animated, and Norman again 
saw the same enchanting creature who in the 
wood of-Kenanowen had sung with all the 
simplicity of innocence to a little bird. This 



A NATIONAL TALE. 279 

was the first time he had strongly felt the 
fugitive charm of female gracefulness, or the 
light, playful, nameless graces of female 
prattle ; when native talent is animated 
by fancy, and refined by education. Even 
the oddities of Montague became pleas- 
ing, when Monimia deigned, for the amuse- 
ment of the moment, alternately to rally, 
ridicule, and mimic, his natural awkwardness, 
or affected gentility. 

Charged with a thousand messages to the 
Lady, Norman departed at a late hour for 
Eleenalin. Nor had Monimia forgotten her 
kind old physician, and the Piper was loaded 
with marks of her attentive generosity. 

Norman begged the Piper to take him up 
at that point of KenanoAen nearest the island, 
and hastened to the banks of the mountain 
stream, to live over in recollection one of the 
happiest days of his life. — " This is the rock, 
that the tree which shaded her ; here she fell, 
aed here did I find her, pale, bleeding, insen- 
sible." — The heart of Norman was even more 
affected by the gay and innocent, or trem- 
bling, agitated Monimia of Kenanowen, than 
with the high-bred, beautiful, and bewitch- 
ing Mrs. Montague of Dunalbin. To his 



280 CLAN-AL.BIN, 

mind they represented different ideas, and 
he almost gladly forgot the latter, to feast his 
imagination with the insidious recollection of 
the former. From a dangerous reverie, which 
tended to deepen every soft impression, and 
to interest all surrounding nature in his nas- 
cent passion, Norman was recalled by the 
voice of the Piper. 

In the course of their little voyage, Nor- 
man recollected the painting, and the resem- 
blance, which was certainly not altogether 
fanciful, though he feared it was accidental. 
Hugh said nothing to confirm his hope. The 
young soldier had died very early in life, and 
the painting had never been unpacked till 
now, for by the time it had arrived from 
France, misfortune had scattered the family 
of Macalbin. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 281 



CHAP. XVIII. 



" I've seen sae mony changefu' years 

On earth I am a stranger grown, 
I wander in the ways of men, 

Alike unknowing and unknown. 
Unheard, unpitied, unreliev'd, 

I bear about my lade of care, 
For silent, low in beds of dust, 

Lie a' that would my sorrows share." 



Burns. 



While Flora resided at Dunalbin, Norman 
spent the most of his mornings at the same 
place. He had either some book to return > 
or to borrow; some message or invitation 
from the Lady, some moss or rare wild- flower, 
to exercise the elegant pencil of Monimia, 
some trifling excuse, till excuse became no 
longer necessary ; and habit made his society 
not only welcome, but desired. Monimia had 
now imbibed his own enthusiasm for every 
thing connected with the Highlands. She 
cultivated the sweet sad music of that roman- 
tic country j delineated its landscape, studied 
B b 2 



282 CLAN-ALBIN, 

its language, assimilated even her dress to its 
ancient costume, and in her bounded reign, 
and with her thinly scattered subjects, strove 
to revive the kind and generous spirit of the 
olden time. Norman was delighted with her 
rapid progress in his beloved mountain tongue, 
and never wearied imparting the instruction 
she so eagerly received. Already could she 
listen with rapturous emotion to the recita- 
tions of Moome, — to those exquisite effusions 
of genius and sensibility which have " floated 
down the tide of ages," known only to that 
peculiar people, who have a relish for their 
beauties, which no stranger can either feel or 
understand. 

The mornings of the young friends were 
thus devoted to liberal pursuits, aud the acqui- 
sition of useful knowledge ; the evenings to 
elegant recreation, and the society of Lady 
Augusta. In the balmy twilight of that short 
sweet northern summer, they often sailed on 
the lake with the Lady, sometimes landing at 
a wooded point which tempted a closer in- 
spection, rambling round its jutting headland, 
till they again met the skiff, rowed forward 
by the Piper, cheering his light toil with the 
rowing" chaunt. Monimia was certain that 



A NATIONAL TALE. 283 

the forced pine-apples, at a guinea each, 
which she had seen furnishing out magnificent 
entertainments, never were half so delicious 
as the bilberries, or wild strawberries, which 
she gathered in these romantic recesses, and 
eat with Moome's excellent cream, in the 
woodbine porch of Eleenalin. 

Such evenings, in the uncertain summer of 
the North, as did not permit these little ex- 
cursions, were spent in reading and music. 
In reading to his fair companions Norman 
spoke with the vivacity and energy of a man 
capable of performing the magnanimous ac- 
tions described by his author ; or of avenging 
that oppression, meanness, and cruelty, which 
even in idea roused his spirit to indignation. 
Nor was the domestic evening without diver- 
sity. There were indeed no visitors, but^the 
animating strathspey of Hugh, " the light fan- 
tastic toe 1 ' of Monimia, never wearied of trip- 
ping; and wiih the mirth-loving pin-maker, 
Flora was sometimes engaged in a very amus- 
ing, if not very elegant, operatic exhibition. 
Montague had now sufficient employment in 
a sheep-farm, and some sort of society in 
Macpherson the Innkeeper ; and this, with 
the expectation of the shooting season, his 



284 CLAN-ALBIN, 

quality friends, and the Northern Meeting., 
made the summer pass away more easily than 
he had hoped for. 

About this time the zeal and the suspicions 
of Mr. Buchanan were awakened, by a very 
respectable Catholic gentleman, in his neigh- 
bourhood, taking extensive farms, and divid- 
ing them into small portions, to accommodate 
a number of poor families that had been warned 
away, from lands now occupied by Macpher- 
son the Innkeeper. Buchanan's bigotry pre- 
vailing over the kindness of his nature, saw in 
this generous action a plot to overthrow the 
Protestant faith. Lady Augusta endeavoured to 
reason him out of this absurd opinion, Norman 
scouted it with disdain, Monim. a amused her- 
self with imagining the progress of the revo- 
lution to be effected by kindness to poor Pro- 
testants, and expressed her warm admiration 
of the means employed, while Montague 
joined the alarmists, — because he "could see 
no other motive the man could have j for why, 
would he not have made more by the land in 
his own hands, than by letting it out to these 
beggars ?" — Macpherson, who cared very litle 
about the national faith, was nevertheless 
much offended that the poor wretches, he had 



A NATIONAL TALE, 285 

stripped of their land, still found a shelter in 
their country, and clamorous in maintaining 
the plot to be a very good plot. Thus was 
the country divided into parties, and Flora 
called away from her interesting employments 
to be the amanuensis of her father, who had 
determined to warn his countrymen of their 
danger. Day and night was devoted to the 
important work, and when it was declared to 
be finished, Buchanan departed for the low- 
country, to superintend its publication, hav- 
ing been persuaded by Macpherson to that 
measure, and supplied by him with money 
necessary to defray the expense. Flora in- 
stantly perceived many of the bad conse- 
quences of this step, but expostulation was 
vain, and she returned to Eleenalin and Dun- 
albin. 

" Well, my little theologian, I trust you 
have fully detected the Popish plot ?" said 
Monimia, as she entered. Flora burst into 
tears, — " My dear girl," cried Monimia, em- 
bracing her, I am greatly shocked that my 
levity should distress } T ou." 

" You have not distressed me, but I am 
indeed greatly distressed and grieved that my 
father should wound the feelings of so good a 



286 CXAN-ALBIN, 

man as Craig- gillian." " Monro of Craig* 

gillian ?" inquired Monimia, — " is that the 
author of the plot. It is indeed worthy of him, 
I only know him from his sou, who is one of 
the most amiable young men I ever knew." 

" Our Hector !" exclaimed Flora and Nor- 
man in a breath, — " Our old schoolfellow ! — 
Is he known to you ?" 

" Indeed he is. To him I owe some of the 
best pleasures of my life, for he first inspired 
me with the wish of visiting this country." 

The young friends were delighted with this 
discovery, and Hugh was called in to relate 
the story of this family. The elder Craig- 
gillian had been thrown on the world a friend- 
less orphan, in consequence of the fatal trans- 
actions of 1745. — " But go where he would," 
said Hugh, — " and young and destitute as he 
was, — think you he forgot the blood he was 
come off, or was the less proud of himself?" 

The story of Craig- gillian was brief, but 
honourable. Stimulated by the pride of 
ancestry, his perseverance had ensured com- 
parative success in life. He had no Craig- 
gillian to bestow on his son, but he continually 
impressed on his young mind, that he was still 
the heir to the name and the virtues of his 



A NATIONAL TALE. 287 

ancestors. The young man had gone out to 
India very early in life : his generous ambi- 
tion, and noble self-denial, had but one ob- 
ject, and Craig-gillian was now the property 
of his father. " They say it is a bad bar- 
gain," said Hugh, — " but Craig-gillian does 
not think so. Think you he is less proud of 
his estate now, than if he had never lost it ?" 

" I am sure he is not," cried Monimia, her 
eyes sparkling through tears. 

" And if he choose to be good to the poor 
people whose fathers lived on the lands of his 
father, — I hope and believe there is no great 
harm in that ?" 

" I am certain there is none," said Moni- 
mia ; and Hugh withdrew, while Flora be- 
wailed afresh the strange infatuation of her 
father. But even these mortifying recollec- 
tions had not power long to embitter the young 
existence of Flora, who, at Dunalbin, soon 
forgot that there are such things as party- spi- 
rit, bigotry, and mistaken zeal, to divide those 
who practise the same Christian virtues, and 
inherit the same immortal hopes. 

About the end of July an incident occurred, 
which powerfully interested the sequestered 
inhabitants of Glenalbin. The weather, 



288 CLAN-ALBIN, 

though warm, had been stormy and dark, and 
the day so rainy that Monimia and her friend 
had not been able to visit Eleenalin. In the 
twilight Monimia leaned on her casement, 
watching the volumes of mist which floated 
along the sides of the mountains. Suddenly 
the sound of a harp was heard. Monimia 
turned round smiling, and beckoned her com- 
panion to keep silence. The music died 
away, and again rose on the breeze. 

" Some gallant knight in minstrel guise," 
said Monimia laughing. 

" A wandering son of song," said Flora, — 
" Probably an Irish harper. In this manner 
they were wont to stroll over the Highlands ; 
and there are very recent instances of that 
romantic custom. In this modest manner they 
solicit admittance into the houses of gentle- 
men, and none turn a deaf ear to the voice of 
the bard." 

" Nor shall I, — I am delighted with this 
adventure. It carries one back to the ages of 
romance and chivalry. I hope our harper is 
a civilized animal, for I would not be disen- 
chanted for a world." 

They opened the casement, and seated 
beneath the ivied gateway, saw a blind, feeble, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 289 

and very aged man. A coarse loose dress of 
russet sheltered his spare form from the blast, 
that waved the few white hairs which still 
lingered on his forehead. He leaned pen- 
sively on his harp : no one came forth to bid 
him welcome. His guide, a lovely girl of 
six years, sat wet and shivering on a stone 
which had fallen from the wall. The old man 
seated her on his knee, and wrapped the skirt 
of his coat round her little naked feet. A dog, 
the companion of their pilgrimage, and the 
last friend of their adversity, stretched him- 
self before them. The old man took a crust 
from his pocket, and divided it between his 
child and his friend. 

" And none for yourself, my grandfather," 
cried the little girl, taking the bread from her 
severed lips. The dog, which had eagerly 
snatched his moiety, now laid it untouched 
on the lap of the girl, on whom he playfully 
fawned, while he wistfully gazed on his aged 
master. The old man kissed the child, and 
tried to sooth her sorrows ; but she still wept. 

" And will you stay here all night my grand- 
father? And will we never return to our own 
Castle-connal, where we were all so happy : 
— this is a bad country, and a bad people." 

VOL. I. C C 



290 CLAN-ALBIN, 

The girl looked round as she spake of the 
country, and saw Monimia leaning on the win- 
dow. She had already learned some of the arts of 
her profession. — " Play my father," whispered 
she, — fc The ladies listen : play to please the 
ladies." — A crimson flush dyed the pale face 
of the old man.—" Oh what have I to do with 
pride," thought he : and he began to modu- 
late the strings of his harp, which in the que- 
rulous murmuring voice of age, he accom- 
panied with the following 

S O N G. 

Oh ope your hospitable door, 

For I am wretched, old, and blind; \ 
Exiled from Erin's smiling shore, 

And hope, and home are far behind. 
I drain the bitter cup of grief, 

I eat the bread of penury, 
And time, which brings to all relief, 

Has no loved bliss in store for me. 

The fury of fell civil strife, 

To wo and want my age consigned, 

Thrown weeping on the verge of life, 
I wander wretched, poor, and blind. 

Erin alas ! I now must shun, 
A sad, forlorn, and blind exile, 



A NATIONAL TALE, 291 

Ob could I once behold the sun 
Sink on my green, my native isle ! 

No tender claim, no kindred ties 

Where'er my devious footsteps bend ; 
Of all that shared my early joys 

None live to hail me "Father !" "Friend \" 
— None live my aged griefs to share, 

To weep o'er Erin's wrongs with me, 
For dear to me her shamrock fair, 

Her oak, her harp, her minstrelsy. 

All withered now my oaken bough?, 

My harp hangs on the willow pale, 
For Erin's griefs my heart o'erflows, 

Her slaughtered sons I sadly wail; 
For dark the days which I have seen, 

While Erin and while Freedom bled, 
Proud England loathed the smiling green, 

With native blood she dyed us red. 

Tho' fourscore years had blanched my head, 

To love my country was a crime ; 
And happiness with freedom fled : — 

But Erin's wrongs are more than mine ; — 
From Erin's wrongs my sorrows rise, 

For all her hopes to me were dear ; 
Though light has fled my aged eyes, 

They ever drop the silent tear. 



292 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Those spirits broke fate ne'er could bend, 

They fled to death from slavery, 
And long I wept each martyred friend, 

But who is left to weep for me ? 
Oh ope your hospitable door, 

Oh drop the pitying tear for me, 
For I am wretched, old, and poor ; — 

I live, — and Erin is not free. 

Monimia knew somewhat of the sad story 
of her native country. She had heard of cruel 
oppression, and desperate resistance ; of dark, 
ambitious, and turbulent spirits ; and of others 
loftier and purer, who had loved Ireland well, 
but not wisely. All had been swept away in 
one common ruin. Law, rigid and severe, 
cried out that this was necessary and just ; 
and Monimia bowed in submission. But the 
still small voice of compassion pleaded power- 
fully for unfortunates who " had done nothing 
in hate, but all in honour." 

Impatiently therefore did she listen for the 
conclusion of the old man's song, and then she 
flew down into the court to bid him welcome. 
He looked up, and faintly smiled, when he 
heard her declare herself his countrywoman ; 
and then begged her kindness to his girl. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 293 

The child, smiling through her tears, was 
led into the castle by Flora, while Monimia 
herself guided her venerable guest. Every 
thing conducive to his comfort was immedi- 
ately provided. In few words he expressed 
his gratitude. His harp was placed beside 
him ; his dog was stretched at his feet, before 
the blazing fire ; and his little guide, seated 
on the knee of Monimia, expressed her satis- 
faction, and her resolution to stay atDunalbin. 
A languid smile rose on the interesting fea- 
tures of the old man. " You also shall stay 

my grandfather," said the child, — " this shall 
be your home ; the lady is sweet and lovely." 

" It shall my love," cried Monimia, kissing 

her, — " I hope it will r" The old man 

replied not : a solitary tear rolled down his 
cheek. The little girl looked in his face with 
a mixture of pity and anxiety : his wants and 
his misery had already unfolded her sensi- 
bility. She placed a stool beneatji his teet, 
and busied herself in little kindly duties about 
his person. Still he was silent and dejected. 

" I will sing the song you love," said little 
Mary, and in a soft clear voice she sung, 

"Green were the fields where my forefathers dwelt." 
c c 2 



294 CLAN-ALBJN, 

The old man patted her head. — " Now shall 
this be our home ?" said the child, caressing 
his hand. He sighed deeply. — " My home 
will soon be the Paradise of my God ; — but 
for you, poor thing ! child of an out-law ; — 
guide of a beggar." 

" Her home shall be my bosom," cried Mo- 
nimia, folding the little girl in her arms. The 
old man seemed greatly affected ; twice he 
attempted to speak : but he was unable. 

" I shall try to thank my generous country- 
woman to-morrow," said he ; and Monimia 
was glad to escape from his thanks. 

In a little while he called, — " Where are 

you my child ?" " I am here, my father;" 

and springing forward, she kneeled at his 
feet, crossed herself, and repeated her prayers. 
When she had ended, the old man placed his 
hand on her head and blessed her.— " Lis- 
ten to me my child ; I have instructed you in 
the Catholic faith ; never forsake it." — " Oh 
never, never," cried Mary. 

" In that faith your fathers have lived, and 
died ; and gone to God and his saints : to all 
it is the faith of truth and holiness, but to you 
it is also the faith of honour. Think of these 
words when you see me no more, and never 



A NATIONAL TALE. 295 

forsake the religion of your country and your 

family." " Never, never, my father," 

cried the child. 

Monimia understood these injunctions as 
partly given to herself. She wished to assure 
him that she would never seek to sway the 
opinions of her future protegee ; but she could 
only say, — " We shall know each other better." 
The old man again blessed the child ; she 
pressed her cherub lip to his cheek, and he 
retired, recommended earnestly to the care 
of the late Mr. Montague's confidential ser- 
vant, whom Monimia retained in her family. 

It was well he retired, for Montague, who 
had just come home, bustled into the room, 
expressing his astonishment at her admitting 
a blind wandering beggar, not only to her 
house, but her parlour, and that beggar an 
avowed Irishman. 

" You must forgive me if I cannot parti- 
cipate in your terrors, as I am unfortunately 
an Irishwoman myself." 

" Aye< true, but not a Papist," replied 
Montague, somewhat disconcertexl ; and he 
withdrew, — " dare saying he only feigned 
blindness," and " dare saying he would try 
to rob the castle in the night." 



296 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Mary, all in tears, bitterly exclaimed against 
H the black-hearted Protestant ;" and Monimia, 
shocked at her language, demanded who 
taught her such phrases. — " Why black- hearted 
my dear ?" 

" Oh, just because they hare black hearts." 
" Who said so ? — not your father ?" 
" Oh no ; — but Connor in the cabin, and 
Connor's wife, and all the children :" and a 
little history of the cabin followed, by which 
Monimia learned that many kindly virtues 
dwelt there, and not a few u manly vices." 

¥ Ah wretched, wretched country !" sighed 
Monimia ; but she soothed the grief of Mary, 
and tried to eradicate the unamiable opinions- 
imbibed in the cabin. Kindness had already 
made the child familiar ; a little bed was made 
up for her in Monimia' s own chamber, and in 
a few minutes she sunk into the repose of 
innocence. 

At an early hour Monimia was awakened 
by the repeated embraces of her little friend, 
who clung round her neck with the playful: 
fondness of endearing childhood. 

" Lady, I must go to my grandfather." 

" 'Tis too early," " Oh no : I must say 

my prayers, tie his shoes, and lead him out 



A NATIONAL TALE. 297 

to a green bank : he sits down, and I tell him 
where the sun shines. He stretches out his 
arms and says, — " There is my country : 
Father of Mercy bless it I" 

Monimia was caressing the child, when the 
old man's dog burst into the chamber, howling 
piteously. He leaped to Mary, and dragged 
her forward by the clothes, ran away, and 
again returned, as if he invited her to follow. 
Mary bounded after him, and when Monimia 
had dressed herself, she also followed to the 
chamber door. She heard the child weeping, 
and addressing her grandfather, she softly 
opened the door, and saw the old stranger 
cold and ghastly ; and the little girl trying to 
fold his stiffened arms round her. He had 
been dead some hours. The loud shriek of 
Monimia, who fell insensible at the foot of 
the bed, summoned the servants. She was 
soon restored to recollection ; but the aged 
man was for ever removed from the joys and 
pains of mortality. In vain did Mary call on 
her beloved grandfather to awaken, in vain 
the dog whined round the bed. Fitzconnal 
was deaf to the entreaties of affection, and to 
the voice of friendship. 

Mary threw herself on the floor in an agony 



208 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of sorrow ; the dog licked off the tears that 
streamed down her innocent face, and alter- 
nately turned to the bed, gazed at the face of 
his master, and burst into a dolorous howl. 
Mary was soon consoled, but the dog still 
watched by the corpse of his master. 

On the third day, Monimia and all her 
family attended the funeral of the aged man 
to Eleenalin. The procession was joined by 
some kind strangers, and by the islanders. 
Hugh played the cronach, Moorae wept, as 
was her custom at funerals, for Moome was a 
fountain of tears, and Fitzeonnal was com- 
mitted to earth, unhallowed, save by his mis- 
fortunes, and his noble, though ill-directed 
virtues. 

When the ceremony was ended, Hugh set 
up a rude stone, to tell future generations 

where a man was laid. " I also willlay a 

stone to tiie cairn of the stranger." * sard 
Moome, solemnly placing her stone. Every 
one followed her example, and Fitz-connal's 
heap was gathered. 

If there be a national custom more affect- 

* Tite Lowland peasant, to express good-will, says,—" I 
will dance at your wedding,"— The Highlander says,— 
" Curidh mi claeh ar do chairn." 



A NATIONAL TALE. 299 

ing than all others, it is this, simple, solemn, 
and impressive, of adding a stone to a moun- 
tain cairn. *" Where shall I die, and where 
shall I be buried," said Norman, while busy 

" And Rachel died, and was buried in the Ephrath, which is 
Bethlem. And Jacob set up a pillar upon her grave ; that is the 
pillar of Rachel's grave unto this day." It is well known how 
desirous all Highlanders are to * possess their souls in patience" 
during trouble, and to depart with decency ; to be remembered 
with reverential love, not mourned with impious sorrow. It is 
indeed the familiar care of their whole lives. The bridal linen, 
when such luxury is known, is generally folded up to shroud the 
corse of the bride. I have known solitary women, so miserably 
poor that English imagination would be puzzled to find out 
how they contrived to exist, hoard up a pound or two in the 
hands of neighbouring gentlemen, for " the decent funeral." 
This ambition of posthumous fame has gone a good way towards 
dilapidating lona. The pious Highlander feels no scruples in 
lifting the grave-stone of some reputed king or insular prince, 
to ornament the remains of his grandmother. A considerable 
number of these stolen stones may now be seen very far from the 
sacred island in which they were originally placed. 

* Few years have elapsed since solitary Irish harpers wander- 
ed over the isles and west coast. Hence the seeming identity of 
many Highland and Irish airs. This romantic practice is now 
forever abandoned. Dogherty's was the *• Lay of the last 
minstrel." Of late years, unfortunate persons of another descrip- 
tion have wandered over the same bleak but kindly tract. 
Bleeding limbs cast from a mangled country. Among these 
unhappy individuals was one of that distinguished appearand* 
which, once beheld, can never be forgotten. He was remem- 
bered by gentlemen of the country as holding high rank when: 



SOD CLAN-ALBIN. 

fancy reverted to the fate of her who slept here 
with the stranger. The Piper drew the sleeve 
of his cassock across his moist eyes, and the 
females moved away, " Dust was returned to 
its dust; and the living withdrew laying it to 
heart. 1 * 

ranfc was the badge of disgrace and rebellion. Yet, though dis* 
loyal to Britain, it is probable that he thought himself but the 
more true to Ireland. But he was now a wandering maniac. 
He said the sufferings of hi8 country had made him mad ; and 
the Highlanders forgot bis crimes, and thought only of his mi* 
sery. 



END OF VOL. I, 
