DUDLEY. 



BY 



MISS O'KEEFFE, 



AUTHOR. OF 



PATRIARCHAL TIMES, OR THE LAND OF CANAAN 
ZENOBIA, QUEEN OF PALMYKA ; &c. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. I. 



LONDON: 

Printed by Strahan and Spottiswoode, Printers- Street; 
Vim LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN, 

PATEBNOSTER-ROW. 

1819. 



s CONTENTS 

o 

.^-1 OF 

^ THE THIRD VOLUME. 

ID 
<Ti 

LO ===== 

g PART V. 

^ LETTER ^ PAGE 

XLI. Don Zulvago to Sir Eliot Ho- 

"^ ward 1 

XLII. The Rev. Henry Clonmore to 

Sir Eliot Howard 91 

'i XLIII. Sir Eliot to Clonmore n4 

^' XLIV. Mrs. Gran tley to Mrs. Clonmore 147 

^. XLV. Sir Eliot to Clonmore 159 

f- XL VI. Sir Eliot to Clonmore 174 

(;; XL VII. Don Zulvago to Sir Eliot 194 

'^sXLVIII. Clonmore to Sir Eliot 208 

. ft PART VL 

■f XLIX. Dudley Clonmore to Sir Eliot... 229 
^ L. Dudley Clonmore to Claudina 

Q^ Howard 246 

I LI. Mrs. Grantley to Mrs. Clonmore 260 
d) LIL Claudina to Dudley 275 



IV CONTENTS. 

LETTER PAGE 

LIII. The Countess of Alford to Mrs. 

Balfour 289 

LIV. Mrs. Clonmore to Mrs. Grantley 327 

LV. Sir Eliot to Dudley :^40 

LVI. Dudley to Sir Eliot 352 

LVII. Clonmore to Sir Eliot 359 

LVIII. Dudley to Sir Eliot 397 

LIX. Dudley to Sir Eliot 416 

LX. Sir Eliot to Clonmore 441 



DUDLEY. 



LETTER L 



The Rev, Henry Clonmore to the Countess of 
Alfotd. 

MY DEAR MADAM, Oakland Park, Dorsetshire. 

The only apology I can make for my 
very sudden departure from Paris, is to 
request your ladyship to read the en- 
closed letter, which I received whilst 
preparing to attend your party on Wed- 
nesday evening last : — it will fully ex- 
plain my motive for not even stopping to 
take leave of you, and our numerous 
Anglo-Parisian friends, to whom I have 
now to request you will account for my 
disappearance, though in all probability 
the newspapers have by this time in- 
formed the whole fashionable world of 

VOL. I. B 



% DUDLEY. 

the melancholy event which occasioned 
my abrupt return to England. 

Had my own private concerns alone 
been the cause of my journey, I should 
have found time to have sent you a few 
lines of farewell, but, as you are deeply 
interested in the business, I purposely 
avoided you, in the delusive hope of 
being able to transmit from hence less un- 
pleasant news. Your ladyship may now 
readily guess that the intelligence I re- 
ceived related to your brother. — Lay 
by my letter, and read the enclosed. 

** REV. SIR Oakland Park, Dorsetshire. 

"It is with great pain and grief of 
mind, that I think it my duty to inform 
you, before you can even read it in 
the newspapers, of the death of my 
Lady; — she died, as it appears, sud- 
denly, on Friday evening, between the 
hours of five and seven, since which time 
my master has been little better than 
a madman. 

" I think, Sir, that if you, who from 
having been his school-fellow, and known 
him from a bay, understand his temper, 



DUDLEY. O 

and have more influence over him than 
all the rest of his friends and even re- 
lations put together, could come here 
without delay, much mischief might be 
prevented. — Not one of his neighbours 
are at present admitted to see him : — 
he is entirely alone, and spends most of 
his time in the room wherein are de- 
posited the remains of my departed 
Lady. None of his household presum- 
ing to intrude into his presence, he has 
really no one to speak to, and is starv- 
ing, fretting, and consuming himself to 
death. 

*' I need not remind you, Reverend Sir, 
how sincerely my master values your 
friendship ; yet as some motive ought 
perhaps to be given for my writing to 
you in preference to either of his sisters^ 
I hope you will not be displeased at my 
mentioning what passed at our table, 
the very day before my Lady died : 
speaking of you, Sir, to some gentleman, 
a stranger, a Mr. Miles Cavendish of 
the navy, who was dining with him, I 
heard him, as I was placing the wine on 
the table, say in answer, I fancy to 
B 2 



4} DUDLEY. 

some question — « Who ? Clonmore of 
Exeter College ? — a better fellow does 
not exist on earth : — I have known 
him boy, youth, and man, and never 
met his equal.' — * He is now in Paris, I 
hear; have you heard from him lately?' 
enquired Mr. Cavendish. ' Yes ; he and 
Grantley, my brother-in-law at Copen- 
hagen, are my only foreign correspond- 
ents ; my sister Jane disUkes writing, and 
my sister Caroline, also in France, likes 
pleasure, so from neither of those fair 
ladies do I ever receive a line.' 

" These were his very words, spoken 
with all that warmth of colour in his 
cheeks, and cheerfulness of voice, which 
I need not describe to you. Sir. Could 
you but see him now ! — In the hope 
that you will visit him soon, and that, 
through God's blessing, you may be able 
to afford him some consolation in this, 
his bitter affliction, I hasten to conclude, 
l"emaining with all due respect, 
*< Rev. and hon. Sir, 

" Your most humble servant, 
" George Herbert, 

f* Steward to Sir EJiot Howard.'* 



DUDLEY. ,5 

On the receipt of this letter, (a pas- 
sage of which here and there you, Lady 
Alford, must excuse, in consideration of 
the honest meaning of the good old man,) 
I quitted Paris without the least possible 
delay. On my arrival in London, stop- 
ping only a few minutes to a<:quaint 
Louisa with the motive of my unex- 
pected return, I broke from every im- 
pediment in the shape of my wondering, 
delighted, and inquisitive children, and 
with a heavy heart set off post for Dor- 
setshire. 

With far different sensations I had, 
on a summons from my friend, tra- 
velled that same road about two years 
before ! 

You, dear Lady Alford, the favourite 
companion of his youth, his best beloved 
sister, who well know with what fire 
and enthusiasm his whole person is 
lighted up, when his heart is filled with 
emotion, can picture him at that time 
meeting me on the road, about half a 
mile from Oakland Park, throwing him- 
self from his horse, darting into my 
B 3 



6 DUDLEY. 

chaise, and with a face radiant with joy 
seizing both my hands, exclaiming, 

" Clonmore, six years ago you mar- 
ried me to Claudina, you must now 
come and christen ray first child, a late 
blessing it is true, but it is come at 
last."— 

This was the first intimation I had 
had of his new family-acquisition, being 
just returned from Scotland', and I now 
congratulated him on it most sincerely. 

" And I can tell you, Clonmore," he 
added, " it is a very pretty girl, and 
very like me." He then took my arm, 
and at the risk of breaking my neck, for 
the day being cold, I was benumbed and 
chilled with my journey, he dragged me 
out of the chaise across the hall, and 
up stairs, nor would he suffer me to 
take a moment's breath until he had 
fairly shoved me into his nursery. 

There, in the full meridian of youth 
and beauty, in the perfect enjoyment of 
every earthly bli^s, loving and beloved, 
I again met, after a three years' sepa- 
ration, my dear and respected patroness 
Lady Howard. To her other virtues 



DUDLEY. 7 

was now added the maternal, and never 
shall I forget that look almost divine 
which she threw upon me, as I took 
her infant from her arms, and kissed 
and blessed it ; neither can I forget her 
smile and tone of voice when threaten- 
ing to turn her husband out of the 
room, did he not moderate his noisy 
transports. 

You, Lady Alford, were not, I thihk, 
very intimately acquainted with your 
sister-in-law. — Your long residence in 
Ireland with your late lord prevented 
your meeting with her latterly ; and even 
when in England, I understand yoii 
were not thrown much into the society 
of each other : — this is unfortunate, as 
you cannot, under these circumstances, 
do justice to the memory of the de- 
ceased, or form an idea of the extent of 
your brother's loss. Knowing her as I 
did from early youth, her father having 
been the pupil of mine, you, my dear 
madam, may judge under what impres- 
sions I now hastened towards the same 
dwelling. 

B 4 



8 DUDLEY. 

There was no friend now to meet 
me on the road, no mistress of the 
house now to salute at entering, no 
cheerful, happy home, wherein, by- 
spending time, long or short, to be 
convinced that married felicity is the 
purest, most natural, most exquisite on 
earth. 

I reached Oakland Park about nine 
o'clock in the evening, and alighting at 
the door of the shrubbery nearest the 
house, ordered the post boys to the 
stables, and went round myself to a 
private door leading to the garden. — 
Taking the privilege of our brotherly 
friendship, I determined, without being 
announced, to make my own way to his 
dressing-room, where at various periods 
of our lives we had spent together many 
a happy hour. 

On reaching the door I tapped gently^ 
knocked loud, and still louder, but no 
answer being returned, I went in : the 
chamber was in such a complete state of 
confusion that it evidently had not been 
occupied for some time ; — from thence I 
passed into the bed-rooms, and finding 



DUDLEY. 



9 



the same solitude every where, I returned 
down the great staircase, and went 
boldly, with heavy sounding strides, 
towards the library. 

Before I entered I stopped a mo- 
ment to recover myself^ when, with an 
emotion that almost deprived me of 
breath, I heard a low deep sigh from 
some one within ; I instantly threw 
open the door, and rushed forward, ex- 
pecting to find my friend, but saw only 
Herbert. 

The tears started iiito the eyes of the 
worthy old fellow as he raised his looks 
to mine, and got up to meet me, having 
first taken off his spectacles, and laid 
them on the large open book of accounts 
Over which he seemed poring at my en- 
trance. I soon perceived they were not 
tears of pleasure at the idea of having 
better news to impart ; on the contrary, 
his dejection was so great, and move- 
ments so slow, in quitting the writing- 
table, and placing a chair for me, that I 
instantly conjectured I had come too 
late, and that all was over. 
B 5 



10 DUDLEY. 

" I see how it is," said I : " you need 
not speak, Herbert, I see what has hap- 
pened, your master is dead." 

*' Dead, Sir! Heaven forbid! my master 
is not dead, at least no one here has heard 
of his death ; but we do not know what is 
become of him." 

This sudden relief from the over- 
whelming certainty of Sir Eliot's being 
no more, was too much for me, it occa- 
sioned at the instant a fit approaching 
nearer to strangulation than ever in my 
life I before experienced. 

Herbert prevailed on me to sit down, 
and take some refreshment which he 
fetched j and by this time the news of 
my arrival having spread from the stables 
to the house, many of the servants 
crowded to the hall under the mistakep 
idea that I knew where their master 
then was, and had come purposely to 
inform them, and arrange his domestic 
affairs during his absence. They were 
soon undecbived ; when each offered a 
conjecture, equally improbable, as to 
where and how Sir Eliot had secreted 
himself. 



DUDLEY. 11 

From their accounts it appears that 
soon after the funeral, (which had been 
retarded some days on your brother's 
madly refusing to part with the body 
of his wife,) he had confined himself 
upwards of four-and-twenty hours to his 
dressing-room, and having closed the 
shutters there remained without air, 
light, or food, or suffering any of the 
servants to enter. On the second 
morning he breakfasted in the library, 
saw his child, spoke to the nurse, and 
the rest of his people occasionally, and 
seemed to have recovered some share of 
resignation and composure. On the 
third day they all agree he was parti- 
cularly calm, and at times cheerful. 
On the fourth he walked in the garden, 
and with a favourite Newfoundland dog 
strolled for about an hour into the park. 
On his return he dined below stairs for 
the first time, and in the evening sat 
in the library and read for some hours ; 
that night passed quietly, and the next 
morning he had disappeared ! 

Yes, literally disappeared —- leaving no 
trace where or how to find him : — 
3 6 



12 



DUDLEY. 



while Herbert and the rest of the 
household (under the idea that he had 
retired as before to his bed-room, into 
which no one dared intrude) were per- 
fectly secure as to his safety, he had 
fled, and whither, as they said, " Heaven 
knew/* 

. How often do we use this sort of 
sullen hopeless mode of expression, as 
if implying «' Heaven knows no more 
than we," and yet is it not the actual 
truth ? — Is not our only comfort in this 
instance derived from the conviction 
that Heaven does know where now 
wanders our poor afflicted friend ? — It 
is ; and let us rest assured that the eye 
of Providence is as full upon the forlorn 
fugitive in his present hour of sorrow, 
as when the happy owner sheltered 
and embosomed in these his own do- 
mains. 

Every endeavour to find him, dead or 
living, has hitherto proved useless : the 
country round has been searched, ponds 
and rivers dragged, the coast and tides 
watched, and every friend and acquaint- 
ance privately written to. We must now 



DUDLEY. 13 

have recourse to public measures, by dis- 
tributing handbills through the country, 
and inserting advertisements in all the 
London and provincial papers. 

I have already written three urgent 
letters on the business to Dr. H — , but 
have had no answer. How I regret his 
absence from Oakland Park at the period 
of Lady Howard's decease ! It seems 
he was here only three days before her 
death, and intended to prolong his visit, 
when summoned to town to attend a 
nephew who was declared in a hopeless 
way. Had Dr. H — remained here, your 
brother would certainly have admitted 
his society, though he excluded that of 
all others ; for the doctor's professional 
skill and real worth as a man, notwith- 
standing the oddities of his character (so 
well known to us all), render him a fa- 
vourite with Sir Eliot, to whom he is also 
greatly attached. 

Do you think it probable that your 
brother (supposing him to have quitted 
England) is gone to Copenhagen, to 
Mrs. Grantley ? — or to France, to you— 
to me J — I know not what to conjecture. 



14 DUDLEY. 

If he should be in Paris, you will of 
course instantly inform me ; and indeed 
I think it would not be amiss for you to 
send a special messenger to your sister, 
acquainting her with the melancholy cir- 
cumstances that have taken place here, 
and preparing her for the reception of 
her brother, should he think of going to 
Denmark, by v/ay of trying the benefit 
of a total change of scene. 

As to the domestic affairs of Oakland 
Park, and in town, they cannot for the 
present remain in better hands than in 
those of the land-steward, and of Her- 
bert the house-steward and butler. All 
things go on with proper spirit and ac- 
tivity ; whilst at the same time I observe 
a sort of decent sorrow prevails in every 
department, arising from the deep sense 
they have of the loss of so excellent a 
master and landlord. 

In a few days you will hear from me 
again ; in the mean time depend upon 
my most active endeavours, my dear 
Lady Alford, and rest assured that no 
exertions on my part shall be wanting, 



DUDLEY. 15 

either to find the retreat, or ascertain the 
death, of my valued friend. 

Condolements on such an occasion as 
this are useless, not to say frivolous — we 
can each feel for the other. I may have 
lost a man highly esteemed by me ; you 
a brother deservedly beloved. Let us, 
however, hope that, if still living, he 
may yet be restored to that society of 
which he was an honour, and become 
again the protector of his child, and the 
ornament of his country. 

Henry Clonmore. 



16 DUDLEY. 



LETTER II. 

The Countess of Alford to the Rev, Henyi/ 
Clonmme, 

Paris. 

Y OUR letter, my dear Sir, has remained 
unanswered some days in the pleasing, 
but I now fear vain hope of receiving 
better news than your last contained. I 
had previously, and with extreme regret, 
seen the account of Lady Howard's 
death in the newspapers : as we cannot, 
however, recall life, lamentation is use- 
less ; our attention must now be turned 
to the recovery of the survivor. Can it 
be possible that there is as yet no intel- 
ligence respecting my unfortunate bro- 
ther ? Have then all those means which 
your friendship and zeal led you to exert, 
been wholly unavailing? What is be- 
come of Dr. H — ? — - have you seen him 
yet ? As you truly observe, he is indeed 
as worthy as he is eccentric j and so 



DUDLEY. 17 

thoroughly am I convinced that in his 
hands alone would Eliot suffer himself 
to be treated like a child in leading- 
strings, that I could almost fancy they 
were at this moment together. At times, 
so very probable does this conjecture 
seem, that my mind is at ease ; and yet 
about an hour ago, regarding his death 
as positive, 1 was literally half wild. 

Although, from various causes, I had 
seen very little of my sister-in-law, Lady 
Howard, I know how fondly Eliot was 
attached to her, and how worthy she was 
of his tenderest regard. This very con- 
viction leads me sometimes to think that, 
unable to survive her loss, his intellects 
became deranged, and that on quitting 
home he put an end to his existence. 
You will say, that in that case his body 
must have been found. It might not : 
- — recollect his residence, — so near the 
coast ; from those cliffs w^e are in a mo- 
ment gone, and swept away either in 
deep water or by the receding tides. 
Had he strayed inland, dead or alive, he 
must have been by this time discovered : 
the great reward which has been offered 



18 DUDLEY. 

would have prompted many persons to 
leave no spot unsearched throughout the 
united kingdoms ; and yet we see every 
endeavour has hitherto failed. 

Can he have gone away by sea ? — are 
any boats, or yachts, or vessels of any 
description missing on that part of the 
coast ? — have any one of his servants 
or tenants disappeared? I regret very 
much that Herbert and the rest did not 
at all hazards watch him more narrowly, 
at least until your arrival. But what 
gives me most concern is, that the old 
butler did not immediately send after 
Dr. H — ; who, I am confident, on hear- 
ing of Lady Howard's death, would have 
contrived to spare a few hours from his 
invalid nephew, and return to comfort 
him whom he had known and attended 
in a professional capacity from a boy. 

Eliot, I recollect, had a Newfoundland 
dog, who, though a terrible annoyance to 
every one else, was a great favourite with 
him ; I suppose the same you mention as 
having been his companion in the park 
the day before he spirited himself away ; 
— what is become of this dog, whose 



DUDLEY. 19 

name I do not even remember, for he 
used to be a great disturber of my 
flounces and laces ? But if he has not 
accompanied Eliot, enquire for him ; and 
when you leave Oakland Park, take him 
with you. Since human sagacity fails, 
we must have recourse to the brute : ac- 
cording as you feel justified, follow his 
lead. 

You make little or no mention of the 
child in your letter j whether you saw it, 
in whose care it is at present, and whe- 
ther you think it had better be sent to 
me, or I wait until my medical folks here 
permit me to return to England ? 

I hate to talk of myself at such a mo- 
ment, or I should assure you that all the 
good I had acquired by change of air, 
from the brown smoke of London to the 
blue sky of Paris, was completely lost on 
the receipt of your letter ; and as the 
purport of it is now blazed in all the 
papers, my unfortunate hotel is besieged 
at every hour in the day with English, 
French, German, Italian, and Spanish 
enquiries of — " Any news yet of Sir 
Eliot Howard ?" I have three quarters 



so DUDLEY. 

of a mind to hang out a bulletin every 
morning with these words in great long 
letters — ■ *' Not found — go seek." 

I have already written to Denmark, 
and to almost every part of the civilised 
continent where I think he may have 

chosen his retreat ; and my Lord C s 

and M. T d have set on foot the 

most diligent enquiries throughout Paris 
and its neighbourhood : — should, there- 
fore, the best exertions on the part of 
our worthy ambassador and the sapient 
French minister fail, we may renounce 
all idea of his having come to France, 
as I at first conjectured ; and if the 
answers from my different correspond- 
ents prove equally unsatisfactory, w® 
may either conclude that he has secreted 
himself in some part of Great Britain or 
Ireland, or that he is really and truly 
dead. 

* * # # 41: * 

The express I sent to Copenhagen is 
just returned ! — he brings me a letter 
from my sister Grantley, to whom ac- 
cording to your advice I wrote the same 
day. — Now for news ! 



DUDLEY. 21 

Surely nature never formed a brother 
and sister" so opposite as this pair, fire 
and snow, air and earth do not more 
widely differ in quality than Eliot and 
Jane, and yet they are both excellent in 
their kind. 

Would you believe it possible that the 
following note is, word for word, the 
answer to a letter announcing the 
sudden decease of a charming sister- 
in-law, and the alarming absence, per- 
haps death, of an affectionate brother ? 
— and having read this note, will you 
credit my assertion, that a more worthy 
woman, a better wife, a fonder mother, 
a warmer friend, (no, I mean a more 
sincere friend, for there is not a spark of 
warmth in her composition,) does not 
exist than my sister Grantley ? 

You call me in your letter Eliot's best 
beloved sister : there you are wrong, my 
good sir ; beloved, I allow, but not best. 
He preferred me for a playfellow, it is 
true, being nearer his own age, but Jane 
was his friend and confidante, and ever 
in matters of consequence (having as 
you know been left by the death of our 



i^^ DUDLEY. 

father very young his own master) fol- 
lowed her advice even when contrary to 
his own wishes or judgment, and ever in 
contradiction to mine. 

On such occasions, of course, I used to 
sulk and pout, and accuse him of loving 
me less because I was only his half-sister, 
and Jane more, because she was his 
whole and entire sister, as I called her, 
(you of course remember both our mo- 
thers well,) when he would restore peace 
by observing, " You, my pretty Caroline, 
like me, being very young, speak only 
from the heart; whilst Jane, our wise se- 
nior, calls her head into the debate." 
And the event ever proved that we were 
in the wrong, and she was in the right. 

Now read her letter, and let me com- 
ment upon it. 

" DEAH sister, Copenhagen. 

" Lady Howard's death is indeed very 
much to be regretted, particularly as she 
has left a child behind her, and that child 
a girl. — Eliot has not been here ; should 
he come, I will let you know. If he 



DUDLEY. 28 

marries again, I hope it will be a person 
who will be kind to his little daughter. 

" Mr. Grantley is still attached to the 

— , and I do not hear any likelihood 

of his being recalled, at least while this 
peace lasts, which some seem to think 
will be of no long duration. This climate 
certainly does not agree with him, and if 
his cough continues, we shall return to 
England for a few months. 

** Mary and Edward, to whom you 
send your love and presents, are dead ; 
they died about six weeks since, within a 
few days of each other. — Mr. Grantley 
joins me in affectionate remembrance, 
and in best wishes for the preservation of 
your health. 

** I am, dear sister, 

" Your's most truly, 

** Jane Grantley.'^ 

Now you, my friend Clonmore, may 
advance, that this letter is a pattern of 
plain simple sound sense and reason, the 
truth, and nothing more nor less than the 
truth. You may also point out that the 
death of her children (her only children 



24 DUDLEV. 

left !) has absorbed, or rather blunted, 
that sensibility which would otherwise 
have been acute, on hearing of her bro- 
ther's misfortunes ; but, my dear sir, you 
are altogether mistaken. 

The fact is this ; Jane, whilst still very 
young, as I have been told, adopted a 
sober, steady, sure-footed walk through 
life, which she has hitherto strictly kept 
to, and in which she seems determined 
to persevere to the end of her days. — 
Eliot and I having to travel the same 
road at the distance of some ten and 
fifteen miles (years) or so behind her, 
often make a dead stop, then take a 
spring forward, sometimes bound to the 
right, and more frequently, I am sorry to 
say, to the left: — now and then we are 
benighted ; we lose ground by retreat- 
ing, get swamped when following a Will- 
o'-the-wisp, and scratched by a heedless 
fall among thorns and briers. 

This is the present situation of the 
three: — Eliot has suffered his passions 
(however laudable) to play the Jack- 
o'-lanthorn with him, and is gone the 
deuce knows where, (begging your re- 
5 



DUDLEY. ^5 

verence's pardon.) I, confined to a sofa, 
with my whimsical nerves, am as helpless 
as if at the bottom of a gravel-pit by the 
way-side ; whilst Jane, our old jog-trot, 
walks deliberately onward : — she meets 
with impediments, it is true, on the high 
road of life, but conscious that she did 
not turn out of her way to seek them, 
convinced that they are placed there by 
no power or fault of her own, she 
quietly steps on one side, (or steps over 
them,) disengages her petticoats without 
tearing a thread, and pursues the even 
tenour of her course, aware that the 
hand of her Maker beckons her to the 
end of her journey, and that all her aim 
is to reach that one point in peace, se- 
curity, and honour. 

Thank me, Clonmore. — Not a bad 
subject for your sermon next Sunday ; 
but pray do understand my motive for 
dwelling so long, and apparently so out 
of season, upon sage Mrs. Grantley's 
character. — It is, that Eliot may be in- 
duced, when found, for I will not hear 
of his death, to go immediately to her. — 
You would, advise him, on the contrary 

\OIj. I. c 



26 DUDLEY, 

to come to me, because with me you 
are well acquainted, and with my sister 
not at all. Did you know Jane, I 
should soon lose all preference in your 
opinion, and I am only astonished that 
Eliot had not made you acquainted 
with her character and temper long 
ago. 

For Heaven's sake, therefore, and for 
the sake of this stray sheep when we 
do find him, send him to Copenhagen. — : 
Believe me, a mind such as Mrs. Grant- 
ley's is best suited to the irritable state 
of feelings under which, poor fellow, he 
no doubt at this time labours. / resem- 
ble him too much to be of any service 
towards blunting those keen sensations 
which a thousand daily occurrences must 
put to the proof. I should but nurse the 
disease ; Jane will in time cure it ; and 
with so gentle and loving a hand, so 
wholly without obtrusion, nay, almost 
without intention, that he will find his 
heart healed, and never hav^e felt the 
remedy. 

I know her well : she will listen to his 
ravings, his lamentations, his most bitter 



DUDLEY. ^7 

complaints, with the sweetest patience 
imaginable, and in the middle of them 
ask him to stoop for her pincushion j or, 
as she once did when he was storming 
against a groom, who had lamed his 
favourite mare, request him to hold 
some cambric she was cutting by a thread. 
I wish you could have seen his faqe at 
that moment ; I have it now before my 
eyes. As he was not at that time so well 
acquainted with her strange manners, he 
perfectly stared with astonishment and 
incredulity, to find out whether this turn- 
off proceeded from finesse or naivete, 
(Pardon me, but we have no synonymous 
words in our language.) A smile of 
conviction followed the stare, and by 
all the charms of Omphale, if he did 
not sit down as calm and appeased as 
a wild boar, and do as he was bid. Yes, 
Clonmore, it is a fact, Jane for a full 
hour will hear him bewail his lost hap- 
piness, his present anguish, and future 
hopeless prospects, and then enquire 
whether he thinks Iceland moss or can- 
died horehound best for Mr. Grantley's 
cough. 

c 2 



2S DUDLEY, 

Now, were / to act thus, he would 
fling from me in superlative heroics, 
knowing that I was acting, and make no 
ceremony of calling me an unfeeling, 
frivolous wretch ; but, conscious that 
Jane speaks from singleness of heart, he 
pauses for a moment, like the high- 
mettled steed at the tap of its rider, 
couples a sigh with a smile, and stoops 
for the pincushion, holds the cambric, 
or prescribes for the cough, or moss or 
horehound. 

Send him to Jane, send him to Copen- 
hagen, my dear sir : mad Hamlet was 
forwarded to England to recover his 
senses ; Eliot will recover his only in 
Denmark. 

I write in better spirits than when I 
began; for I feel confident we shall 
soon hear some news, and pleasant 
news, concerning him ; if not, in spite of 
my medical stafij expect me on your 
side the Channel, when, (that is, nerves 
permitting,) no part of our island, or its 
rebellious neighbour, Erin, will I leave 
unsearched, until I find him who is to 



DUDLEY. 29 

me (particularly now that he is out of 
reach) the dearest object on earth. 

Ever one of your and your Louisa's 
best friends, 

Caroline Alford. 



c 3 



30 DUDLEY. 



LETTER HI. 

The Rev. Henry Clonmore to the Countess of 
Alfh'd. 

Oakland Park, Dorsetshire. 

I HATE all mystery, all suspense ; there- 
fore, in few words, my dear madam, 
learn that Sir Eliot, thank Heaven, is 
still living, and in one of the Canary 
Islands, but which of them I am as yet 
unable to discover. 

Shortly after the receipt of your last 
letter, I went to town, resolved to set 
every enquiry on foot, and, above all, to 

make it a point to see Dr. H ; but I 

had not been more than three hours in 
London, when a servant from Oakland 
Park arrived, with the distressing news 
that your little niece had been seized the 
night before with convulsions, or some 
disorder to which they were the prelude, 
and that her life was despaired of. Re- 
questing Louisa to send immediately to 

f)r, H 's house, and enquire as to the 

fate of my letters to him, and inform him 



DUDLEY. 31 

of our subsequent proceedings, I set off 
on my return to Dorsetshire, slept in my 
chaise, and arrived just in time to hear 
the village surgeon, who had been called 
in by Morton the nurse, and old Her- 
bert, declare that all fears were over, and 
that the dear child had only to be kept 
quiet. 

The next evening I was sitting alone 
in the nursery, — that same room which 
I had not entered since the day when I 
saw therein the beautiful mother suck- 
ling her first-born infant. What a con- 
trast it now offered ! — a small candle, 
in a shade at the further end, threw a 
gloomy light around j not a sound was 
to be heard. I had sent away the nurse 
and the child's maid to their supper, in 
the servants' hall, saying, I would watch 
Claudy ; and I sat down by the side of 
the little crib bed in which she lay in a 
profound sleep. . Poor deserted babe ! 
its mother dead, its father absent, itself 
oppressed by sickness, it appeared a lily 
nipped from its parent stalk, and left to 
wither on the ground. 

As I held her feverish little hand hi 
c 4 



12 DUDLEY. 

nine, and fixed my eyes upon her inno- 
cent, sleeping face, on which the hght 
partially fell, I could not avoid saying 
aloud, '' When I last kissed you, my 
poor forsaken child, it was in your 
mother's arms j" and, mechanically, a» 
I spoke I turned my face towards s^ 
distant window, near which Lady Howard 
had been then seated. At the same in- 
stant, a sudden shock, like a tremendous 
weight, seemed to fall upon my brain; 
there, on the same sofa, on the very 
same spot, I now clearly distinguished, 
sitting, a figure in black. 

I certainly did not faint, but my nerves 
were more completely shaken than were 
ever your's, my dear Countess, at the 
sight of an earwig or a frog ; and I recol- 
lect uttering a sort of a tremulous howl, 
which would have had a wonderfully 
fine effect in an Irish funeral, but which 
only now served to awaken and terrify 
the child. Her screams increased, anci^ 
as I started up, she stretched out her 
little arms, calling on nurse and Martha, 
and papa and mamma, by turns, not one 



DUDLEY. S3 

of whom were within hearing, to protect 
and sooth her. 

Ashamed of my unmanly and ridicu- 
lous fears, which your ladyship must al- 
low me to place to over fatigue of body, 
and great anxiety of mind, I first pacified 
Claudy, and then went up close to this 
formidable still-sitting figure, the cause of 
all the mischief, whom I found with one 
leg thrown across a chair, deliberately 
taking snuff. 

*' So, Clonmore,'' said the gruff voice^ 
** turned nurse, are you ? I thought you 
had enough of that work at home : 
your good woman makes you give a 
hand now and then, eh ? loves you the 
better for it? Why, what the plague 
is the matter with the fellow?'* (per- 
ceiving that, on recognising who it was, 
my emotions took a new turn) " did you 
not hear me come into the room at this 
door, as the old woman left it at that 
yonder ? 1 made noise enough. Why, 
you gave as famous a start as the best 
Macbeth of them all, — oiiUKembled it, 
faith ; but, instead of an * Oh !' you 
should have cried, Avaunt ! and as for 
c 5 



34 DUDLEY. 

that young sqnaller, she has a fine pipe 
of her own.'^ 

If I am right as to his mode of ex- 
pression, you, my dear Lady Alford, may 
easily guess I was now shaking hands 

with Dr. H ; and you may also form 

some idea of the innumerable questions 
I poured upon our worthy physician ; but, 
as we have often remarked, instead of 
the medical line, he would have cut a 
capital figure in the diplomatic y for it is 
as vain to expect a direct answer from 

him as from my Lords M and C . 

To my simple question oi', where and 
how is Sir Eliot, the answer was, 

** The roads are confoundedly heavy, 
and the nisrht dark ; I was full two hours 
coming the last eight miles." 

As 1 make it a point of never humour- 
ing humourists, not even our dear and 
respected Hippocrates, I did not repeat 
my question ; but, on seeing Claudy still 
awake and restless, I returned to the chair 
at the side of her bed, and having ad- 
justed her little cap and night-dress, I 
composed, and hushed, and patted her 
shoulder gently, until convinced she was 



DUDLEY. 35 

again asleep. As Dr. H justly ob- 
served, I had often shared these tender 
nursery cares with my Lonisa, who did 
not, on that account, respect or love me 
the less. 

The nurse and the maid returning 
soon after from tlieir supper, I resigned 
Claudy to their care for the night, and 
proposed to the doctor to adjourn to the 
library. Having first examined the state 
of the child, he gave directions to the 
nurse, and then prepared to descend, 
by depositing liis snuff-box in his pocket, 
putting on his shovel hat, and grasping 
his gold-headed cane, which answered 
the purpose of a crutch. 

Whilst opening the door with one 
hand, I offered my other arm to the 
Doctor and his gout, and led him care- 
fully, through various intricate passages 
and lobbies, safely dov/n stairs, though, 
as usual, he railed at me the whole way, 
as thus : — " Why do you hurry me, you 
puppy? do you think you are jumping 
dow^n the steps of your pulpit? By 
the vengeance, sir, if you hold the 
candle in that fashion, you'll burn the 
c 6 



3(> DUDLEY. 

house j or do you want to set fire to 
my hat?'' 

Having at last deposited him in the 
largest chair in the library, I rung for 
lights, and at his desire ordered tea. 
Now, thought I, for some communica- 
tion — no, not a w^ord ; and I honestly 
confess, that> had 1 not been withheld 
by my respect for his age, his professioHj 
his character for universal benevolence, 
(not to speak of his sterling friendship for 
myself,) I could with pleasure have 
snatched that eternally-opening snuff- 
box out of his hand, and rammed it into 
the fire. 

Being forced to vent my feelings in 
some way or other, I snatclied up an 
Edinburgh Review, and pointing out to 
him a particular passage, as of profes- 
sional interest, asked his opinion of that. 
** It won't do, Clonmore," replied he, 
looking up, and smiling archly, as he 
poured the tea to and fro from cup to 
saucer : — " it w^on't do/' 

Tea was at length over, his boots ex- 
changed for slippers, his snuff-box fairly 
pocketed for the night, the candles 



DUDLEY. ^ 37 

snuffed, and the fire most furiously 
poked, when he launched out at once 
with — 

** So you have been putting advertise- 
ments in the papers, have you ? and 
setting all the gossips and news-mongerSj 
male and female quidnuncs, in the three 
kingdoms, prating, have you ? draining 
fish-ponds for a drowned baronet, raking 
sea-weeds for a noble corpse, overhauling 
travellers, and setting the machinery of 
the police at work ? and what good have 
you done by all these frolics ? — a man 
chose to walk out of his house, and 
could not you wait patiently until he 
chose to walk in again ?" 

From these words, I naturally con- 
cluded that Sir Eliot had accompanied 
the Doctor to Oakland Park, that he was 
then in the house, and had, perhaps, re- 
tired to bed. Under this impression, I 
seized one of the candles, and was leaving 
the room hastily and in silence to con- 
vince myself of the truth, v/hen, with 
almost provoking calmness, he exclaimed, 

*« Call to him, he'll hear you, that is, 
f he can : — his ears being at this mo- 



38 DUDLEY. 

ment nearer to Cape B()jador in Africa, 
than Cape Lizard in Cornwall." 

With a boyish petulance, of which I 
was on reflection heartily ashamed, I re- 
placed the L'ght on the table, and threw 
myself again in my chair, saying 

** It is in vain, I see. Doctor, to expect 
any intelligence from you concerning 
Sir Eliot, I shall, therefore, to-morrow 
make enquiries in another quarter, as to 
where and how he is." 

** Where, I have already told you, at 
least implied, that he was in the Canary 
islands : it is not so long since you left 
school, — you might remember that scraj[^ 
of Geography. — -How is another ques- 
tion — but if in the state I left him, 
tolerably well." 

*' You left him !" I exclaimed, with 
astonishment. 

*< Yes ; we had a pretty trip of it to- 
gether, just fifteen days going out, but a 
confounded long one coming back. — My 
poor nephew though has hopped the 
twig, I suppose you have heard of thai: 
— he is dead." 

Al] fears for your brother's safety being 



DUDLEY. 39 

by this explanation completely done away, 
such is the caprice of human nature, that 
I now felt risini2: within me sensations of 
anger and disappointment — such strange 
unfriendly and mysterious conduct ! I 
thought I would scarcely allow myself to 
acknowledge that the most poigiiant sor- 
row and despair could justify it, and as I 
hastily traversed the room, strange to 
say, filled at once with joy and vexation, 

whilst Dr. K ■ was occupied with 

making another violent attack upon the 
fire, I, without disguise, expressed my 
feelings, concluding with " I could not 
have acted thus." 

** No," said he, laying down the poker, 
and throwing his leg over a neigh- 
bouring chair, one hand in his pocket, 
and the other playing with the spectacle- 
case on the table ; '* No, neither could /, 
when I was a younker. I had then, and 
you have still your bread to get. We 
are not rich enough to play the fool, but 
had I or you a rent-roll of forty thousand 
pounds, we could afford to be a couple 
of as fine blockheads as any in the king 
dom." 



40 DUDLEY. 

«' You think, then, that Sir Eliot's con- 
duct has been the result of folly ; and 
yet folly and his name have kept hitherto 
very wide asunder." 

<* I think no such thing; but I can 
tell you, it has been the consequence of 
madness." 

At these words I stopped abruptly in 
my walk to and fro, and coming hastily 
to his chair, said, for an idea of horror 
flashed across my mind, ** I see how it is, 
I see it all : he is mad ; he is insane ; 
and instead of being gone abroad, is now 
confined in some private bedlam in 
England." 

You deserve to be shut up in Bedlam, 
or public or private," he replied, with 
warmth, turning around, and looking up 
at me ; ** Have I lived to the age of 
fifty- eight, to be told, by a clerical whip- 
per-snapper, thirty years my junior, that 
I assert a falsehood, I told you, sir, he 
was in the Canary Islands ; what right 
have you to deny this, and assert he is in 
an English mad-house ? Shaking the 
room with your tragical strides, and 
tossing your arms in the air, as if you 



DUDLEY. 4i 

were banging your red velvet cushion, 
driving your hearers before you into hea- 
ven, and preaching peace in a thunder- 
storm of words. Sit down, sit down, sir!'' 
he cried, raising his voice to a roar, and 
I actually obeyed him, with as much sub- 
mission as ever poor admiring Boswell 
obeyed Johnson the Imperative. _ 

After a long pause, during which the 
Doctor bit his nails and stared at the fire, 
he attempted to continue in the same 
strain, but his voice failed him. I felt 
the cause, and leaning forward^ took and 
pressed his hand, with much more emo- 
tion than ever I did that of a fine lady, 
saying, *♦ Dear sir, forgive my folly ?" 

" It was to avoid such hot-brained 
romantic puppies as yourself, though you 
are an A.M.'' continued the Doctor, in 
a subdued tone, " that he smuggled him- 
self out of the kingdom for a few weeks. 
I condemned him at the time, but I now 
see the crazy Baronet was right after all, 
in resolving to be master of his own per- 
son and leisure. Why, if a man had all 
his wits about him, your high frolics 
would scatter them abroad. I have told 



42 1)UDLEY. 

you he is in one of the Canary Islands, 
but which of them, you shall not hear 
from me : once the track is known, well- 
meaning officiousness will, by following, 
dodging, and surrounding him, set him 
off again on the wander ; and if he should 
take it into his addled pate to go to Ice- 
land, or Tangataboo, I desire yovUll con- 
voy him thither, and not I. — Let me hear 
no more of either of you." 

" Never fear. Doctor : Sir Eliot, I 
assure you, shall never be molested by 
my officiousness. I am well convinced 
of the old remark, ' an imprudent friend 
does more injury than a professed enemy/ 
You may therefore rely upon my word, 
that I shall never attempt to disturb his 
retreat ; and with respect to my having 
given such painful notoriety to the busi- 
ness, the very circumstances fully justified 
all I have done. Was it not natural to 
feel some surprise and alarm at the con- 
duct of a man of Sir Eliot's rank in life, 
and interest in the country, leaving his 
house suddenly, on foot, unattended, 
perhaps without money, certainly without 



DUDLEY. 43 

a change of clothes, neither acquainting 
his servants, writing to his friends — — " 
*' Ah, there, there's the plague of 
riches. Had the Baronet been a poor 
man instead of a monied man, he might, 
like honest Goldsmith, have put a clean 
shirt in one pocket, a book and his flute 
in the other, and lifting the latch of his 
hovel, have set out and trudged over 
Europe, before you or any one else 
would have stirred a finger, or cried, 
' hollo 1' to prevent him." 

*' Granted, Doctor. — But, however, 
honours are divided between the rich 
Baronet and the poor poet : my children, 
a thousand generations to come, will be 
familiar with the name of Goldsmith, 
whilst my great-grandson may never have 
heard of one Sir Eliot Howard." 

The Doctor made no reply. Whilst 
leaning forward for his great coat, which 
hung upon a chair at too great a distance 
for him to reach, he had nearly lost his 
balance and fallen on the fender, wiien, 
luckily, 1 started up and saved him, at 
the same time observing, why had he not 
desired me to reach it to him. 



M DUDLEY. 

** Had your eyes been where they 
ought to be," he observed, " present 
instead of absent, you would have seen 
what I wanted." 

He then took from a side pocket of 
the coat, which he let fall upon the 
ground, a large black leather pocket- 
book, and turning to the table, opened, 
it, and shook out several letters. This 
led me to remark how singular it was, 
that he had not written a single line of 
explanation to myself of to Lady Alford, 
at Paris, before his departure from Eng-- 
land, and to enquire whether he had 
received my letters sent to him from 
Oakland Park. 

" And what took you to Paris at such 
a time ? No sooner was peace pro- 
claimed, than you my reverend chap, 
and thatgiddy -brained, frolicksome young 
Countess, with her old dowager mother- 
in-law, must be off like a leash of rockets 
to France. I see how it will turn out, — 
treading on a net which will soon en- 
close you all ; running into the snare 
with your booby eyes open. — I hope 
when the grand Corsican fowler draWs 



DUDLEY. 45 

the noose dose, not one of you fools of 
English partridges on French ground 
may escape.'* 

As there was no occasiqn to enter on 
politics at this hour, I avoided any direct 
answer to this kind and patriotic wish, 
and only remarked, in reply, that busi- 
ness had taken me abroad for a short 
time, otherwise I had not quitted my 
family and parochial duties for merely 
curiosity or pleasure. 

" And on what business did you go 
upon, you puppy ?" 

This, though bluntly spoken, was ac- 
companied by a look of such benevolent 
interest, that my ill-humour and sturdi- 
ness vanished for the remainder of the 
evening. — Neither could I forget, at 
that moment, that such was precisely the 
look, and such nearly the words, when, 
on being consulted by the deceased Lady 
Howard, as to the presentation of the 
living I now hold, he said, ** Give it to 
that puppy yonder." 

I briefly stated that I had gone to 
France to bring back a youth who is to 
be placed under my care for a few years. 



46 DUDLEY. 

with the view of learning the English lan- 
guage, and pursuing his other studies ; 
but, principally, to be out of the reach 
of the law of conscription. — I added, 
" He is a very fine young man, and — " 
Here the Doctor burst into one of his 
tremendous laughs, which ended in say- 
ing, *' And I suppose the gay Countess 
went to France upon the same errand, to 
bring back a French youth, a fine young 
man : or has she crossed the water, to 
judge with her own beautiful eyes, (he 
did say beautiful), which has the yel- 
lowest face, the First Consul, or his arch 
minister ?*' 

Upon my remarking gravely that your 
health was delicate, and that the air of 
France had been recommended by your 
physicians, the Doctor's raillery in-, 
creased : — *' Yes, the wholesome air of 
midnight balls, and flirtations at the 
Tuilleries, the pure air of the French 
Theatre, of the Palais Royal, of routs, 
parties, and masquerades. — Had the 
pretty widow asked my advice before she 
went off, which she took 'special care 
not to do, I should have prescribed six 



DUDLEY. 47 

days in the week, a dinner with Charley 
Fox, a rubber with Madame la Consule, 
and a pas-de-deux with the handsome 
Eugene." 

Oh how 1 longed for you, my dear 
Lady Alford, to inflict upon him your 
usual punishment, that of stealing his 
snufF-box from his pocket, and not re- 
storing it but upon promise of better be- 
haviour. 

He then threw me three or four sealed 
letters, directed to your ladyship, to 
me, to Herbert, and to a person who has 
charge of Sir Eliot's house in town. 
These letters, it seems, the Doctor, on 
leaving England with your brother, had 
given in charge to a servant of Jiis own 
to forward by the post, instead of which, 
through a carelessness that has deservedly 
lost him his place, the Doctor, on his 
return from the Canaries, found every 
one of these truly important letters lying 
on the table in his study, in the \ery same 
spot where he had himself sealed and 
directed them. 

My information is now brought to a 
close ; and to sum up all, in a few words, 



48 DUDLEY. 

the object of our affection and anxiety is 
living in one of tlie Fortunate Islands, 
whither he was accompanied by Dr. 

H , and his favourite dog Carlo. — 

There he intends remaining until the re- 
turn of spring, when, most probably, we 
shall have him again amongst us, restored 
to health, and peace of mind, though 
not to happiness. 

In the interim, the child is to be 
placed under your care, on your returri 
to England, but on no consideration 
whatever to be taken to France. Her 
present nurse, Morton, is warmly re- 
commended to your favour, with wishes 
that you may continue to her the care of 
Claudy ; and finally, you are requested, 
according to your own pleasure and con- 
venience, to make Oakland Park your 
rural head-quarters. 

As I can be of no further service in 
this unhappy business, and that all my 
attempts to find out the name of the 
island to which Sir Eliot has retired, 
have ended in the Doctor's seriously as- 
suring me, that he was bound to secresy 
by your brother himself, I shall only re- 



DUDLEY. 49 

main in London until Louisa is sufficiently 
recovered from her late confinement to 
go back to Wiltshire, when I shall return 
to Paris to receive my young pupil, St. 
Eloi, from his fond and anxious parents. 
If you and the Dowager Countess 
will then accept my escort back to Eng- 
land, I shall be most happy ; and happier 
still, should 3/oz^ feel inclined to comply 
with your old schoolfellow's wishes, and 
spend with her a month or two at Bloom- 
field Rectory. To bribe you to consent, 
we shall have little Claudy with us j and 
if any other inducement were necessary, 
let me add, that our infant stranger is a 
girl, as you wished and prophesied it 
should be. Be assured. Lady Alford, 
that your society will give the utmost 
pleasure to your very sincere and attached 
friends, Louisa and 

" Henry Clonmore.'* 



VOL. I. 



50 DUDLEY. 



LETTER IV. 

T/ie Countess of Alford io the Rev. Henri/ 
Clonmore. 

And so Eliot is really alive after all ! — 
a good-for-nothing fellow! — and he has 
perched himself, a widowed turtle-dove, 
on the top of a rock in the Atlantic 
Ocean ! I think he had better have staid 
by the crib-bed of his child, and patted 
her to sleep, in your fashion. If the spirits 
of the departed are permitted to hover 
round us mortals, do you not imagine 
such conduct would have better pleased 
that of its deceased mother ? 

But my good friend, whilst writing to 
me* did you fancy you were composing 
a second Castle of Otranto, or aUdolpho, 
that you thought it necessary to manage 
a surprise with such magical effect ? — I 
always observed a strong tinge of the ro- 
mantic in your composition, as well as in 
Eliot*Sj and you have now confirmed my 



DUDLEY. 51 

idea. When you mentioned seeing a 
figure in black in the nursery, why not at 
once have added, it was Dr. H — ? No : 
you led me to think it was either a ghost, 
or my living brother. The latter con- 
jecture being the most reasonable, I no 
sooner glanced my eye over that line, 
than 1 started from the sofa, forgetting I 
was an invalid, incapable of the smallest 
exertion, crushed your letter in my hand, 
and not being able to declare whether I 
intended to langh or cry, actually flourish- 
ed my pretty feet in the air, in a pas seul, 
before they could get me to swallow a 
bumper of hartshorn and water. 

And when I read on, oh how provoked 
I was with myself for having shown one 
glimpse of uneasiness for so ungrateful an 
object! — a worthless, selfish wretch, to 
steal from all the friends who loved him 
with such tenderness; — an obstinate, 
sulky fellow, to bind Dr. H — to secresy, 
lest we should write to him or follow him. 
I follow him ! None but crows and eagles 
can reach him there, at his Fortunate 
Islands, as you call them. I shall not be 
surprised to hear (you, doubtless, know 
D 2 

LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY Of \Lunm 



52 DUDLEY. 

wherefore) that he has roosted on the 
Peak of Teneriffe, among eternal frosts 
and snow. These may, certainly, in 
time, cool the mad ardour of his brain, 
the fiery temperature of his nature. Yet, 
had he remained in England, some re- 
medy as effectual, and more tender, 
might have been found. 

The man who suffers from affection to 
woman, will ever find among women his 
warmest friends, — we feel so much gra- 
tified that it is in the power of our sex 
to endear itself thus to the honest heart 
of man. — 

Eliot in sickness and in pain has sought 
a foreign pillow whereon to lay his poor 
distracted head, a foreign hand to feel 
his fever's pulse : — ungrateful brother ! 
in losing his wife, did he lose all who 
loved him ? — This unkindness to me, 
this unfriendliness to you, this total en- 
velopement in self, and entire abandon- 
ment to his own feelings regardless of 
ours, is what I never can account for, or 
forgive. 

That odious Dr. H ! thus to spirit 

him away, to put a knife into a madman's 



DUDLEY. 53 

hand, (for to a diseased mind, I should 
imagine solitude is destruction,) and in- 
stead of plucking the feathers from his 
wild goose wing to assist in pluming 
them i — 

In the name of common sense what 
the deuce has Eliot to do with the Canary 
Islands now ! — he was born at TenerifFe 
I grant, for there, as you may have 
heard, his mother died giving birth to 
him, but has no other interest in the 
place whatever. When he was thinking 
of exile, better at once have gone to St. 
Helena, he has now done things only by 
halves. — 

My belief is that he is wholly deranged, 
and that the voyage altogether was on 

Dr. H 's part a desperate attempt at 

remedy. — In that case, poor dear Eliot ! 
though I reproach, I must ever love him : 
— even at the best, he has been and is 
now acting under the delirium of a fever, 
a temporary insanity, and under such 
circumstances I ask myself ought I to 
take oftence at any insult however cruel, 
or conduct however violent. — Ought we 
not rather when he does come back en- 



54 DUDLEY. 

deavour to sooth and protect him, and 
at the return of health rejoice with the 
most sincere and unbounded affection. — 
Dear, dear brother, stay then in the spot 
chosen by yourself until your heart shall 
be healed, and then welcome back to 
England and your friends. — 

With respect to arrangements concern- 
ing Claudy, Nurse Morton, and Oakland 
Park, and my visit to Bloomfield Rectory, 
your fruitful lady, and her new-born 
bantling, we will talk over those affairs 
when we meet ; and as to our old Physi- 
cian and me, do pray leave us to fight 
our own battles. 

I must now finish my letter and dress ; 
Paris is in an uproar of joy and felicity, 
yet no one knows the cause. — The St. 
Elois and I, with half a score more good 
folks, are going this morning to the 
Tuilleries, and the Louvre, and from 
thence to see the Consular Guard re- 
viewed. — The cannon are firing, drums 
beating, flags flying, eagles flapping, and 
the air echoing with rapturous shouts, 
and the soul-exhilarating strains of the 
beautiful Consular march. 



DUDLEY. 55 

Farewell, Reverend ! The white horse 
is led under the windows of our hotel, 
and we must run to see the rider mount, 
^* With love to Louisa and bairns, 
" I am your well-wisher, 

^* Caroline Alford/' 



D 4 



56 DUDLEY. 



LETTER V. 

The Countess of Alford to the Rexh Henry 
Cloiimate. 

Park Place, London. 

Twelve months are nearly elapsed, my 
dear sir, since I lost a brother, you a 
friend ; since which period I make no 
doubt your prayers have been as fervent 
as my own, mine were incessant, that 
he either might be restored to us, or that 
we might receive intelligence directly 
from himself. 

Our prayers are heard, Eliot has writ- 
ten to me, and though I suppose you 
may have received letters from him by 
the same fleet, I cannot let a day pass 
without communicating this to me wel- 
come news. — A stranger might have 
concluded the post had brought me a 
warrant for my death, such a vast pro- 
fusion of tears did 1 shed on this joyful 
occasion. 



DUDLEY. 5^ 

Mrs. Grantley (or widow Grantley, as 
she chooses now to be called, poor fellow I 
he died at Copenhagen, never lived to 
see England again) was sitting at my 
side when the packet arrived, with little 
Claudy standing at her knee, for whom 
she was busy measuring and cutting out 
frocks. 

Having opened the letter, I screamed 
" from Eliot 1*' and thrusting it into my 
sister's hand, snatched Claudy to my 
bosom, covering her dear little face with 
tears and kisses. 

The next moment I was tempted to 
throw every scrap of muslin, patterns, 
scizzars, threads, tapes, and bobbins out 
of the window — no, this instance of 
Jane's supineness is scarcely to be cre- 
dited. — Without the smallest change of 
voice or variation of feature, she said in 
reply — '' Stop a moment, Caroline, I 
have only this sleeve to cut out, and I 
will clear the table." 

Locke himself would have been puz- 
zled to know, what clearing the table 
had to do with reading my letter ! — 

Oh these hearts of snow ! — how one 
d5 



58 DUDLEY. 

sister can be born with a flame in her 
bosom, and the other with a lump of ice, 
is past my comprehension. — As to poor 
Eliot, to judge from his correspondence, 
his nature is become a mixture of both, 
each preponderating in turn — now all 
fire, now all despair — he that was once 
so uniformly active^ brilliant, and enthu- 
siastically wild. 



Another packet! and from you! thanks, 
my dearest friend, for this very consider- 
ate kindness. — We will then exchange 
letters, I have just received Eliot's to 
you, and I herewith send you his to me. 
I know you will read it with the same 
attention and indulgence I did, and join 
with me in pitying this beloved and un- 
happy brother, and forgiving his appa- 
rent neglect. 

He has no reason to accuse his friends 
of seeking to violate his retirement, we 
have all respected it even so far as not 
to hazard a letter to that part of the 
world, confiding it is true in the faithful 
promises of Dr. H to reveal the se- 
cret, should circumstances render him 



DUDLEY. 59 

justified in so doing. Eliot has at length, 
of his own accord, broken the seal of 
mystery ; and as he has been indulged in 
solitary grief to the extent of his own 
wishes, we may now reasonably conclude 
that he will soon return to the habits of 
common life, and become once more a 
social and useful being among his fellow- 
mortals. 

He thinks he has regained his usual 
serenity, and is once again at peace j I 
hope it may not prove the deceitful calm 
of a half-spent volcano : but I detain you 
too long from the perusal of his romantic 
billet-doux, for such it is, though speak- 
ing of the dead, and addressed to a third 
person. As you are not blessed, how- 
ever, with the patient apathy of our sister 
Jane, perhaps Ehot's letter has been read 
before this of mine, — even so, I forgive 
you, for I am doing exactly the same by 
yours. — 

I have laid by your letter, and must 
now bid you and Louisa good by, that I 
may devour his with eyes and heart. 

** Caroline Alford.' 

D 6 



60 DUDLEY 



LETTER VL 

Sir Eliot Howard to the Countess of Al/ord, 

Teneriffe. 

If ever my dearest Caroline for one mo- 
ment doubted that she was still beloved 
by me with the most warm and unabated 
affection, she has done me injustice : 
though deprived of all that could render 
life desirable, I was not so selfishly 
wrapped in sorrow, as never to bestow 
the kindest thoughts on those dear friends 
w^hom I had left behind. 

How the first few dark months passed, 
on my leaving England, I scarcely myself 
know, but of this I am convinced, mad- 
ness, irremediable madness, would have 
been the consequence of a longer stay in 
that spot, once to me a heaven on earth. 

Before the faint spark of reason was 
for ever quenched, it seems to have 
guided me from a place, wherein, every 
object reminding me that I had become, by 



DUDLEY. 61 

one sudden and unforeseen blow, the most 
forlorn and wretched of human beings, I 
might have languished for the remainder 
of my days a confirmed lunatic under 

the care of M 's keepers, from such 

horrors it pleased Providence to snatch 
me. 

The first intentions of a widowed 
heart, were to immure myself in the 
tomb of all my happiness, to spend the 
remnant of my life within those walls 
where she had breathed her last, and to 
devote myself to the rearing of my dear 
and motherless child ; but upon trial, 
Caroline, it would not do — my fortitude 
wholly failed, and in less than a week I 
looked round on the scene of my aban- 
donment with the jealous and glaring 
eye of a maniac. 

You shall judge — I took up a book, 
intending to force my attention and read : 
the first words that met my eye were 
these, written by her hand on a blank 
cover, " The gift of my beloved hus- 
band on my birth-day.^' — Instead of 
clasping it to my heart (oh such idle 
fancies belong only to the hours of love 



62 



DUDLEY. 



and courtship !) I dashed it from me, to 
the farthest extent of the room, and with 
a violence that the mere observer might 
have mistaken for the feelings of hatred. 
•— I opened a portfolio, and the next 
moment the carpet was strown with her 
torn and disfigured drawings. — I threw 
up the lid of the piano — oh how I de- 
lighted in the horrible and jarring dis- 
cord made by the blows of my frenzied 
hand. 

On her dressing-table lay a bunch of 
carnations. I had gathered fliem on the 
morning of her death, and brought them 
to her, as she sat at the looking-glass, 
arranging her hair. They were now 
withered ; but they had outlived the 
beautiful hand which had held them, the 
smile which had thanked me. 

1 wandered from room to room, and 
every object I met with seemed to be 
herself, and yet to say, " I am gone.'^ A 
bonnet, a stray glove, a shoe, a ribbon, a 
shawl, no matter what — no where, 
through our part of the house, could I 
turn my eyes, without meeting some me- 
morial of my lost Claudina.. 



DUDLEY. 63 

I fled into the garden. Here were 
her plants, her flowers, her tame liberty- 
birds, as she called those which she daily 
fed upon the lawn, under our window, 
with crumbs of bread from the break- 
fast-table. Every thing reminded me of 
her. 

Agreeable to a mutual compact, formed 
in the days of courtship, we always break- 
fasted alone, in a small boudoir adjoin- 
ing her dressing-room. No third person 
was ever admitted to that dear repast ; 
and, to prevent even the necessity of 
servants attending it, we were supplied 
from without by means of a turning cup- 
board in the wall. In consequence of 
this arrangement, though our house 
was, at different periods, full of com- 
pany, we were secure of enjoying our 
favourite meal in privacy and quietness. 
This hour formed a happy contrast to 
the remainder of the day, which was 
wholly devoted to our friends and 
guests. 

A few mornings after my loss, I at- 
tempted to breakfast in the accustomed 
place j but I found it would not do, and 



64 DUDLEY. 

I removed for that purpose to my own 
dressing-room. This change certainly 
did afford me relief; and the idea then 
occurred, that instant removal from 
Oakland Park, would prove the only 
effectual step towards subduing my mind 
to an humble resignation to the will of 
Providence, and preparing me so far to 
conquer despair, that I might yet do 
justice to my poor child, by devoting 
those cares solely to her, which the dead 
no longer required. 

My first intention was to go to Bloom- 
field Rectory, and write from thence to 
my friend Clonmore, who was in France; 
but, on further consideration, I deter- 
mined not to carry grief and despondency 
into his happy family, particularly as I 
had lately heard from him that bis wife 
was removing to town, to prepare for 
her expected confinement. That pleas- 
ing hope was no sooner formed than it 
was relinquished. 

I then turned my thoughts on you, 
Caroline; but you were in Paris, and 
the very idea of going thither was horror 
to me; besides, in your own shattered state 



DUDLEY. 65 

of health, I was conscious of being no 
very agreeable inmate. 

For one moment T determined to set 
off for Copenhagen, where I was sure of 
a kind, sincere, though naturally cold 
reception, from Jane ; but her husband 
was ailing, and I knew well would feel 
shy of associating with a man labouring 
under mental anxiety ; from which, 
owing to the extreme irritability of his 
own system, he never failed to suffer 
severely himself. 

" These are the only three persons on 
earth," J said aloud, as in dim twilight 
I traversed my solitary room, ** the only 
persons to whom I would wish to un- 
bosom myself; for all Claudina's rela- 
tions are dead — Colonel and Mrs. Powis, 

all — all are dead. There is Dr. H 

indeed, one who has known me from 
my birth. I might go to his house in 
town ; but the comfortless fire-side of an 
old bachelor is not exactly suited to a 
man of my domestic habits. 

** Where, where shall I go!" and, at 
these words 1 threw myself on the sofa. 



66 DUDLEY. 

as if, in that simple act, expressing the 
determination to stay at home. 

At this moment, the door slowly open- 
ing, a figure appeared standing without, 
as ii' desirous, yet fearful of intruding. 
<* Come in, Nurse," I said, and extending 
my arms, took my child, who was half 
asleep, from her, and for a few minutes 
gazed fondly and anxiously upon her 
lovely features ; then exerting myself, I 
performed my duty of rocking her on my 
knee, swinging and coaxing so w^ell, that 
Morton declared with a faint smile, and 
a full dropping tear, I made a most 
capital nurse. 

Claudy's waist and shoulders, I ob- 
served, were decorated with a sash and 
bows of full pink ; to which pointing, I 
enquired as to their propriety. Morton 
understood me, and with hesitation re- 
plied, ** Why yes, sir, but I need make 
no change, I think, as yet ; because — 
the funeral — though you are the best 
judge, sir. I have every thing ready ; 
but it seems to me that a baby — and 
Miss Howard is only just turned of two 



DUDLEY. 67 

years — does look so very dismal in 
black." 

I saw clearly, that respect to my feel- 
ings had prevailed over her idea of what 
was proper, but I returned the child to 
her in silence. She left the room, leav- 
ing the door a-jar ; Avhen, in less than 
ten minutes, as I was repeating the word 
" dismal /" she again appeared, leading 
in Claudy, v/hose white frock and pink 
ribbons were replaced by a suit of black, 
her neck encircled by jet beads. 

Simple and trifling as this incident 
was, it seemed so exactly to represent 
the awful suddenness of the mother's 
fate, that I felt my soul die within me. 
Thus, thought I, was my life, at one in- 
stant, changed from couleur de rose to a 
hue of the blackest die. 

I could not again take the child, but 
going to the window, leaned my arm and 
head against the frame ; and, on turning 
round, some time after, was relieved to 
find myself alone, and the door closed. 
One of the minor blessings of life is to 
be attended by feeling and affectionate 
servants. 



t)8 DUDLEY. 

Having spent the whole day, and the 
ensuing night, in revolving whether I 
should quit my house, or remain in it, 
the following evening found me in a 
fever of doubt and perplexity ; unable 
to decide of myself, and not having one 
friendly bosom, to w^hom I could lay 
open the terrible agitation of my own. 
In solitude and mental ravings were the 
succeeding hours of darkness passed ; 
and though in the possession of thou- 
sands, I felt like a houseless wretch, who 
had not whereon to set his foot. 

It is in human nature to be shy of our 
dependants, where the affections and 
weakness of the heart are concerned j I 
therefore, when in their presence, mas- 
tered every sign of emotion : nay, when 
my servants appeared, I assumed a sort 
of careless cheerfulness, that often made 
them examine me with doubtful sur- 
prise. Thus passed another night of 
agony, not to be described. 

The next morning I trifled over a 
breakfast; held a newspaper in my hand, 
one word of which I never saw ; then 
reached my hat, ^nd calling tp C^rloj, 



DUDLEY. 69 

wandered again into the park. As I had 
taken the same walk the day before, 
and returned to dinner, my people were 
under no apprehensions ; whereas, had 
they followed me, I should not, perhaps, 
at this moment be within sight of the 
volcano of TenerifFe. 

The first symptom of insanity may be 
traced to my shyness of my servants j 
their looks, reflecting my own feelings, 
w^ere daggers to me ; their silence, their 
caution, their very respect and tender- 
ness, were torture, for all reminded me 
wherefore they were thus subdued in 
voice, and manner, and look. Their 
black liveries and dresses were the next 
sources of pain. I shut my eyes to 
avoid the sight, and I found them repre- 
sented in miniature on the inside of my 
eyelids. On finding none but silver 
knives allowed me at dinner, I did not 
speak, but cast on Herbert, my honest 
faithful servant, a look of savage pur- 
pose. Other precautions stole upon my 
notice ; and this producing hatred to- 
wards my preservers, you may well con- 



70 DUDLEY. 

ceive with what rapid strides insanity 
was gaining possession of my brain. 

But to proceed with an account of 
the events that occurred on tlie second 
morning of my strolHng with Carlo to 
the park, whither I went with so deter- 
mined an air of indifference, that my 
people were deceived, and did not follow 
me. 

About one hundred yards from the 
house I met some girls at play, and stood 
to watch them. Totally regardless of 
my misfortune, even if they had heard 
it, they w^ere pelting each other with 
tufts of loose grass, and with all the 
jocund frivolity of their age, and conti- 
nued and loud laughter, were running 
round the trees, and up and down a steep 
green slope. 

This was the first moment of relief I 
had felt for many days ; I breathed with 
more freedom ; an oppressive load seemed 
taken from my breast, my head, my eye- 
lids 5 and, as I struck into a more re- 
tired walk, I exclaimed, *•= I wish I were 
among strangers ; were I with those who 
10 



DUDLEY. 71 

know not the cause of my aflliction, it 
would be greatly lessened." 

On reaching the root-house near the 
lake, in the centre of the park, I took 
out my master-key, and, desiring Carlo 
to stay without, went in, for the first 
time since my loss, intending to spend 
in this, my favourite spot, a few hours 
before my return to the house. 

In building this rustic edifice, (which 
you, Caroline, had never at that time 
seen,) no workmen had been employed ; 
it was the labour of my own hands after 
a little design by Claudina, and was en- 
tirely composed of the roots of trees, and 
other rough timber, and thatched with 
reeds and canes. The interior displayed 
two small windows of painted glass, a sort 
of couch covered with carpet-work, orna- 
mental flower-stands, a work-basket, a 
book-shelf, a stained lamp, and various 
other articles, displaying at once the 
simplicity of Claudina's taste, her in- 
dustry, and her ingenuity. 

No one hitherto had entered this 
elegant little hermitage, excepting our- 
selves. It had been consecrated in the 



72 0UDLEY.- 

romantic fervour of youth to conjugal 
friendship, having been built in fulfil- 
ment of a promise mutually given be- 
fore wedlock ; since which day of bliss 
we had spent in it many a happy hour, 
in conversation, in reading, or in 
drawing. 

On entering it, 1 closed the door, 
and, sitting down upon the couch, 
quietly looked around me. Never hav- 
ing seen any living object in this place 
beside my wife, it now seemed filled 
with her image alone ; and certain of 
not being overheard, for no one could 
approach the building within a quarter 
of a mile without being observed from 
the windows, I indulged myself in fre- 
quently repeating her name. ** Clau- 
dina," I said, " I will read to you; what 
shall it be?" — and, reaching a book, I 
again seated myself, taking care to leave 
space sufficient on the sofa beside me 
for a second person — a small table, 
with a basket of unfinished work on it, 
stood immediately in front, in exactly 
the same position she had left them the 
day previous to her death. 



DUDLEY. 73 

Would you credit my crazed infatua- 
tion ? — The book was " Mathilde." I 
read a whole page aloud, and as the 
branches of the dark fir, and climbing 
shrubs, and hanging ivy, moved with a 
gentle noise against the dim and painted 
windows, I looked up, saying — *' It is 
so dark, and the print so small, I can 
read no more.*' 

I then took up the work that lay on 
the table, and, after examining the em- 
broidery, enquired, " Is this the pattern I 
drew for you, Claudina? — your needle 
has improved upon my design : little 
Claudy will look quite grand in this fine 
new frock.'' I laid it down again, and 
shuddered at the silence that followed 
my own voice ; and when I turned my 
eyes on the vacant seat beside me, and 
stretched out my hands to be convinced 
that all was air — was nothing — was 
death, — Oh, my God! my God! the 
horror of that moment ! And when, 
in replacing the work in the basket, 
violently thrusting it in, my eyes caught 
the sight of a letter directed to my wife, 
which being from Mrs. Clonmore, we 

VOL. I. L 



7^ DUDLEY. 

had read together on the very day wheu 
I was last on this spot; and now, when 
I looked at the date of the frank ! ^- 
and in so short a time ! — Oh Heaven 
forgive me ! — forgive the horrid trans- 
port of that instant : — my God ! ** blot 
out mine iniquity — remember not my 
sin." 



Caroline, I distress you. I must quit 
this scene — I will be brief. Could 
you suppose, that instantly on leaving 
the hermitage, I walked, without stop- 
ping to take either rest or refreshment, 
nearly twenty miles ? I was always a 
famous pedestrian, you may remember ; 
but, considering the enfeebled state to 
which I was at that time reduced, this 
exceeds my proudest athletic perform- 
ance. In short, instead of turning my 
face homeward on quitting the root- 
house, I strode rapidly the contrary 
wayj and avoiding the lodges, leaped 
over the stone park fence, and gained 
the turnpike road. 

The chain of memory is here broken, 
but the links, which are wholly wanting 
in my mind, can be supplied by our old 



DUDLEY. 75 

friend Dr. H , who, having heard of 

my wife's death shortly after his return 
to town, apprehensive of the conse- 
quences to myself, had set off instantly 
for Oakland Park. He had changed 
horses at the last stage, and was leaning 
in the corner of his carriage reading 
a pamphlet, when a sudden stop and 
outcry from the postilions attracted his 
attention, — a man was found lying on 
his face, at his full length, in the middle 
of the road, seemingly in a fit, over 
whom stood striding a large Newfound- 
land dog. 

Dr. H was no sooner out of the 

chaise than I was placed in it, soaked to 
the skin, for the rain was heavy ; and 
as we were at this time farther from my 
own house than his in Hampshire, he 
instantly formed his determination to 
return thither. The post-boys were de- 
sired to turn round their horses' heads, 
and I was carried, still insensible, to the 
country residence of our worthy phy- 
sician. 

The rest is easily explained and un- 
derstood. At this very period Dr. H — . — 



76 



DUDLEY 



was under the necessity of accompanying 
to Madeira a nephew whose life had 
Jong been despaired of, (he is since 
dead ;) and but for the news of my 
wife's decease, he would at that time 
(being free from the gout) have been 
already on his journey to Falmouth. 

Understanding from me, on my re- 
covery, that I had no friend in England 
in whose care he would feel himself jus- 
tified in leaving me, yet agreeing to the 
propriety of not burdening those abroad 
with my infirmities of mind and body, 
he was doubtful how to proceed, until, 
with a sudden renovation of fortitude, 
J enabled him to decide at once, by de- 
claring I would accompany him to Ma- 
deira. 

This was indeed the most rational 
plan that could be pursued, as a total 
change of scene was the only chance I 
had of cure. Dr. H having pro- 
mised to write to my sisters, to Clon- 
more, and to Oakland Park, I prepared 
for my departure, or rather, I should 
say, I left every preparation to my 
friend, and was transported from Ma- 



BUDLEY. 77 

2 / 

deira to England with as little ceremony 
as a bale of goods, and almost as uncoa- 
scions. The voyage was to me a blank ^ 
a sad delirium followed, during which I 
fear I often put the patience and hu- 
manity of the Doctor to the severest 
trials ; for, though he endeavoured to 
make me sensible I was on board a mer- 
chant vessel, out in the open seas, and 
surrounded by good honest sailors in 
blue jackets and trowsers, I would insist, 
it seems, that I was in Bedlam — that 
he was my keeper — and that all my 
neighbours were as mad, or, rather, were 
very sensible persons, as ill-treated dm 
myself. 

The Doctor's intention was to take 
me to the Atlantic islands, but certainly 
not to leave me there ; and yet when he 
found, on the full restoration of my 
health and reason, that I was bent on 
removing, at least for a few months, to 
Tenei'ifie, the place of my birth, he 
acquiesced, and we sailed thither. 

After a short stay at the house of a 
Scottish emigrant merchant of this place, 
a friend of his, of the name of Balfour, 
E 3 



78 DUDLEY. 

on whose kindness and humanity he 
could rely, he only waited to see me 
removed to the habitation I now occupy 
at Santa Cruz, Avhen he returned to 
Madeira, from whence, on the death of 
his nephew, he sailed to England. 

I had entrusted him with letters to all 
my English friends, requesting him to 
read them first, and if he judged them 
to be only the flights of insanity, pro- 
ductive of no good, but a great deal of 
mischief, to destroy them, otherwise to 
deliver them as directed. On this sub- 
ject he wrote to me from Madeira, as- 
suring me he had thrust every one into 
the fire, reminding me, at the same time, 
I was in a Spanish country, and that if 
I did not wish to be the victim of an 
AutO'de-fe my self i as well as my mag- 
nificent epistles, not to presume to write 
again, until Mr. Balfour, (who has much 
skill in medicine, and who formerly prac- 
tised at Glasgow,) should give him a 
favourable report on the state of my 
pulse. My disorder then took a con- 
trary turn, and I at last extorted from 
him a solemn promise not to reveal the 



DUDLEY. 79 

place of my retreat, until I should be 
deemed sufficiently recovered to need no 
sw^eillance. 

And now, my sister, can you forgive 
my long and seemingly unkind silence ? 
Cap you feel for me — can you pity my 
wanderings, both mental and corporeal, 
and will you write to me? I know you 
will. I have passed the probation to 
which I had condemned myself, of liv- 
ing a full twelvemonth in perfect seclu- 
sion ; and can now own that my health 
is, thank God, entirely estabhshed, and 
my mind at once calm and firm. I can, 
at this day, look back upon the past 
without that bitter pang, which, for- 
merly shooting at once through heart 
and brain, withered the one, and burnt 
up the other. I can, indeed, say at this 
hour, with the lips of simplicity and 
truth, " The Lord gave, the Lord hath 
taken away ; blessed be his name.^* 

Neither you, nor my sister Jane, had 
seen much of Claudina — Cionmore 
had. You are neither of you aware of 
the greatness of my loss — he is. Ask 
of him, enquire of him, was she not a 
E 4 



so DUDLEY. 

tnost gracious being, beautiful and good, 
tender, affectionate, sensible, and pious. 
She was — she was all this — and more, 
much more than I can express. I mean 
to write to him on this subject. 

What ravages these mental convul- 
sions cause to the human frame . I, Jane's 
younger brother, were we now seen toge- 
ther, might be mistaken for her father. 1 
understand, Caroline, you have got my 
child in your care, as I wished ; and 
that our sister, now a widow, and child- 
less herself, is living with you, and that 
you have been most kind to my poor 
little Claudy. Heaven bless you both. 
I have had regular and minute accounts 

from Dr. H of how you all go on ; 

but we must in future relieve him a little 
of the burthen of writing, by corres- 
ponding with each other. 

I see, I guess your astonishment. No, 
my dear sisters, (for I now address you 
both,) do not expect me in England. I 
could not return but at the hazard of a 
relapse. Never more could I inhabit 
Oakland Park, or my house in town, 
where my life was once blessed, and can 

12 



DUDLEY. 81 

be blessed no longer. Here I have 
recovered serenity and peace, and here 
I purpose, for the future, residing. We 
can but be happy on whatever spot we 
vegetate, and in this small sequestered 
island, which gave me birth, I am, and 
hope to remain, comparatively happy. 

Could we but look forward on the 
road of life, instead of journeying blind- 
folded as we do, how different would be 
our fate ! Had I known I should live 
to experience the misery of early widow- 
hood — dear as she was to me, I 

A mist is gathering before my sight, 
r can *7nt€ no more. 

Etjot Howard. 



82 BUDLEr, 



LETTEK VIL 

Sir JEliot Howard to the Eev. Henri/ Clonmore^ 

Teneriffe. 

What need of apologies, Clonmore^ 
between you and me ? — ^ Do I not know 
the state of your mind towards me ? — » 
is not mine open to your inspection ? -— 
we understand each other. 

When did we last meet ? — on what 
occasion ?— was it not when I rode over 
to Bloomfield rectory, to engage you and 
Mrs. Cionmore to come and celebrate 
the anniversary of our wedding at Oak- 
land Park ? 

I fear I shall weary you, my best 
friend, by my disconsolate letters ; but 
you wish me to write, and on what subject 
can 1 but on that with which my whole 
soul is still occupied, and which whilst I 
exist can never cease to fill both heart 
and memory? Besides, you know the 
full value of the treasure I once pos- 
sessed --« with you my wife had been 



DUDLEVe 8S 

long acquainted before I had ever seen 
her ; — you, therefore, can best bear 
witness whether I exaggerate her worth, 
and alone can make allowances for my 
conduct, which, to a casual eye, must 
seem the result of weakness more than 
feminine. 

Dr. H — =-. tells me you have often gone 
to Lady Alford's, purposely to caress my 
little Claudy ; that you are as fond of her 
as of your own children ; and that, ow- 
ing to some remarkable impression on 
the child's brain, whenever she sees you 
she asks for me, enquiring how old I 
am — how tall — what clothes I wear -— - 
when I mean to come home, and other 
important particulars ? How dear are 
such trifles to the heart of a parent ! 

Can I, ought I to confess that nothing 
gave me m.ore pleasure than to hear, from 

Dr. H -, that she bears not the slight* 

est resemblance to her mother. I hear 
you exclaim against this sremingly un- 
natural emotion, and doubt my sincerity 
in avowing it. Had I, my friend, loved 
her mother less, I might wish otherwise 5 
but as it is, every man is the best judge 
E 6 



84 DUDLEY. 

of his own feelings; and I am well as- 
sured, that did Claudy resemble the 
being who gave her birth, I never could 
feel happy in her sight. To be, at every 
instant of my future life, tantalized by 
the look, the features, the voice of 
Claudina, and she gone for ever ! — No, 
I could not endure that torment. 

I have her picture, a whole-length, 
by Lawrence, given to me, in some mea- 
sure, by herself, after her death. It now 
looks down upon me as I write these 
words. The sight of this I can bear ; I 
can gaze for hours upon this ; I can 
fancy it hears me when I speak to it, 
and opens its lips in reply, and moves its 
deep-blue eyes, as watching me, in 
silence, when I traverse the room : — all 
this I can bear ; but another living Clau- 
dina, and not my Claudina, my wife ! — 
No, never could I suppo4t that torment. 

How full of truth and sensibility is 
that remark of Dr. Johnson, when speak- 
ing of portrait painting : he says, ** It is 
an art xvhich diffuses friendshifp^ renews 
tenderness y quickens the affections of the 



DUDLEY. S5 

heart, and continues the presence of the 
deadr 

This picture was sent to me from 
Oakland Park, as you perhaps were in- 
formed at the time, at my desire, by 

Dr. H ; and has, since its arrival 

here, been closeted with me in a small 
room, into which no one has access but 
myself. I was never jealous of the ori- 
ginal, but I am of this : it shall be seen 
by no eyes but mine ; never shall it be 
profaned even by the admiration of a 
stranger. 



I have drawn the curtain before it, 
and will endeavour to write with more 
calmness and connection. 

Many of us young men, Clonmore, 
choose our future wives at balls and plays, 
parties and races, to all of which most 
single women go, for the express purpose 
of captivating the eyes of man : they 
dress for the purpose, smile for the pur- 
pose, laugh, simper, talk, aye and bet 
among themselves, before they set out, 
as the old song has it, to *' bring home 



86 DUDLEY* 

hear^ts by dozeris'' How often have I 
heard my giddy sister, Caroline, thus 
boast, when springing into the carriage, 
to drive to some fashionable assembly, 
flushed with hope and prepared for 
conquest. 

Caroline, it is true, did win a high 
prize in the matrimonial lottery ; but 
though her earl was, in fact, caught at 
first sight by her lovely figure and beau* 
tiful face, he, like a wise man, though very 
young, had the precaution to check his 
passion, until he had thoroughly enquired 
— not into the state of her fortune, 
there let me do him justice — -but into 
that of her temper. He made allowances 
for the exuberant flow of youthful spirits j 
and they were married, and were happy. 

Our elder sister, Jane, whom, it seems, 
all her kind friends had set down, even 
from childhood, for eternal maidenhood, 
was one morning, at breakfast, asked by 
my father, had she any objection to 
change her name to Grantiey, that of a 
man who had not said a dozen civil words 
to her in his life, but who had been on 
the most friendly footing with our pa- 



DUDLEY* 87 

rents for as many years. Jane, notwith- 
standing her frozen nature, did certainly 
bkish, and hesitate, and throw down a 
cup of scalding tea, as is usual on these 
occasions ; but, being pressed by her 
father, laughed at by me, a wild young 
boy, and pinched on the arm by Caro- 
line, a still wilder little girl, she at last 
contrived to say, with very decent com- 
posure, "Your choice, sir, shall be mine;*' 
and this union proved most happy. 

I, as you know well, escaped the sy* 
tens, the nymphs, and the graces that 
haunt the concert, the ball, and the 
play : neither was my fate decided in a 
family party. You, Clonmore, kno\v 
how and where I first met Claudina ; but 
you know not how I lost hen 

I had been detained at Dorchester, ort 
some high-sheriff business, longer than I 
wished or expected \ and as soon as I 
could possibly escape, hastened towards 
home. It was the anniversary of our 
marriage 5 and disappointed of your 
company, and that of Mrs. Clonmore, 
on account of your intended removal to 



88 DUDLEY. 

town the next day, we resolved to spend 
it entirely alone. 

I have read of that feeling called pre- 
sentiment; nay, 1 am not ashariied to 
confess I have, on some occasions^ felt 
it ; but, on this day, so buoyant, so ex: 
hilar ated were my spirits, that I have 
since reflected I never experienced more 
delightful sensations than during my 
ride from Dorchester to Oakland. 

On entering the Park I heard the 
first dinner-bell ring; and apprehensive 
that Claudina had been anxious at my 
stay, and perhaps given up all expect- 
ations of seeing me that evening, I 
opened the hall-door, and, striding up 
three or four steps at a time, booted and 
spurred as I was, almost ran to her 
dressing-room. There, on the outside, 
I found little Claudy, drumming at the 
door with both her hands, and calling 
loudly to be let in : — " Open door ! — 
me ! — open door ! — me !" was repeated 
in a sweet lisp, but with no small degree 
of violence. 

I suspected that, for some high crime 
or other, she had, as usual, been put out 



DUDLEY. ^ 

of* the room, and her nurse rung for ; 
when, lifting her from the ground, and 
giving her a fond kiss, which contra- 
dicted my words, I said, *' Claudy, 
naughty girl ? papa will not love naughty 
girls." Then, with the child still in my 
arms, I opened the door and went in, 
saying, as I entered, ** Claudina, my 
love, I fear I have made you wait ; but 
I will be ready in five minutes." — She 
was sitting on the sofa opposite the fire, 
with her back towards me ; lights were 
burning dimly on the table at which she 
reclined, and, as I received no answer, I 
concluded she had fallen into a doze. 

Under this idea I walked on tiptoe 
until I came behind her, when I held 
Claudy over her shoulder, who, seizing the 
veil which formed part of her head-dress, 
stooped, attempting to clasp her mother's 
neck, when my attention was, on a sud- 
den, attracted by a long square frame, 
covered with a green cloth, which rested 
on the ground against a chair, opposite 
to me. Suffering Claudy to scramble 
down over the back of the sofa as well as 



90 DUDLEY. 

she could, 1 went hastily round to examine 
this new object. 

I, however, partly guessed what it 
was, and, consequently, felt no great 
surprise, though indescribable pleasure, 
when, on snatching off the cover, I saw 
the whole-length portrait of my wife, 
which, according to her directions, had 
been sent home by Lawrence on that 
very morning. 

Too full of admiration and tenderness 
for words, I could only, for some mo- 
ments, gaze alternately, and in silence, 
upon Claudina and her picture. Ob, 
Clonmore ! how little conscious, then, 
that I had gained the shadow, and for 
ever lost the substance ! 

" And this is your present to me on 
our wedding day, my dear Claudina ! — » 
and in the very dress you wore, the 
Scotch plaid, when our eyes first met. 
Yonder is your bonnet on the ground, 
and here your little basket, and even 
the bundle is not forgotten. The lo- 
calities are also kept ; behind you is the 
gate, and here, at the side, the very 
hedge that caught your veil. I think 



DUDLEY. 91 

Lawrence might have given me a place 
in the back-ground, and have introduced 
Rover with some effect. It is an ad- 
mirable painting ; and as for the like- 
ness ! Come, rouse yourself, my love, 

and let me thank you as I ought." 

I rushed to the sofa, threw myself by 
her side, caught her in my arms, and — 
oh God ! embraced a corpse ! 

Yes, Clonmore ! a cold, inanimate, 
stiffening corpse ! — without warning, 
without seemingly one pang or struggle, 
without the slightest previous illness, (as 
I afterwards collected from the nurse, 
who brought in the child as usual 
whilst she was dressing for dinner, from 
the maid who attended her, and from 
Herbert, to whom she had given direc- 
tions, at the door of her room, concern- 
ing the delay of dinner until my return, 
however late,) — without, 1 repeat, the 
smallest complaint of any kind — nay, 
they all asserted they had never seen her 
look more beautiful or happy — was this 
excellent creature, in the twenty-sixth 
year of her age, snatched from life, from 
her friends, from her child, from her be- 



92 DUDLEY. 

loved and doating husband. She was 
dead, quite dead — cold, perfectly cold. 

I have read of such things — heard 
of such things : — in magazines, and in 
newspapers, I have met with a hundred 
instances of this nature ; and I have 
perused them with much the same apathy 
as when reading an account of a sale by 
auction, or that of a fox-chace. The 
shaft was now come home to my own 
bosom, and I felt it — I feel it still. 

From the moment of being convinced 
by the surgeon of the village, who was 
called in, Heaven knows when, or by 
whom, that she was past recall, to that 
in which I saw her coffin placed in the 
funeral vault, my mind was a blank — 
a blank, Clonmore ! — I saw nothing, I 
heard nothing, I remember nothing ! 
Oh, yes! I heard one sound — a sound 
which pierced my brain through and 
through, and which, even at this distant 
period, thrills it with madness : — it was 
the cry of my child, when, screaming 
with grief uncontrollable, and refusing 
to be comforted, she called, " Mamma ! 
mamma !" 



DUDLEY. 93 

Thus, Clonmore, did I, in one instant, 
in the twinkle of an eye, as quick as the 
stroke of lightning, become, from a being 
Avho enjoyed every comfort and blessing 
under the sun, the veriest wretch that 
crawled upon the earth. In her I had 
lost my wife, my best friend, my other 
self, my sincere adviser, my comforter, 
my bosom counsellor — the only woman 
I had fondly loved — the only woman who 
had ever truly loved me ! She was dead, 
and I still lived ; and yet how often, in 
the wild effusions of affection and gra- 
titude, I had declared I never could sur- 
vive her loss ! — The Lord of existence, 
and of death, he heard these idle w^ords, 
and in chastisement decreed, " You shall 
survive her," 

I can recollect, my good Herbert, the 
surgeon, and others, removing, during the 
tirst paroxysms of my grief, every imple- 
ment of destruction. — I could not blame 
them, and to argue would have been im- 
possible J but had they known, as well as 
you know what were my principles, they 
must have been aware, that I look upon 
a Christian as no more master of his life 



94 DUDLEY. 

than tke sun is of its own movements ; — 
that sun may with as much justice start 
from its orbit, and refuse to give light to 
the universe, as man to rush from his 
station here on earth, and burst an un- 
bidden guest, (or a guest not having on 
the wedding garment,) into the presence 
of the Lord of life. 

You are aware I speak not of such 
whose death is the consequence of in- 
sanity, to those we may hope mercy will 
be extended, but that was not precisely 
my case. Whilst blessed with sufficient 
reason to feel conscious that suicide was 
a crime, there was no extenuation of 
guilt ; — could I, then, the firm believer 
in the immortality of the soul, by my 
own sinful act, the very nature of which 
shuts out all chance of repentance, put 
an eternal divorce between the pure 
spirit of Claudina and my own? — How 
could I ever hope the reunion of the soul 
of an impious suicide (for the distinction 
must be drawn, and can be proved) with 
that of a godly soul recalled by its 
Maker ? We are told by the divine and 
blessed One, that in heaven there are 



DUDLEY. 95 

many mansions, or degrees of happiness, 
but unless enjoying the self-same sphere 
of beatitude with her, could heaven be a 
heaven to me ? 

No, my friend, even in the very ex- 
tremity of distress, in the very bitterness 
of despair, the idea of self-destruction 
never came across my mind ; once, and 
once only, when in the hermitage in the 
park at Oakland, the very day on which 
I quitted my house for ever, wound to 
the very height of frenzy, I dared re- 
proach my Creator with my loss, shriek- 
ing like a maniac, " Restore her ! O my 
God restore her, or take me !" — When, at 
the same instant, I recollect throwing 
myself on my knees in penitence and 
remorse, saying, *' Thy will be done." 
True, my lips moved not, but what have 
the lips to do with prayer ? 

The suspicions of my people did me 
injustice — they wounded me most 
deeply ; but I could not, at that time, 
justify myself, all the emotions of my 
soul being absorbed in one dreadful con- 
viction — that I was utterly ruined,—. 
I had looked forward to a wedded life, 



96 DUDLEY. 

even to old age ; I had anticipated be- 
coming the father of sons and daughters, 
nay, with fond weakness, I had pictured 
around me a group of grand-children, 
and I was now widowed — left alone in 
the world, with one tender fragile flower 
of a few months growth, which the hand 
of death, natural or accidental, might 
deprive me, and I should then be totally 
childless, perhaps doomed to live the 
full number of years allotted to man, — 
childless and widowed. 

No, I assert, and ever will maintain, 
of all miseries, that of losing a wife, your 
choice, your chosen, your other heart, 
your twin soul, your inseparable hourly 
companion, your fellow-labourer in the 
holy vineyard, is the very climax of 
earthly sorrow. From the moment our 
eyes first met, we loved. — She knew not 
who I was ; I was equally ignorant con- 
cerning her ; we were strangers, totally 
strangers, and yet at that first look, our 
souls said, — *^ We belong to each other;" 
from that hour we never ceased to love, 
and for eight years she was my pride, my 
ornament, my heart's bright sun-beam, 
my best blessing on this side the grave. 



DUDLEY. 97 

Have I at length made amends for my 
long silence, which you, Clonmore, it 
seems so warmly lamented, and which 
I now most solemnly entreat you to for- 
give ; or have I wearied you, my friend ? 
Whether you wish it or not, I must still 
write to you, for thus my mind is eased, 
my temper tranquillized, and my tender- 
ness awakened. When writing to the 
friend of my boyhood and youth, I feel 
I have not lost all, in losing Claudina. 

Write soon, and often ; but first see 
my child, who, I understand, has, thank 
God, safely passed through the diseases 
incident to her time of life. — Speak to 
her of me, tell her you have heard from 
me : remember her answer, her questions, 
her every action, and repeat and describe 
them to me minutely. 

Adieu, Clonmore : may you never ex- 
perience my present feelings, — so prays, 
in behalf of yourself and wife. 

Your faithful 

Eliot Howard. 



VOL. I. 



98 DUDLEY, 



LETTER VIII. 

The Rev* Henry Clonmore to Sir Eliot Howards 

Bloomfield Rectory. 

Can I give my dear Howard a more 
convincing proof of the sincerity of that 
pardon he condescends to solicit, for his 
apparent want of confidence and friend- 
ship, than by declaring that one of tlie 
happiest moments of my existence was 
that wherein I received his long-ex- 
pected letter. 

I certainly must acknowledge, notwith- 
standing my high opinion of your reli- 
gious principles, that I had my fears of 
your personal safety, until relieved by 
the explanations of our eccentric friend 

Dr. H- , by which I found that you 

were still in the land of life, and a self- 
banished man. 

And now, my dear friend, in sober 
judgment, what occasion was there for 



DUDLEY. 99 

thus retiring to so remote a corner of the 
world, that, as Lady Alford justly ob- 
serves, none but swallows and other birds 
of passage can attempt to visit you. 

You have fled from England, it is true, 
but can you, have you fled from your- 
self? And do you not think that your 
mind would have regained its serenity, 
and your body its strength, had you, 
instead of exiling yourself to TeneriiFe, 
crossed the English Channel to us when 
we were in France, or gone on a tour 
through Scotland or Wales, or under- 
taken a pilgrimage to Ireland ; any mea- 
sure, in short, rather than become an 
absentee in so obscure a country, sur- 
rounded by foreigners and strangers, 
who can hav€ no one interest in your 
aftairs, or you in theirs. 

You were deprived by the dispensa- 
tions of Providence of your wife ; why 
should you, in consequence, voluntarily 
deprive yourself of your child ? — Two 
blessings were bestowed upon you by the 
Giver of all good, and because he thought 
fit to bereave you of oncj yoii indignantly 
F 2 



100 " DUDLEY. 

throw away the other I — Is this acting 
like a Christian, like a man ? 

In England, you united in your per- 
son the characters of husband, father, 
master, landlord, senator, magistrate, 
brother, and friend, and you fulfilled the 
duties of each most faithfully — reverse 
the medal, and tell me what are you now ? 
Take away the first title, that of husband, 
and do not all the rest remain ? — They 
do; and now that your mind is once more 
at ease, they summon you to return, and 
exercise the respective functions, as here- 
tofore, with honour to yourself, and 
satisfaction to others. 

An unfortunate debtor, or a surviving 
duellist, or imprudent seconds — a public 
defaulter, or a private swindler, — or in 
short any person involved in mystery and 
misfortune, may feel it convenient to 
smuggle themselves out of the kingdom, 

according to Dr. H 's expression ; 

but how the father of an infant child, a 
man of considerable landed -property, and 
a member of the legislature, could let 
his private and domestic feelings so far 



DtJDLfiY. 101 

conquef the desire to fulfil his public 
duties, staggers me not a little. 

Dr. H 's excellent heart cannot 

be doubted, but his judgment in this 
affair has, and ever will be, called in 
question. — Your departure from Eng- 
land, and present residence, are now 
no secret j and every one, friend and 
stranger, is at liberty to talk according 
to his own view of the subject. Hitherto, 
it must be confessed, no very flagrant 
enormity has been committed on your 
part, as the change of scene and 
climate may have had on your health the 
most beneficial effects : but to prove that 
your mind is equally sane, you must be 
well convinced that an immediate return 
to England is absolutely necessary. — 
Under this idea, I have to hope that 
your letter will be the only one I shall 
ever receive from Teneriffe, and I have 
no other correspondent in that island 
except yourself. 

On receiving a line from you, dated 
from any English sea-port, I shall hasten 
to meet you, that mine may be the first 
F 3 



102 DUDtEY. 

ha»d to welcome you back to your native 
land, for such I must ever assert is Great 
jBritain to ypu : no matter where you were 
born. 

Every thing at Oakland Park, <w at 
Bloomfield rectory, shall be in readiness 
for you. — If you fix upon the former, 
I invite myself, and wife, and perhaps 
a half- weaned baby or so, to spend a few 
weeks with you. Of course Lady Alford 
and Mrs. Gr^ntley, who are now in town, 
will be in Dorsetshire ready to meet you j 
so that all together we shall make a good 
strong party to chace away the blue 
devils, who it is very natural should try 
to make good their footing in a place 
from which an angel has been for ever 
removed. 

Your feelings and mine with respect 
to sudden death wholly differ ; but the 
subject is too diffuse to enter upon at 
present. — I have only to remark, that 
in its very nature we are taught the most 
implicit submission to Heaven : it is so 
decidedly the act of Omnipotence, so 
truly the awful word of God, saying. 



DUDLEY* lOS 

" Come," and he cotneth, « Go,** and 
he goeth ; that we are compelled at once 
to acknowledge the Divine will, and to 
bend to that will in meek resignation. »— 
Wlien death is the consequence of acci- 
dent, of illness, or of old age, we are per- 
mitted, before the last moments, still to 
hope, to doubt, that life may, by our 
care and skill, be prolonged ; and we tiius 
become self-acting agents : but far 
otherwise must it be regarded, when the 
object, in full health, youth, and spirits, 
falls at our feet and expires* 

To return, however, to the chace of 
the blue devils, should our attempts be 
insufficient to drive them away, we shall 
have a most powerful ally in your little 
Claudy, for a more boisterous, noisy, 
self-willed urchin, I never met with. 

My boys and girls, though so much 
older than herself, are literally afraid of 
her : the only one she will condescend 
to treat with common civility is little 
Dudley, who, you may remember, is 
about her own age, although, from severe 
illness, my poor child is now less than 
F 4 



204 JIUDLBY. 

half her size. All the good that your 
Ciaudy acquires from her aunt Grantley, 
whom we find a very sensible woman, is 
rendered null and void by the provoking 
conduct of her aunt Alford : — the 
Countess indulges her in every whim, 
gives her every thing she roars for, and 
obeys all her infantine and absurd com- 
mands. 

The child will be wholly ruined, unless 
put under proper management ; and al- 
though only three years of age, and a 
girl, under whose care ought she to be 
placed ? under whose roof ought she to 
be reared? She has lost her mother, 
ought you not to supply the maternal 
place ? 

Your daughter, your sisters, your te- 
tants, your constituents, your household, 
and your friend Clonmore, join in sum- 
moning you back to England : for their 
sakes, and your own, comply, and 
speedily. Trust me, that then, and then 
only, you will be blest with complete 
recovery. Your spirits will soon regain 
their happy equanimity, and your person 



DUDLEY. 105 

its former state of health. Finally, re- 
member, that " Omnia corporis mala ab 
anima procedere.** * 

Ever sincerely yours, 

Henry Clonmore. 

* Plato, 



F d 



106 DUDLEY. 



LETTER IX. 

Sir Eliot Howard to the Rev, Henry Clonmore, 

Santa Cruz, Teneriffe. 

It was not without reason, my dear Clon- 

more, that Dr. H once called you, 

in my hearing, a self-tormentor, and that 
he often compared you to a thoughtlesif 
boy who blew bubbles into the air, ex- 
pecting they would reach the skies, and 
fretted because they burst. 

I will not trespass on your time or pa- 
tience, or even your friendship, by asking 
you to read over my letter ; but, from 
remembrance of its contents, tell me 
where found you in it a single passage, 
a line, a word, that bears the slightest 
reference to my return to England? — 
"Why, man, I never mean to return to 
England! England is not my native 
place. Go back to my native land ! I 
am in my native land : — this spot, in- 
sulated and obscure as it is, is the place 



DUDLEY. - 107 

of my birth. This is the air I first 
breathed, the soil I first trod ; these are 
the accents I first heard, I first spoke : 
here I was born, and here I will die. 

In the last lingering pangs of a con- 
sumption, my mother, as you must have 
heard, was brought from Madeira to this 
island, this air being considered still niore 
favourable to the nature of her disease. 
In the very house I now occupy, nay, in 
the very room 1 now write, she gave 
birth to me, and died in the arms of my 
father. Too feeble and weak to be re. 
moved to England, when he returned 
home with the remains of his wife, he 
left me in the care of my nurse and her 
husband, hardy and robust mountaineers j 
and such was the improvement in my 
growth and health, and the excessive 
fondness of my youthful foster-parents, 
that he consented to my remaining with 
them until I had attained my sixth year. 

Thus did this sun, this firmament, this 
soil, become individually my owrt ; and 
thus, instead of being surrounded by 
strangers and foreigners, as you remark, 
I feel at home, and every stranger appears 
F 6 



108 DUDLEY. 

a friend. All things around me assert 
their claim to my affection ; and to bind 
me still stronger to this dear place of my 
nativity, at the very moment I now 
write, being unusually weak and low- 
spirited, I am attended by a Spanish 
woman, the kindest, most disinterested 
being on earth, and to whom I was in- 
debted in a great measure, on my arrival, 

(for Dr. H sought and found her,) 

for the recovery of my health and reason. 

Clonmore, Martella, the nurse of my 
infancy, (now a widow,) at whose breast 
I was nourished for so many months, and 
by whose tender care I am in a great 
measure indebted for my recent recovery, 
is now at my side, entreating me, with 
all the fondness of a mother, to lay by 
my pen, and take the sago she has pre- 
pared for me. 

This simple, untaught Spaniard, with 
her good-humoured happy face, unre- 
mitting attention, and love of anecdote 
respecting my deceased mother, and my 
own childhood, has been the means, under 
heaven, of restoring me to what I am, 
not a cheerful, but a resigned being. 



DUDLEY* 109 

Talk no more, then, to me, of England. 
There, it is true, I spent the delightful 
morning of boyhood, and enjoyed the 
meridian sun of youth and maturity; 
but there, also, came on that fatal eclipse, 
even when happiness was in the zenith. 
There I suffered the bitterest anguish of 
spirit, and lost, what my own death only 
can restore. 

When my dear friend invites me, with 
such apparent ease, to return, and resume 
the functions of landlord, magistrate, and 
senator, how little is he aware of the 
change I have passed through ; and how 
incredulous would he look, were I to 
assure him, that did he meet me, unpre- 
pared, in any strange place, he would 
pass me by, as one unknown to him. 

I am now sitting to an eminent Spanish 
painter, who is on a visit at Mr. Balfour's, 
for my picture. Yes, Clonmore, for a 
full length picture, and as large as life ! 

" No flattery,'' I said to the artist; 
" examine every wrinkle in my cheek ; 
take notice of these furrows in my brow ; 
observe the white shade in my temples. 
Copy faithfully the dull and sunken eye. 



110 BtJDLEirv 

the mournful turn of the lip, the deep 
contraction of the forehead, the pale and 
unhealthy colour of the skin, the thin 
and nerveless hand, omit nothing of all 
this; varnish not the slightest defect, 
but paint my blighted youth, my wasted 
form, to the very life. 

« You must represent me," I conti- 
nued, " in this my usual morning dress ; 
here, in my private study, and seated 
in this old-fashioned high-backed chain 
(The furniture of the house remains in 
the same state as when my mother died, 
now nine-and-twenty years.) Examine 
well the minutest decorations of this 
room : let every article, which can with 
propriety be admitted into a picture, re- 
semble strictly the original, — the co- 
lour and disposal of the drapery, of the 
hangings, of the curtains, — let all be ex- 
act J and when you have represented me 
thus by my English Rumford fire-side, 
you must paint the companion of my so- 
litude, Carlo, my Newfoundland dog, 
lying on the mat at my feet, as you see 
him at this moment !" 

The painter, with a mournful smile. 



DUDLEY* 111 

which I could have dispensed with, pro- 
mised to comply, by attending most 
strictly to my directions. — The picture, 
when finished, shall be sent to England, 
to Oakland Park, there to hang in 
Claudy's room. I wish it to be the first 
object her eyes meet with when she 
wakes, and the last before she retires to 
rest. Thus will she become gradually 
familiarized to my appearance, so that 
when I send for her to come to me, (nay, 
no amazement, Clonmore, such is my 
intention,) she will not be shocked or 
affrighted at the living skeleton that shall 
hold out its arms to receive her — she 
will not shun and fly from me as from a 
monster : but having been taught, for 
upwards of a year, to call a painted figure, 
resembling me (and there is no hope of a 
more favourable change) her father, when 
we do meet, it will not be as strangers. 

You now understand me perfectly, 
Clonmore, and I trust you to communis 
cate my feelings and determination to my 
sisters,^ who, if they have still any value 
for my future happiness, will, instead of 
persevering, like yourself, in fruitless at- 



11^ DUDLEY. 

tempts to induce my return, enter fully 
into them, and endeavour to serve me 
as alone I wish to be served. 



I am building, Clonmore ! — My good 
friend, I have long since been convinced, 
that the radical cure for a wounded spirit 
is employment. I have, in consequence, 
for many months, been engaged in that 
species of active occupation, which, more 
than any other, has the power of engross- 
ing and interesting the mind, — building 
and gardening. 

My resolution once formed, the land 
was soon purchased, and the foundations 
of the house laid. I made a model of 
the latter with my own hands ; and not 
only designed the arrangements of the 
grounds and vineyards, but superintended 
the workmen, and personally assisted in 
their labours. 

I am confident, my friend, that whilst 
you decidedly approve of this experiment 
to lessen the repinings of the soul, and 
strengthen the body by manual toil, you 
will feel astonished at my possessing that 



DUDLEYw 113 

degree of fortitude necessary to lead me 
to form it* The idea, Clonmore, did not 
originate with me : I adopted it at the 
suggestion of a Spanish friend of Mr, 
Balfour, at whose house at Santa Cruz, 
and villa at Ben Lomond, as he calls it^ we 
often meet. 

This Don Zulvago was at first the ob- 
ject of my suspicion, and soon became 
that of my horror and aversion. I fan- 
cied he was a spy upon my actions ; and 
having, soon after my arrival here, found 
him at different periods close behind me, 
when I fancied myself in total solitude, 
I have been often tempted to insult him, 
and call him to an account for his singu- 
lar conduct. On such occasions he bore 
my peevishness and violent remonstrances 
with the most perfect good-humour, 
merely turning from me with a shrug of 
the shoulders, whilst whistling the bur- 
den of a Spanish song. 

I have since recollected that I was 
subject at that time to a giddiness in my 
head, and more than once, in my lonely 
rambles, must have fallen into the sea, or 
over a precipice, but for the vigilance, 



114 DUDLEY* 

strength, and activity of this constant, and 
unless required, invisible attendant. — He 
never spoke, never answered me, but to 
all my questions as to his insolent offici- 
ousness, invariably turned upon his heel 
with a whistle. 

I had sense enough, however, to ob- 
serve, that as my health grew confirmed, 
he became more sparing of his company ; 
and to my great relief, I had not been on 
the island more than four months, when 
he discontinued his attendance altoge- 
ther. 

Anxious to make some compensation 
to Balfour, my mercantile friend, I one 
day, >vhen we were alone, put a small 
pocket-book into his hand, with grateful 
expressions of my sense of the skill and 
humanity with which he had treated me, 
(for, as I have already mentioned, he 
formerly made medicine his study,) when 
he, conscious that he had fulfilled his 

promises to Dr. H , with the utmost 

frankness and good-humour accepted the 
gift as a token of gratitude from a rich 
man to one, but lately married, who 
might have a family, and whose depend- 



DUDLEY. 11^ 

ance rested on the exercise of his various 
talents. 

I then threw upon the table a purse of 
dollars and other coin, adding carelessly, 
" Give that to your spy : he has done 
his duty ; but never let me see his face 
again.'' 

" My spy !" exclaimed Balfour, with 
astonishment. 

" Yes, that fellow with the strong arm 
— you know who I mean : in short, my 
dear sir, as I am now well enough to ac- 
knowledge my past insanity, do you be 
equally candid, and own yourself satis- 
fied with that able-bodied Spaniard whom 
you appointed my keeper, and give him 
this his reward from me." 

Balfour perfectly stared with surprise, 
and then added, " You cannot mean 
Don Zulvago, whom you have met so 
frequently at my table." 

" The same — the man in black ; — 
as for the Don, that title here, I find, is 
on a par with Esquire in England. — And 
as for his dining in your company, that 
I look upon as the hospitable sort of 
equality which I so much admire in the 



il6 DIJDLEY. 

place J but I made one observattion oi« 
your guest, if you choose thus to denO' 
minate him, neither at meals, or other 
time, did I ever hear any sound from his 
lips but a sort of whistle." 

" In the first place, pocket your dol- 
lars, and then tell me, do you not, Sir 
Eliot, consider yourself a rich man — of 
course that is understood, you are such. 
Well, then, the fact is, this Zulvago pos- 
sesses, perhaps, triple your wealth, as on 
enquiry you would be informed at the 
banks of London, Paris, Vienna, and 
Amsterdam. — Since the title of Don 
displeases you as common and unre- 
stricted, perhaps that of Conde d' Al- 
meida may please you better ; and, not to 
mention half a score Christian names 
which distinguish him according to the 
Spanish custom, let me add, he is one of 
the most illustrious members of the 
Cortes of Spain, and has held a high 
commission in the Spanish army." 

" Can it be possible! — but then his 
manners, his habits of life — even his 
dress, his equipage, — or rather his no 
equipage -" 



DUDLEY. XI7 

" Granted, but such is his pleasure, — 
- Je is verging towards the age of five-and- 
thirty, and still unmarried ; true, but that 
is equally his own concern. — He is a na- 
tive of Madrid, and yet a naturalized 
citizen of almost every civilized capital ill 
Europe. — He has been in every quarter 
of the globe, has spent some years in 
India and America, and is not only mas- 
ter of the dead languages, but speaks and 
writes most of the modern." 

" Not English, assuredly !" — (and I 
felt myself redden at past recollections.) 
" Pardon me — he does, and if you will' 
take the trouble to unbend and meet him 
half way, you will find him as great a 
proficient in our language as Baretti him- 
self, whose travels I see you are now 
reading. You will meet in Zulvago the 
rational companion, but no entertaining 
traveller, as his reserve is at times invin- 
cible. However, to recommend him fur- 
ther to your acquaintance, I must dwell 
on the care and attention he has for some 
months shown to you ; when I felt un- 
easy at your absence, and yet was unable 
to disengage myself from business to at- 



118 DUDLEY. 

tend you in your rambles, three words 
from Zulvago have set my mind at ease 
for the remainder of the day — " Rely 
on me," was his usual expression, and I 
have then felt as secure as if I had had 
you buckled to my side.'* 

" But what motive — what induce- 
ment ?" 

" Simply philanthropy," replied Bal- 
four, "therefore consider yourself under 
no peculiar obligation to this gentle- 
man -— he lives to do good — he not only 
seizes every occasion that presents itself, 
but seeks for opportunities, and is equally 
ready to assist the helpless and afflicted 
negro, as the wealthy English baronet ; nei- 
ther sex, age, condition, colour or religion 
have any distinctions with him, his ready 
hand is held out to all : — it is a hand 
equally ready to relieve, to comfort, and 
to save, as to punish and defend.'* 

At this instant, Clonraore, the door 
opened, and the object of our conversa- 
tion walked into the room, or rather 
sauntered carelessly forward, one hand 
replaced again in his pocket, the other 
holding on high a bunch of grapes, which 



DUDLEY. 119 

he was eating in the manner of a boy 
playing bob-cherry. 

I rose hastily, and extending my hand, 
thanked him cordially for the benevolent 
attentions he had shown me during my 
malady, and dwelt particularly on the 
gentlemanly forbearance he had at all 
times manifested, even when my suspi- 
cious petulance warranted very different 
treatment. 

He received my thanks and apologies 
with a singular degree of ease and readi- 
ness, thereby acknowledging them his 
due ; and as we then entered on topics 
of a general nature, (he speaking our 
language fluently, though with a foreign 
accent,) Balfour, after shaking us both 
heartily by the hand in the true English 
fashion, and congratulating us on this 
first introduction to each other after a 
four months' acquaintance, left the room. 

From that period not a day has passed 
that Don Zulvago and I have not met, 
either in our walks or rides, or at the 
dinner and evening parties to which we 
are invited by the different consuls and 
other hospitable neighbours of different 



120 ' DUDLEY. 

nations residing in various parts of the 
island. 

One subject alone seems, as if by mu- 
tual consent, to be excluded our inter- 
course, — that of marriage : indeed we 
seldom speak of women at all. Of course 
he has been made acquainted with my 
misfortune, and avoids the slightest refer- 
ence to it, and yet 1 sometimes imagine 
his aversion to this topic is less to spare 
my feelings than his own. 

Though only five or six years older 
than myself, I feel the attempt to pene- 
trate his secret impossible ; but that there 
is a secret, and one of a disastrous nature 
that fills his heart, I am thoroughly con- 
vinced. With all due respect to his phi- 
lanthropy, I am almost persuaded, that 
sympathy had the greatest share in lead- 
ing him to watch me with such unremit- 
ting attention. 

He is a worthy man, I allow ; but like 
myself has certainly been crossed in the 
plain road of life, and forced into a thorny 
path as contrary to his expectations as 
wishes, and this has been the found- 
ation of so extraordinary a character. — 



DUDLEY. 121 

Grief and disappointment have left their 
marks upon him, not so much upon his 
person, as upon his manners altogether, 
which are undescribable j to return your 
quotation by another — " Mcestitia cor 
quasi percussum constringitur, tremit et 
languescit, cum acri sensa dolorisJ^ * 

This Zulvago has outlived the effect of 
some sudden and dire convulsion of the 
heart, and is now master of its move- 
ments : — he betrays no emotion, no sen- 
sibility, no warmth of attachment to any 
one object ; and yet I am persuaded there 
is still a chord existing in that heart, 
which touched by the hand of a master, 
or of chance, would vibrate with intense 
passion. 

But to return to the subject of my 
new occupation : — about two months 
since we rode together in my calash to 
Laguna, when oppressed with heat and 
thirst we stopped at the cottage of a wa- 
ter and ice carrier, and refreshed our- 
selves with what the inhabitants eagerly 
placed before us. Whilst our beasts 

* Melancthon. 
VOiL. I. G 



12^ PUDLEY. 

rested in the shade, he and I walked 
round the cottage to observe our hosts 
young and old, at their various labours. 

The master of the family fixed my at- 
tention: — he was at work upon a low 
wide shed constructed of rude logs of 
wood, the interstices filled with blocks of 
lava, and the roof thatched with dried 
vine stalks. — To this habitation, designed 
for his mules, he was now making a 
door, — his cheerfulness, his industry, 
ingenuity and patience, for the trade of a 
carpenter seemed new to him, excited at 
once my admiration and envy. 

" Here," observed I to Zulvago, 
" here, though surrounded by poverty, 
is a truly happy mortal, for he has some 
employment : I wish I could build a mule 
house, and attempt to construct a door to 
fit it, I should unquestionably be a more 
useful man, and perhaps a happier, than 
I am at present." 

" What occasion to build a mule house 
or perplex yourself whether a door will 
or will not fit ; — build at once a mansion 
house, and I will engage, as you say in 
Ireland (for I have been in that island), 



DUDLEY. 1^3 

that the grass will never grow before 
your door." 

Upon this slight hint, which immedi- 
ately filled me with hope, as offering a 
resource for the future, I laid all my 
plans; and profiting by his superior know- 
ledge of the country, and its inhabitants, 
I became the purchaser of a tract of land 
a few miles from the city of Orotava, 
which for local beauties has not its equal 
in the island. From Balfour's perfect 
acquaintance with the customs of the 
place, I left him the task of engaging 
workmen, and artificers; and our daily 
progress is such, that in less than a 
twelvemonth I shall be in possession of 
an earthly Paradise. A Paradise ! yes ; 
an Adam without an Eve. 

All this would indeed be superfluous 
folly, had I not a child. Or rather, no- 
thing merely to benefit self, could have 
roused me to this exertion ; but, when I 
think of my little Claudy, and how soon 
the infant expands into the child, the 
child becomes a girl, the girl a woman! — 
Oh, Clonmore, if the Almighty but 
spares my life to rear my daughter io 



124 DUDLEY. 

maturity, to see her blessed and blessing 
in wedlock, (as I was once blessed,) to 
behold her children round me, then, in 
peace, I may lay down my widowed 
head, on the pillow of death, and resign 
the world without one pang. 

I think, after this letter, my sisters, 
and you, will have the rationality to give 
up all serious expectations of my return 
to England. Write to me, and say you 
are satisfied : promise me that the picture 
mentioned above, and which you will 
soon receive, will be disposed of in the 
manner I wish ; and, finally, assure me 
you are reconciled to the idea, that in a 
year from this time, the period allotted 
for the completion of my future resi- 
dence, Claudy must be brought to me. ■ — 
It is even so, Clonmore, and you are the 
person who must bring her ! I speak de- 
cisively ; such is the language of friend- 
ship. I would do thus by you, and you 
know I would. — If you comply, we 
meet again : if not, we meet no more in 
this world. 

Present my kindest wishes to Mrs. 
Clonmore j and when you write again 
13 



DUDLEY. 125 

pray be particular concerning your little 
Dudley, (the dear god-son of my Clau- 
dina !) He seems, poor fellow, to have 
had rather more than his share of suffer- 
ing in this world ; and yet, as I hear 
from Dr. H — , he bears his afflictions 
with patience and docility. Poor infant ! 
And acquaint me how your French pupil, 
St. Eloi, goes on. As to politics, and 
your new war, my dear friend, I have 
only to ascend a few miles" towards 
the Peak, to feel as if all the convulsive 
struggles for empire, among mankind, 
were little more than the quarrels of em- 
mets for a grain of corn on an ant hill. 
Ever sincerely your's, 

Eliot Howard. 



G 3 



1^6 DUDLEY. 



LETTER X. 

The Countess ofAlford to Sir Eliot Hoisoard, 

Oakland Park, 

1 DID not answer your letter, my dear 
brother, because I really did hope, that 
on the receipt of Clonmore's, you would 
have called for your barge, and merry 
men all, and ferried over the water from 
Teneriffe to our Dorsetshire cliffs. 

About three days before the time when 
we might reasonably expect you, that is, 
by the last homeward-bound ships, I 
crammed the Parson, sister Jane, little 
Claudy, and myself into my travelling 
carriage, and set off in a whirl of dust 
from London to Oakland Park ; — there 
were we deposited, whilst our reverend 
gentleman struck off eastward, ho ! for 
Portsmouth, to meet you ! 

Daily, at the hazard of my neck, did 
I fix myself on the look-out with my 



DUDLEY. 1^ 

opera-glass, watching every sail from the 
south ; and once, mistaking a flock of 
gulls for a fleet, narrowly escaped the 
fate of Sappho, (without her fame,) by 
tumbling over the cliffs into a raging 
ocean ; whilst steady old Jane went on, 
as usual, with her morning avocations, 
beginning with that intolerable one of 
teaching your mighty heiress her A, B, C. 
Upon my life, Eliot, after all, you have 
played us a shabby trick. Now, suppose 
sister Jenny, and I, a couple of as bonny 
widows as ever wore weepers, had fol-*^ 
lowed your example, where might our 
station be at present? — Why did not 
Jane, on losing her mate, expand her 
raven pinion towards Nova Zembla ? 
And why did not I, when become a 
widow, flutter my butterfly wing, and 
fly to Otaheite ? — Thus, north, south, 
and west, we should have stood three 
disconsolates, playing at ibol in the mid- 
dle. No, no ; we know better. Widow 
Grantley would marry to-morrow, if she 
could get a man in the mind ; and I the 
next day, could I find a man to my mind. 
Ever, Eliot, copy a good example *, and, 
G 4 



128 DUDLEY. 

a word to the wise, no object on earth 
more interesting, in the eyes of a girl of 
fashion, than a handsome widower under 
thirty, whose Christian name is preceded 
by a Sir, and in whose rent-roll, the first 
figure is followed by a couple of brace of 
cyphers. 

Clonmore has shown us your letters to 
him ; and, by the last received, we are 
to understand, that England and its Par- 
liament, Oakland Park and its depend- 
encies, your old school-fellow, and his 
rising family, your prudent elder sister, 
your angelic younger, and, to sum up 
all, your vixen child, are renounced for 
ever. Oh no ! I forgot, the little vixen 
is to be transported to Tenerifie, and, in 
exchange, we are to receive the picture 
of a handsome skeleton, in a blue damask 
gown, green slippers, and red velvet cap, 
with an enormous dog at his feet, roast- 
ing itself before a great fire. 

Well, this is a comical present to 
Claiidy ! And you wish her to fall in 
love with this same portrait of a yellow- 
boned old gentleman, beautifully grey, 
with well-favoured wrinkles, becoming 



DUDLEY. 1^9 

furrows, and languishing hollow eyes. 
If she does, it will be an act of obedience 
you never could obtain from me. ^ 

Apropos of love, Eliot. — Do you 
know, I am singularly bewitched with 
your character of the whistling Spaniard, 

Don Zulvago del , (stay, I must 

look back at your letter to Clonmore, that 
I may spell the Castilian's name with 
propriety, or I may mar my future for- 
tunes,) D' Almeida Don Zulvago, 

Conde D* Almeida ! As fine a name as 
ever flourished in a romance. — The idea 
of a whistling Don v/as to me so truly 
ridiculous, that, at that part of your cor- 
respondence, I own I laughed heartily. 
Why, " as grave as a Spaniard," was a 
favourite proverb of mine ; and must I 
give that up, and substitute the risible 
one of " as merry as a Spaniard !" But, 
let me ask you, does this Spanish Earl 
whistle from " want of thought,'* as Cy- 
mon did of old, or from too much 
thought ? The latter we may conclude, 
as, from certain particulars best known 
to yourself, you infer that he has been 
in love. 



L30 DUDLEY. 

He is five years turned of thirty, yau 
say ; that's a pity. And he positively has 
been once in love : so much the better ; 
the more likely to fall in love again. Is 
he tall or short, fat or lean, orange or 
lemon coloured ? What business had he 
in Ireland ? Has he ever been in Eng- 
land ? Do, Eliot, persuade him what a 
pretty trip it v^ould be for him, to come 
and fetch Claudy, if go she must, but I 
think she is at present in better hands, 
than ever she can be in your's. 

What, in the name of righteousness, 
Eliot, will you be able to do with a baby 
of four years old? Give her in charge 
of your old Spanish nurse, to cram her 
head full of fandangos, sequidillas, and 
love for little boys, or a love of celibacy 
and nunneries ? No, no. Baronet, Claudy 
is safe with us, and here leave her. 
Women alone can, and onght to educate 
girls, especially if they are intended for 
wives, for I scarcely ever yet heard of a 
daughter, brought up by a learned father, 
who did not wither into ** single bles- 
sedues«.*' 



DUDLEY. 131 

I allow that Claudy, althougli my god« 
daughter, as well as niece, is by nature a 
beautiful tyrant, a passionate elf, a ter- 
magant, a scold ; and that she does re- 
quire the authority of papa, to say '* Bo !'^ 
and frighten her into passive obedience 
and non-resistance ; yet I cannot part 
with her; I cannot indeed. So make 
yourself perfectly easy on that head. 
You may think, perhaps, that I have 
treated her with severity : on the con- 
trary, Eliot, I give you my word, I have 
never yet contradicted or punished her, 
even with an angry frown ; yet the un- 
grateful young rebel no more minds me, 
than does my lap-dog,littleBloom, who bites 
my fingers whilst I feed him. Yet there 
is sister Jane, sitting as upright in her 
chair, (without elbows,) and looking on 
a sofa, or a bergere, with as much abhor- 
rence as ever, governs Claudy by a mo- 
nosyllable, a glance of the eye, a nod of 
her stately head, or the tip of her fore- 
finger. — In short, with sister Grantley, 
your hopeful heiress is as meek as a hun- 
gry robin, with me as sturdy as a wild 
sparrow. 

G 6 



132 DUDLEY. 

And so, my good brother, you are 
building a palace in the African islands, 
planting groves of limes and oranges, 
sinking fishponds, grafting mulberry 
trees, trafficking in malmsey wine, visit- 
ing the sepulchral caves of the Guanches, 
and watching the smoke issue from the 
great tobacco-pipe of Teneriffe. — Well, 
these are pretty amusements for an English 
parliament-man, a Dorsetshire squire, and 
a bit of a justice of the peace. 

Would not your mindhave been equally 
diverted from family misfortunes, had 
you, like a good boy, staid at home, to 
whip your child, scold your seiTants, in- 
terfere in your neighbours' quarrels, 
pocket your tenants' rent, and go to sleep 
in St. Stephen's Chapel ? — No ; instead 
of pursuing these manly and rational avo- 
cations, you must, forsooth, (a word 
just in fashion with me,) — you must go 
house-building, and garden-planning, in 
TenerifFe. The deuce fly away with Te- 
neriffe, I say. — I remember, when you 
were a school-boy, and I more than 
usually saucy, you used to threaten me 
with running off to Teneriife. As to the 



DUDLEY. 133 

present excuse, of your having been born 
there, begging your pardon, Eliot, that 
is all nonsense. Your ancestors, your 
parents, your sisters, your wife, your 
child, your friends, were, and are Kiiglish 
born ; and the accidental circumstance 
of your mother's confinement in that 
island, scarcely renders you less a native 
of Britain. 

I have not patience with you, Eliot, 
'pon my life I have not. I did certainly 
like an ideot shed a few tears over that 
first letter of your's to me, just out of 
decorum ; perhaps I kissed it too, with 
more pleasure than ever I saluted a love 
letter from my late lord, even during 
courtship ; but I was then under the full 
idea that your absence was temporary, 
that you would soon return — ■ the slight- 
est suspicion of the contrary, and I had 
immediately put it to the charming pur- 
pose of curling Bloom's whiskers. 



The picture is come ! the painted 
skeleton is arrived ! and now for a de- 
scription of the magical effects produced 



134 DUDLEY. 

by the first sight upon the several per- 
sonages assembled to examine it. 

It was landed at Plymouth, and we re- 
ceived it this morning. On being taken 
out of its packing case, or rather coffin, 
I desired it to be carried up to the pic- 
ture gallery, where it was set upright on 
the floor against the wall, until I could 
have it removed into Claudy's room. 

Dr. H , who has been spending a 

week with us, was present. He stood look- 
ing at it some time in silence, drawing in 
his lips, and tap, tap, tapping the lid of 
his snuff-box, then filling his nostrils with 
a mighty pinch, and to my great horror 
scattering the remainder on the floor : 
he turned round full upon us, saying, 
" Don Quixote and Sir Launcelot 
Greaves were fools to this fellow," mean- 
ing you, my wise brother. 

Poor Cionmore looked at it till ^he 
could look no longer ; his soft, silly heart 
was too full to speak j whilst Jane, as she 
composedly drew forward a chair, and 
sat down before it, quietly remarked, 
with a coldness, for which I could will- 
ingly have taken her by the two ears, 



DUDLEY. 135 

and shaken her out of her shoes, " If 
this really resembles my brother, he is 
very much changed." 

And what was I about all this time ? 
Storming, raving, calling for a pound 
brush of red ochre to splash about the 
deadly cheeks and lips; or for my scissors, 
to cut the horrible ghastly face out of 
the canvas altogether. 

In the name of all that is hideous^ 
Eliot, what made you try to amuse us by 
sending a present of such a spectre ? as to 
its being a resemblance, I will not think 
it possible. — You to be reduced to this 
shadow ! to be really this meagre, sickly, 
withered, melancholy thing! and if a 
likeness, let me enquire, why should you 
be hundreds of leagues distant from us ? 
— unkind, ungenerous man ! Write but 
one word to convince me you are as near 
the grave as this portrait represents you, 
and I will no longer urge your return to 
us, but I will come to you. 

I cannot, I will not believe you are in 

this state, particularly as Dr. H- has 

by the same ship received most favour- 
able accounts from Mr. Balfour. — If such 



lS6 DUDLEY. 

is yoiir appearance on recovery, what 
must you have suffered ! - poor Ehot ! — 

To return to the picture. — Whilst we 
were engaged remarking on it, Claudy 
made her appearance ; — at first she 
imagine() it was one taken down from its 
place ; but after gallopping (she never 
walks) from one end of the gallery to the 
other, and finding none were missing, 
she stood still immediately in front to 
look at it. 

From looking, she proceeded to feel- 
ing, and as she is very fond of dogs, (your 
taste,) she spread both her hands on the 
head of Carlo, and looked up in your 
face, (you understand me.) Her attitude 
was striking ; to us, at the distance we 
stood, she appeared standing at your 
knee, as you sat in your morning gown 
by the fire in your great arm chair. 

Neither the doctor or the parson broke 
silence; and as Jane did not seem in- 
clined to make a second observation of 
any kind, I got tired of this dumb shov/, 
and asked Claudy whose picture was 
that. 



DUDLEY. 137 

« Don't know/' 

" Don't you think it very ugly ? 

" No, very pretty :" — (just out of con- 
tradiction to me.) But whether she meant 
you or the dog was still doubtful. 

" Will you kiss it?" enquired Clon- 
more, lifting her in his arms to your face. 

To this she made not the smallest ob- 
jection, and having touched the death- 
looking mouth with her rosy lips — (I 
protest more than I could have done) — ^ 
she struggled to be placed again on the 
floor, saying, " Must kiss dog too." 

" Claudy, come here," said Jane, 
drawing her to her knee, and pointing up 
to your frightful phiz : ** that is papa, 
your own dear papa, whom you talk of 
every day, and wish so much to see." 

The little girl paused some time, and 
then turning briskly from the picture to 
her aunt, said, (you know, Eliot, you have 
charged us to be particular and unre- 
served in our communications where 
Claudy is concerned,) looking anxiously 
up in Jane's face, she cried, " And 
where mamma ?" 

I should have avoided a direct answer j 



138 DUDLEY. 

but sister Grantley, who never acts like 
any one else, replied at once : — 

" I have often told you, Claudy, that 
mamma is dead, that she no longer lives 
with us on earth ; but lives with God in 
Heaven ; — you will never see her again, 
bat when you die you will go to her/' 

With as much eagerness as if the ques- 
tion related to a journey and a coach at 
the door to carry her to mamma, the little 
creature in a pretty coaxing manner said 
to Jane, ** And tell me, aunt, when shall 
I die.'' 

" When God pleases to call you away," 
answered our orthodox sister, with as 
much formal gravity as if she were speak- 
ing to a girl of eleven ; and then pointing 
again to the picture, she added, " But 
your papa is alive, and you perhaps will 
see him again, and love him, and play 
with him, and make him happy — do 
you not wish to see dear papa, Claudy ?" 

" Yes," replied your heiress, " and 
dog too." 

Thus you see the picture of Carlo has 
awakened as much interest in the bosom 
of Claudy as that of yourself, nay ; I 



DUDLEY. 139 

think her salute to him was more volun- 
tary and fervent than the one to you ; 
she patted his head, held her hand to his 
mouth to be licked, and at last, to the 

great amusement of Dr. H , who 

burst into one of his barbarous roaring 
laughs, she ran from the picture, and, still 
looking back, called to the dog to follow 
her. 

This produced a ridiculous pedantic 
explanation from Jane between the sub- 
stance and the shade, which she fully ex- 
pected a child of three years old to un- 
derstand. Heaven help her sagacity ! 

Tired of you, and them, and the whole 
display, I at last hastily drew the silk 
curtain before the picture, left the gal- 
lery, called to Herbert, and ordered it to 
its future quarters, Claudy's nursery; 
where, in obedience to your worship's 
commands, it will be hoisted and sus- 
pended, for evermore ; that her darling 
little eyes may feast upon it day and 
night ; a sort of repast I certainly do not 
envy her. 



140 DUDLEY. 

From that period we have been hourly 
tormented with one constant repetition 
of ** Where papa? where dear papa? 
when papa come home ? when Claudy 
go to papa ?" In short nothing is heard 
throughout the house but " Papa ! papa 1 
papa!'* and she is akeady as familiar 
with your death's-head portrait, as with 
that of Mother Goose. 

Every soul in the house, the gardens, 
and the stables, has been dragged by her 
little ladyship into the nursery, to see the 
" beauty -picture ^^^ as she calls it; nay, 
at first, she insisted on all her visitors 
saluting it, which nurse Morton and 
butler Herbert j like a couple of „ old 
numbskulls, actually did j and I really 
believe, had we not put a stop to her 
frolics, the numerous spectators would in 
time have saluted away every lovely fur- 
row, and enchanting wrinkle. 

How I wish that Claudy's pretty lips 
could efface them from the original ! — 
iie 1 fie ! on the word of a peeress, I am 
getting sentimental, and sentiment is not 
just now one of the fashions of our island, 
whatever it may be in your's. 



DUDLEY. 141 

Well, dear brother, have I been par- 
ticular enough in my accounts of your 
brat ? -^ if you are not heartily tired of 
the subject, I am, and must now say 
good bye — or in the good old fashioned 
spelling of the word — God be with you. 

As to arguing with you any more on 
giving up this absurd whim of living and 
dying a sociable Robinson Crusoe on 
your semi-barbarian island, that I leave 
to the abler pen of Clonmore — and de- 
pending on him alone, for my obstinate 

old beau Dr. H declares and vows 

(you may substitute a bolder word if you 
choose) that you are to judge for yourself; 
and Jane reminds me of her dislike to 
letter writing; I do not yet despair of 
your eating your next Christmas turkey 
at Oakland Park, in the company of the 
aforesaid individuals, and in that of your 
still affectionate, and ever blooming 
gister, 

Caroline J^Lionjy. 



142 DUDLEY. 



LETTER XL 

Sir Eliot Howard to the Rev* Henry Clonmore. 

Teneriffe. 

JbiiGHT months are passed since I last 
wrote to England, and now I have to 
inform my dear Clonmore, that, thanks 
to Don Zulvago's and Mr. Balfour's 
exertions, my house is finished, and my 
plantations are thriving — that my health 
is greatly amended, and my mind at 
peace. 

Why still persist in urging me by re- 
peated letters * to a compliance with 
wishes that would be death to me ? — -I 
eannot my friend even agree to the terms 
proposed in your last, of paying a short 
visit to England : it is my fixed and unal- 
terable resolution here to remain ; and I 
repeat, that unless we meet in Teneriffe, 
we meet no more. 

* Which do not appear. 



DUDLEY^ 143 

The only letter I received from my 
sister Caroline caused me much uneasi- 
ness. Either my taste and feelings are 
wholly embittered by my late misfor- 
tunes and recent malady, or she is no 
longer the same : she was ever giddy and 
thoughtless, I allow, and is still very 
young, yet such great insensibility to my 
sufferings, such ill-timed frivolity of lan- 
guage, such carelessness of expression, 
(a few tender passages excepted,) I was 
not prepared for, and can only assure 
you, that had I seen this specimen of her 
present turn of mind before I sent her 
the melancholy narrative of my loss and 
departure from England, she had never 
received it ; — as it is, I charge you not 
to show her any more of my letters to 
yourself; she has lost my confidence, and 
can no longer be the depository of the 
sighings of a broken heart. 

I should prefer the rough manliness of 

Dr. H 's nature, or the wearisome 

perseverance of your's, or the frozen apa- 
thy of my sister Jane's, however hostile 
to my inclinations, to those of a fine 
lady ; and such, with surprise and con- 



144 DUDLEY. 

cern, I am convinced Caroline is be- 
come. 

As I observed before, from her very 
cradle she was of a volatile and capri- 
cious turn, though possessing a sweet and 
engaging temper: no one knows this better 
than Mrs. Clonmore, her earliest friend : 
— and Caroline, had a heart also, as was 
often proved during her husband's life- 
time, to whose inclinations her own ever 
gave way — but since his death, she ap- 
pears to have entered so completely on 
the full career of fashion and folly, under 
the auspices of the Dowager Countess of 
Alford, that the very affections of her 
nature seem perverted ; or, what is still 
worse, her real character is perhaps dis- 
guised beneath the flippant veil of levity 
and affectation : — from whatever cause, 
I am persuaded her character is changed ; 
and under this impression, I repeat, my 
confidence in her is gone. 

How truly singular and happy, that the 
same letter which exhibited to me the 
capricious Countess in so unpleasant a 
light, should serve to show Mrs. Grant- 
ley, in the most pleasing point of view 



DUDLEY. 145 

Caroline at that hour (the scene in tlie 
gallery) held a dark lanthorn to her 
sister, herself obscured in shade, whilst 
throwing the full and perfect light on 
Jane, by which I discerned a variety of 
excellence in the latter, that, though I 
had ever a high opinion of her sense and 
prudence, I really knew not from the 
apparent coldness of her character, she 
possessed. 

Oh, Clonmore, should my fond hopes 
be realised, the remainder of my life will 
indeed be smoothed, and its close ren- 
dered far more cheering than I ever 
dared expect. 

Fully to understand the motives on 
which I act, you must first be aware, my 
friend, that though you and I are of the 
same standing in life, Claudy will be my 
heiress, — no second marriage shall ever 
authorise a doubt upon the subject ; and 
thus, be my life short or protracted, 
my daughter will remain my only child. 
Should it, however, please God to de- 
prive me of her, I do not assert that 
my mind may or may not then conform 
to circumstances -, but in all human pro. 

VOL. I. H 



146' DUDLEY. 

babilifcy, if we may judge from her pre^* 
sent excellent stamina, she will live to 
close my eyes, even though I should be 
doomed to a long existence. 

This point settled and understood, the 
next is easily foreseen ; in about three 
months Claudy shall be brought hithefj, 
and thenceforward she and I never 
separate. — I hear all your objections, I 
anticipate all your doubts ; but I am re- 
solved, and nothing now remains than to 
put my long-arranged plans into execu- 
tion. —Once beneath my roof and pro- 
tection, she quits them no more until she 
removes to those of a husband ; and not- 
withstanding Lady Alford's lively re- 
marks on motherless daughters and learn- 
ed fathers, I should be truly sorry were 
Claudy to pass even her twenty- third 
year, and not have come to a resolution 
of giving me a son-in-law. 

To this plan of mine you will object as 
impracticable ; you will assert, and with 
truth, that a girl must be reared under 
female tuition ; and with equal discrimi- 
nation observe, that at my time of life the 
idea of domesticating a young woman 



DUDLEY. 14^7 

with me for that purpose is entirely out 
of the question j and young the person 
selected to bring up Claudy must be, or 
she would not be equal to the charge, or 
able to encounter the turbulent spirits of 
childhood. In figure and face, she must 
at least be pleasing, in manners elegant, 
in conversation refined and polished : — - 
joined to the usual qualifications known 
by the name of accomplishments, she 
must, for her pupil's sake, possess even- 
ness of temper, patience, mildness, piety; 
in short, more virtues and excellencies 
than usually fall to the lot of one woman ; 
for I am convinced, to my everlasting 
regret, that there was but one Ciaudina 
on earth. 

Were we to engage a young person 
such as I have described, to undertake 
the charge of my child, what could pre- 
vent me, from pity and compassionate 
deference to her helpless and dependent 
state — (which is ever the result of extreme 
indigence, for who, that could command 
shelter, food, and clothing, even of the 
humblest quality, would dwell beneath 
the roof a stranger) — what could hinder 
H .^ 



14*8 DUDLEY. 

my showing her those common atten* 
tions, nay, that respect due from man to 
woman, no matter the inequality of their 
rank in bTe ; and though I could answer 
for my own disinterested intentions, and 
the invulnerable state of my own widow- 
ed heart, what I repeat (forgive my 
vanity) might prevent a young girl of 
eighteen or so being inspired with grati- 
tude much too tender. 

These considerations offer an insuper- 
able objection to the governess' plan 5 
neither is it possible for Claudy to remain, 
when here, under the sole female guid- 
ance of Nurse Morton, at least after her 
fifth year ; and I really have not the inten- 
tion with which Caroline reproaches me, 
of consigning her to the care of my own 
old Spanish nurse Martella. 

And now, Clonmore, at once to the 
point. — Do you think it likely that Mrs. 
Grantley could be prevailed upon to spend 
with me a few years of Claudy 's child- 
hood. You have seen her since the loss 
of her husband and her children ; Jane 
and I have not met for some years; you 
are, therefore, a better judge than I can 



DUDLEY. 149 

he of what success might attend ^ pro^ 
posal of this nature: it however must 
be made, and by yourself, and without 
delay. 

The early deprivation of her family 
may lead her to wish for a retreat from 
the world, through which having tra- 
velled upwards of forty years, few tempt- 
ations or enjoyments now remain. - — 
Should she, however, have it in contem- 
plation to marry again, (which I think 
unlikely,) I am so well convinced that 
her choice, both in respect to age and 
character, will be suitable and judicious, 
that my wishes must not in that case be 
even whispered: in short, Clonmore, I 
leave you to settle this very delicate 
business in your usual adroit manner ; 
and be assured I shall feel satisfied, 
whatever may be the result. Concluding 
that no other motive would induce her 
to reject my offer, I shall only then endea- 
vour to reconcile myself to the disap- 
pointment by rejoicing in the prospect of 
the happiness she may enjoy in a second 
union. 

I know her disposition so well, that I 
H 3 



150 DUDLEY. 

shall instantly prepare for her coming, 
should she answer you (though with the 
most seeining indifference), *' Yes, by all 
means j" aware, that had she the slightest 
objection to the voyage, she would reply 
in the same tone of voice, " No, by no 
means.'^ 

Caroline, on the contrary, could she be 
induced, even by the love of novelty, to 
accept my invitation, (under the mere 
idea of a visit, for education with her is 
out of the question,) would in less than 
two days be looking out for a homeward 
bound sail to carry her back again, al- 
though she might have protested before 
her arrival, to live and die with me in 
my beautiful island. 

From having married at seventeen, and 
associated almost exclusively with her 
husband's friends, who were of the gayest 
class, (not excepting his mother, the pre- 
sent dowager,) Caroline's education was 
never finished, (at least in my opinion, and 
in that of Jane, to whose care she was 
left upon the death of her mother,) though 
according to her own assertions, it was 
complete at fifteen, for at that age she 



DUDLEY. 151 

excelled every competitor in singing, 
music, and dancing. — From not having 
had any family, her domestic virtues have 
never been called forth ; and Lord Al- 
ford's death, occasioned by a fall from 
his horse in hunting, when he was 
killed on the spot, gave his wife no op- 
portunity of being initiated, by any pre- 
vious illness or suffering on his part, into 
the duties of a sick chamber, or the 
various acts of self-denial attendant on 
such a situation. She has, therefore, to 
use her own words, really led a sort of 
butterfly life, and now knows little more 
of care than the name : — may she never 
know more ! 

How widely different has been the lot 
of her sister : for many years the nurse 
of an infirm, yet ever beloved husband, 
she scarcely crossed the threshold of her 
house. When she became a mother, her 
laborious duties multiplied, whilst she 
shrunk not from even the most painful : 
three infants died in a short space of 
time in her arms; two were spared to her, 
a girl and a boy ; the education of these 
H 4 



152 DUDLEY* 

she superintended herself, and looked 
forward to rear them to maturity : 
they, as you may have heard, reached 
their tenth and eleventh years, and then 
expired within a few days of each other. 
— The particulars of their death I never 
heard : all J know is^ that Grantley, 
blessing her with his last breath, bade her 
be comforted, for though the event had 
proved otherwise, she had acted for the 
best ; which implies some secret under- 
standing between themselves, and which 
Grantley's medical attendant at Copen- 
hagen, as he informed Dr. H , could 

not himself comprehend, for apparently 
a fonder mother was no where to be 
found. — By his death she is now left 
alone in the world, deprived, it is true^ 
of much anxiety and labour, but at the 
same time of all that she could call hap- 
piness. 

Under these circumstances, I was long 
since informed by Dr. H — , Mrs. Grant- 
ley consented, on her return from abroad,, 
to live for a short time with her sister, 
duriug which visit she has contracted au 



DUDLEY. 158 

affection for her little niece, my poor for- 
saken Claudy, and that the child, on her 
part, has become greatly attached to her 
elder aunt. On this foundation are my 
hopes of future happiness raised : see 
you to it, Clonmore. You now compre- 
hend my views, and have only to realise 
them, without delay. 

Your next letter will decide me as to 
the course I have to pursue. On your 
bringing Claudy to me yourself, the con- 
tinuance of our friendship depends ; 
consequently, on this head, I entertain 
no doubt : my only apprehensions rest on 
Mrs. Grantley's wiUingness to accom- 
pany you. — I should wish that Nurse 
Morton, and my own man, Forbes, and 
Robert, should make part of your suite, 
unless they object, in the slightest de- 
gree, to the voyage, of which you will 
inform me in time, that I may name 
others to fill their posts. 

The enclosed drafts on Puget and Bain- 
bridge, Warwick-lane, and a hst of what 
I wish to form part of the freightage of 
the vessel that conveys you hither, will 
n5 



i54> DUDLEY. 

convince you, Clonmore, that all you 
have now to do, is to obey the dictates of 
friendship. 

Ever your's, 

Eliot Howard. 



DUDI.BY. 155 



LETTER XII. 

The Rev, Henry Clonmore to Sir Eliot Houoard. 

Bloomfield Rectory. 

xLvEN your awful threat, that the con* 
tinuance of our friendship was at stake, 
did I not comply with your wishes, might 
have failed, had they not met with a 
powerful auxiliary in Dr. H — , whom, as 
I told him, I charitably think you have 
secretly bribed into your service on this 
occasion ; but the whim of his raving at 
me for a consequential blockhead, in he- 
sitating a moment on your proposal, was 
what most diverted me, as if sailing to 
Teneriffe was little more than rowing to 
Kew. 

" What, on earth, are you afraid of?'' 
lie vociferated. 

" Nothing, on earth, Doctor,'^ I re- 
plied, laughing. 

« Well then, on the seas, you grinning 
H 6 



156 DUDLEY. 

whelp you ? Would not one think you 
expected mutinies and water-spouts, 
whales, shipwrecks, icebergs, and krakens, 
that you make as much bother about a 
fourteen days' pleasant sail, as if you 
were invited out to the North Pole. One 
would imagine the fellow was at Java in- 
stead of Teneriffe, here close at hand. 
Half the time spent in saying, ** Louisa, 
my wife, shall I go, or shall I not go ?*' 
would have taken you -ten times there, 
and back again.*' 

" Well, Doctor,'* I replied, rather 
piqued at his raillery, ** as you seem to 
think no more of crossing the Bay of 
Biscay in time of war, and sailing to 
these Atlantic islands, than you would 
taking a trip to the Bay of Dublin, sup- 
pose you accompany me ?" 

« Why so I intend, you puppy, whe- 
ther you invite me or not.'' 

As I merely, in an ill-humour, hazarded 
this proposal, without the slightest know- 
ledge of his purpose, you may suppose 
what relief and pleasure these words 
afforded. 

i' Oh, in that case," 1 observed, "the 



BUDLEY. 157 

affkir is a settled thing ; and now to pre- 
pare for this stupendous enterprise." 

Mrs. Grantley, to whom I had not as 
yet mentioned, even in the slightest man- 
ner, what were the nature of your hopes, 
was sitting near us, at work, during this 
conversation, and, at my last remark, 
was heard to utter a deep sigh. Rather 
astonished, I turned round, and, for a 
moment, stood to observe her attentively, 
without her perceiving me. She was 
netting a purse at the time, and I could 
remark, that the whole machinery, (from 
the utmost regular form of rank and file,) 
fell into total confusion, and at an in- 
stant, as if owing to an involuntary con- 
vulsion of the hands. 

Soon after I heard her say, in a sort of 
low whisper, as if only designed for her 
own ear — " But I have not deserved so 
great a blessing." The words were 
wholly unintelligible both to Dr. H — 
and myself, yet they were not lost on 
either. We looked at each other ; he 
took out his snuff-box, and I, as I stood 
at the table, turned over the lea\"es of a 



\5S DUDLEY. 

book, resolving to watch my occasion^ 
and at once impart your wishes. 

It was evident that some powerful 
emotion was struggling in the breast of 
your cold and indifferent Mrs. Grantley ; 
and in a few minutes, it was equally appa- 
rent, that she possessed sufficient self- 
command entirely to subdue it ; for with 
perfect calmness she observed, whilst 
restoring her work to order, ** I wish my 
brother had invited me to TenerifFe ; / 
should have gone, not only without he- 
sitation, but with pleasure. Himself and 
child are to me now the dearest objects 
on earth j and it was only this morning 
that I hoped Claudy might never be se- 
parated from me until she married." 

These words completed the business. 
You may suppose what followed; but, 
well as you are acquainted with your 
sister's temperament, I defy you to picture 
her (unless I assist your imagination,) 
rising calmly fiom her chair, replacing 
her netting in the box, closing the sliding 
lid, carefully picking up every end of silk 
and thread, and throwing them in the 
fire, and then silently leaving the room. 



DUDLEY. 159 

Depend upon it, you are right : her 
heart, though a plain casket, is the re- 
pository of invaluable gems : no one has 
the key of it but herself, and to none but 
to a bosom friend is it unlocked. It is 
evident, from the report of their most 
intimate acquaintance, that her husband 
knew her heart, and valued it accord- 
ingly. 

We saw no more of Mrs. Grantley un- 
til we met in the drawing-room, a short 
time before dinner, when Lady Alford 
exclaimed, '* Lord, Jane, you have got 
a sad cold in your eyes. Why, child, 
they are as red as my coral bracelets. — 
Doctor, why don't you feel her pulse ?*' 

** Something better to do now, my 
Princess," he replied, offering Mrs. Grant- 
ley his arm, whilst Lady Alford took 
mine, *^ I am going now to feel the pulse 
of a boiled chicken." 

The conversation at dinner was of a 
general nature, until the servants being 
withdrawn, we closed round the fire, 
(having no company,) when the subject 
of the voyage was at once entered upon. 



160 DUDLEY. 

and Lady Alford, for the first time, in- 
formed of your wjshesj and our intentions* 
No, Howard, it is entirely out of my 
power to describe the effect this news 
had upon the Countess. At first she 
seemed stunned, as if by a sudden and 
overwhelming blow : she then affected 
to discredit it altogether, and laughed at 
her own credulity ; but when, on appeal- 
ing to Mrs. Grantley, (for she would not 
listen to either the Doctor or myself,) 
she found it was but too true, she burst 
into a violent fit of half rage and half 
grief. — I, as the promoter of the scheme, 
was assailed by every whimsically abusive 
term she could invent, on hearing which 
it was as impossible not to smile as to feel 
pity. I was a stony-hearted Blue-beard, 
a savage Merry-Andrew, to laugh at her 
distress ; a barbarous, two-faced, black- 
hooded monk, to deceive her thus ; a 
great old credulous ourang-outang, to 
believe you sincere in your resolution of 
staying where you v^ere ; and, in short, 
she concluded with this benevolent wish, 
— " May your ship be taken, and all of 
you crammed into an iron coop at Ro- 
J5 



DUDLEY. 161 

chelle, for this insidious and cruel beha- 
viour to me/' 

Mrs* Grantley was next attacked, and 
the TenerifFe expedition represented in 
all its horrors. Shut up with a wild 
misanthrope, (whom, however, she dearly 
loved,) a squalling perverse brat, (who 
v/as an angel,) an old duenna, covered 
from head to foot with Spanish snuff, 
(your Martella, I suppose,) and half-a- 
score yellow-skinned servants, and not 
a soul with whom to exchange visits but 
Don this and Donna that, and Donzella 
the other ; — ** the deuce take them all." 

As for Balfour, he was a bowing Saw- 
ney, and Don Zulvago a Jesuit, without 
ceremony, who had set you on to build 
and plant in a foreign place, that he might 
enjoy house and land himself, after 
tlirowing you into the dungeons of the 
Inquisition. 

This conceit pleased the fancy of Dr. 
H — to so violent a degree, that her 
ladyship next turned her vengeance on 
him, as the original cause of all this mis- 
chief, by tucking you under his arm, like 



162 DUDLEY. 

a bag of Cayenne pepper, as she said, and 
hoisting sail for Teneriffe. 

" One word more,'' said the Doctor, 
after listening to her extravagance for 
some time, with the greatest indulgence, 
** another word, my beauty, and 1*11 
serve you as I did when you were a little 
fury ten years old, stop your vixen rose- 
bud lips with a kiss," 

Up she started, twisting her shawl 
a|i)out her waist, and throwing the ends 
over her shoulder ; — and here I must 
observe to you, Howard, how wonder- 
fully she is improved in person within 
these three years. Though turned of tvvo- 
and-twenty, she does not appear more 
than seventeen ; her face and figure are 
enchanting, and every action is grace. 
Whether it was that I had never before 
seen her in tears, or worked up to such 
strong and genuine emotion, for her 
grief was sincere, I think until now I 
scarcely knew how lovely she is. 

Pretending that her aim was to beat 
the Doctor, who fortunately is at this time 
free fVom the gout, I endeavoured to in- 
terpose, when, to our utter astonish- 



DUDLEY. 16S 

merit, she exclaimed, *' Fll go to Tene- 
rifFe myself V I'll see Eliot also. Why 
the deuce should I not go as well as Jane ? 
Why should Jane enjoy all the pleasures 
of life, and I none ? 

This truly comic, or rather absurd 
view of the business, put us all into 
greater good humour ; and as it is in vain 
to preach consistency to determined in- 
consistent people, we could only laugh at 
her declaration, until Dr. H — observed, 
** What ! Go with us, my charming fairy! 
With all my heart, provided you lock up 
your nerves in your jewel-box before you 
set out." 

<* Hold your tongue, Doctor j with or 
without nerves, Til become as fine a 
Canary bird as any of you. — Defend 
me ! To think for one instant of going 
away, and leaving me behind among 
these savage islanders, (savage islanders !) 
whilst every soul I love will be at Te- 
nerifFe. — When you sail, 1 sail ; where 
you land, I land ; where you stay, I stay. 
Poor dear Eliot! how I do long to see 
him, and I will see him, in spite of you 
all." 



l64 DUDLEY. 

Giving way to a fresh flood of tears, 
she ran out of the room, and was followed 
by Mrs. Grantley. Thus were we left to 
our own reflections. 

<* Ah/' said the Doctor, ** long be- 
fore she reaches her dressing-room, she 
will have changed her mind. To-morrow 
she meets her old dowager of a mother- 
in-law, to attend Dorchester races, and 
the ball in the evening. On the next day 
they are engaged to the officers' play at 
Weymouth, and on the third they give 
us the slip for Bath or London." 

And so it proved. — The two Coun- 
tesses are at present at Clifton, where 
they have taken a house for six months, 
and from whence we have just received a 
cargo of valuable presents for Claudy, 
from her aunt, who desires me to inform 
you, that, perhaps , she may pay you a 
visit in your African island next year. 

Prepare tlien, Howard, to see us at 
the time you have appointed ; and, in 
the mean while, reflect, with gratitude 
to Heaven, on the great and invaluable 
blessings still left you, a princely fortune^ 



DUDLEV. 16. 



O 



a lovely, sensible, and most affectionate 
child, amiable sisters, excellent friends, 
and, lastly, an old, faithful, and ever- 
attached school-fellow, in your 

Henry Clonmore. 



£ND OF PART THE FIRST. 



I(i6 
PART THE SECOND. 



LETTER XIII. 

The Rev. Hetirtj Clonmore io his Wifi\ 

Tenerilfe. 

After a pleasant and prosperous voyage 
of fourteen days, my dear Louisa, we 
landed safely on this most beautiful island, 
of which I may hereafter give you some 
short description ; but, conscious that 
you are now all anxiety to hear particu- 
larly of the welfare of one individual, 
among the thousands inhabiting it, I 
hasten to describe the meeting with our 
friend. 

My fellow passengers, Mrs. Grantley 
and little Claudy, bore the voyage well ; 
so did oiu' servants : but I must acknow- 
ledge, our greatest pleasure was derived 
from the society of Dr. H — , who, as 
you have often remarked, can be, when 
he pleases, the most agreeable man on 
earth. His information, his experience, 



DUDLEY. 167 

his medical skill, his cheerful raillery, 
and the sort of protection he afforded us 
all, (for he has been this voyage so fre- 
quently, that, to him, it seemed really 
little more than a party of pleasure,) 
rendered this last fortnight one of tJie 
happiest of my life. 

The servants suffered most from sea- 
sickness 5 Mrs. Grantley very little, and 
I still less. Claudy was ill the two first 
days \ but, by the time we carne in sight 
of Cape Finisterre, had found her sea- 
legs, and, much to the amusement of her 
companions, her lively prattle also. — - 
During the day, she played chiefly on 
deck, with a child rather older than her- 
self, (who was with its mother, the wife 
of the mate of the vessel, going back to 
Gibraltar, having first touched at Tene- 
riffe,) and towards evening climbed on 
Dr. H — *s knee, and composed herself 
to sleep in his arms, which he taught her 
to call her pretty live hammock. From 
thence she was conveyed to one of the 
cabin beds, where her sleep continued 
sound until the next morning, when she 



168 . DUDLEY. 

was as ready to commence her frolics as 
we were to attend to them. 

The hehiisman was particularly struck 
with her beauty, her archness, and vi- 
vacity. As I was sitting near him, with 
a spy-glass in my hand, I observed him 
watching her in silence for a length of 
time, when, unable any longer to con- 
tain his gravity, he laughed aloud, and 
calling to a sailor, who sat splicing a 
rope at some distance, said, ** Tom, 
this,'' pointing and nodding at the child, 
*' this puts me in mind of the * sxveet 
little Cherub that sits up aloft:* The 
Cherub has taken a fancy to come down 
on deck among us." 

T was pleased with the conceit; and, 
some time after, took occasion to make 
Claudy slip a dollar into his brown, his 
hard and honest hand ; and I believe, 
had it been a copper penny, or a fjive- 
guinea piece, he would have expre?ised 
himself exactly in the same manner. 
His colour rose, and his eyes glistei^ed, 
ais, smiling with wonder, he looked d(iwn 

* Dibdln's well known <' Poor Jack." 



DUDLEY. 169 

upon her, exclaiming, " God bless it ! — 
Well, if ever I see such a creature in all 
my life !" 

Immediately on our landing at Orota- 
va, we were accosted by a gentleman in 
black, wl^o introduced himself as Don 
Zulvago, and by him conducted to the 
house of his Scotch friend, Mr. Balfour. 
Here congratulations, shaking of hands, 
and mutual enquiries, took place betwem 

the latter and Dr. H ; when it was 

agreed that, being late, our meeting 
with Sir Eliot should be deferred until 
the next morning, and that for that 
night, we should accept the accommo- 
dations offered us by Mr. and Mrs. Bal- 
four at their town house. 

From Don Zulvago's account, it ap- 
peared that Sir Eliot had spent many 
successive days on the heights, watching 
with his glass the approach of vessels, 
— *■ that he had returned home languid, 
feverish, and dispirited, particularly the 
evening before, and that he had not been 
able to take his usual ride or walk that 
morning. 

VOL. I. I 



179 DUDLEY. 

As it has been his invariable and well- 
known custom, since the death of his 
wife, to breakfast alone, our new Spanish 
acquaintance, whom we met before noon 
the next day, advised us to let that meal, 
sacred to grief and retrospection, pass 

quietly 5 after which Dr. H and Mr. 

Balfour, with myself, should go to the 
house, and prepare his mind to receive 
his sister and his child. 

To this plan I at first objected, think- 
ing that the climax of emotion being the 
sight of Claudy, he ought to see her at 
once, and be thus spared all unnecessary 
pain ; but I was soon silenced by Dr. H — ■ 
calling out, in his usual style, *' Non- 
sense, sir ! prating about what you doYi't 
understand. Just do as we desire you, 
and leave the rest to us." 

As I appeared still refractory, Mr. 
Balfour had the goodness to explain 

Dr. H 's. meaning, in rather clearer 

language than the worthy physician would 
deign to make use of himself. 

*' Sir Eliot's sister being of a cold 
disposition, as I am told, and the child 
still an infant, no sympathy can be called 



DUDLEY. 171 

forth by them on the part of your friend, 
whose strong emotions would thus be 
thrown back upon himself 5 whereas 
at the first sight of yoUy conscious that 
you understand his feelings, he will give 
way to them without restraint ; his mind 
will thus be relieved, and he will after- 
wards meet his child and sister with com- 
parative calmness, perhaps even carry 
the little girl about for some time in his 
arms, and all will go on smoothly and 
without danger." 

Dr. H was right, Louisa ; every 

thing passed as he had foretold. — After 
breakfasting with Mr. Balfour and Don 
Zulvago, leaving Mrs. Grantley and the 
child behind, (and, indeed, they were 
not yet risen,) we roee a few miles up 
the country, and soon arrived at Sir 
Eliot's new residence, most justly named 
by him an earthly paradise. 

On alighting at a garden door, and 
traversing a colonnade, we were shown 
into a small library, which, by the precise 
mode of its being fitted up, seemed pur- 
posely adapted to the reception of 
strangers \ and here the Doctor, Mr. 
I % 



1?^ DUDLEY. 

Balfour, and Don ZuIvago,left me sitting, 
standing, and walking, with breathless 
impatience, for upwards of half an hour. 
Thev had followed a servant across a 
gallery, and had disappeared through a 
red baize door at the extremity of it. 

My anxiety was at last wound to so 
greata height, I was tempted to go after 
them, when, in striding once more across 
the room, I happened accidentally to 
cast my eyes the contrary way, when 1 
saw them all cross the colonnade, mount 
their mules at the garden gate, and ride 
slowly back the road we had come. 

At the same instant, another servant 
appeared at the opposite door, and ima- 
gine, Louisa, the sudden and joyful im- 
pression caused on me, by the sight of 
Sir Eliot's rich livery of dark blue velvet, 
gold, and red, having been so long ac- 
customed to the undress drab liveries 
worn at Oakland Park, — worn on account 
of the absence of the master. 

In a low voice, and with a Spanish ac- 
cent, the man asked me to follow him. 
I started forward, and when we reached 
the large folding red doors at the end of 



DUDLEY. 173 

the gallery, " My master is within, Se- 
nor," he said, pointing, and disappeared 
at a small door at the side. 

It was then that the similarity of my 
situation, when repairing to Oakland 
Park to seek the lost owner, struck me 
forcibly. We were now assuredly within 
a few steps of each other, a single door 
only was between us, and that half open, 
and yet I hesitated to go on : an unac- 
<:oiintable weight seemed fastened on my 
limbs, and, in proportion to the eager- 
ness of my wishes to spring forward, I 
felt, as if under the influence of the night- 
mare, actually fixed to the spot. 

At last I put my hand on the lock, and 
at the same instant, heard a faint voice 
within caJl out, " Clonmore !" The 
next moment we were face to face ; we 
grasped each other's hands ; we sat down 
at the same time ; we rose together, took 
a few steps across the room, again met, 
once more shook hands, and turned away 
without uttering a word. 

Had Dr. H been present, perhaps 

he would have had reason to call us a 

couple of blockheads ; but luckily we had 

I 3 



174 DUDLEY. 

no witnesses of our folly, and soon re- 
covered spirits to speak. 

I again saw my friend, it is true, but 
not the same Eliot Howard I had parted 
with. — I now gazed upon the very ori- 
ginal of the picture we left behind us at 
Oakland Park ; if there is any difference, 
the portrait has the advantage, for so 
ghastly, so consumptive, so wan and 
desponding a figure I never beheld. 

" ^Vhere is my child ?" was his first 
question 5 « How is my sister ?" the 
second ; and, " You had a pleasant voy- 
age, I hear?** immediately followed; 
when the change in his voice struck me 
with a sorrow and surprise not to be de- 
scribed. — My cheerful answers, however, 
soon brought us round to the topics of 
common life ; during which, perceiving I 
seemed chill and cold, (for a strong 
easterly wind and misty rain made me 
feel as if in a more northern rather than 
southern latitude,) he rang the bell, and 
ordered fresh fuel. 

The hearth, or rather fire-place, soon 
blazed with small well piled faggots of 
fragrant wood ; and as I drew near it to 



DUDLEY. 17,5 

enjoy the comfortable warmth, I con- 
gratulated him on his taste in substituting 
fires for the cheerless foreign custom of 
stoves and conductors. 

The servant who brought in the last 
batch of wood was followed by a fine 
large full-grown Newfoundland dog, in 
whom I had some difficulty of recog- 
nising my old friend Carlo j for if we 
may judge from the good case he is in at 
present, he certainly has not shared his 
master's sorrows, though he has his for- 
tunes. His noble person exhibits the 
sure effects of good living, ease, and 
peace of mind ; and so I told him, as he 
stretched himself at full length at Sir 
Eliot's feet on the mat before the fire. 

Chocolate being served in, ounfriend 
readily partook of it with me, and then 
it was I could more easily snatch a few 
hasty examinations of his person. — The 
features are of course not changed, but 
their expression wholly so. — Whether he 
smile or look dejected, wJiether he speaks 
or is silent, all is changed : there is now 
a mild composure in his manner, a slow 
movement in every action, a pathetic 
I 4 



176' DUDLEY* 

monotony of voice not to be explained : 
added to which, I soon perceived he has 
lost the habit of keeping up a connected 
conversation, the result of solitude, and 
a long association with foreigners. — He 
IS mournfully absent, at times bewildered j 
and not unfrequently, fancying himself 
alone in the room, utters some incohe- 
rent expression, or rises and walks slowly 
to and fro. — A loose wrapping gown of 
pale blue damask was folded round his tall 
wasted figure, as represented in the picture 
sent to Claudy. His hair is still in its na- 
tural state, but the original light brown, 
even at this early period of life, is much 
mixed with white.— The once rapid lustre 
of his large dark grey eyes is replaced by a 
steady look of the most tender dejection. 
Sometimes slowly raising themselves to 
the various objects around, as if with 
painful exertion, inspiring the beholder 
with compassion, not unmixed with doubt 
that all is not right within, which doubt 
is immediately banished when he speaks. 
From constant exposure to the sun and 
air, during his attendance on his builders 
and workmen, his complexion is much 



DUDLEY. 177 

darker than it was"; but his hands retain 
all their usual delicate whiteness, and 
even display that peculiar hue which in- 
dicates great weakness of body, and 
decay of strength. 

Thus were we seated, I on one side of 
the fire, he on the other, leaning his head 
on his arm at a small table placed back, 
his eyes fixed upon the blazing wood, 
listening to my anecdote of the pilot and 
the cherub, when the door was slowly 
and carefully opened by some person 
from without, and a little figure cau- 
tiously admitted : — the door was again 
gently closed, and there stood Claudy, 
her hands raised and joined over her 
head, (a favourite attitude you may re- 
member of her's,) and her lovely counte- 
nance beaming with joy. 

The loud, sudden, and cheerful cry of 
" Papa V caused Sir Eliot to start from 
his thoughtful position ; he looked up, and 
then slowly turned his eyes towards the 
spot where she continued standing ; the 
paleness of death spread itself over his 
face, and his hand dropped nerveless by 
his side. 

I 5 



178 DUDLEY. 

It was then that his look and attitude 
bore the most striking resemblance to 
the picture, on which Claudy had for 
such a length of time lavished her 
caresses, — Again she called out in her 
own brisk, sweet, and clear voice, — 
« Papa ! papa !" and ran to his knee. 

I eagerly rose to his assistance, " Be 
composed," I whispered anxiously, " for 
Heaven's sake be composed ; do not, at 
an instant, irrecoverably destroy the 
fruits of many months' successful en- 
deavours to reconcile her to your present 
appearance. Recollect the powerful effect 
of first impressions ^ this is the hour to 
make a lasting one in your favour on 
the mind of your child : whereas, if you 
give way to the agony that is working in 
your bosom, you terrify her from you, 
and destroy all the happy effects you 
wished the picture to produce, and which 
you see have in reality succeeded. — 
Whilst you remain passive and quiet, she 
will be no more afraid of you than of 
your portrait ; and, as you perceive, will 
presently fondle you with the same con- 
fidence she now does the dog." 



DUDLEY. 1?9 

Claudy had by this time, by means of 
kissing and stroking, roused Carlo to 
acknowledge her kindness with great 
thankfulness ; but when his gratitude 
began to be rather rough, she, with the 
utmost familiarity, sought shelter between 
her father's knees ; then climbing upon 
them, and standing upright, she clasped 
her arms round his neck, and leaning 
over his shoulder with a see-saw motion, 
hummed " little bo-peep,*' with no more 
restraint in her manner than as if they 
had never parted. 

I, however, carefully watched Sir 
Eliot's features ; and when I saw by the 
trembling of his limbs as he pressed her 
to his bosom, and the convulsion of his 
lip when looking at me, as if to say—- 
*< I can support it no longer," I made 
a snatch at Claudy, playfully caught her 
in my arms, tossed her in the air, called 
Carlo out of the room, and ran with her 
across the gallery back into the small 
library. 

Here, on summoning the Spanish 
servant, whom I had belbre seen, I was 
soon joined by Robert.and Nurse Morton, 
I 6 



180 DUDLEY. 

to whose charge I left the child, and 
after answering their anxious enquiries 
concerning their master, I returned to 
Sir Eliot's room. 

To my great relief, and no small sur- 
prise, I found him still seated, and 
though I had not been absent twenty 
minutes, already calmly conversing with 

Mrs. Grantley and Dr. H , who 

having watched me from the opposite 
door, had entered the moment I quitted 
the room with Claudy. 

On reseating myself at the fire, I kept 
supplying it with fuel, in order, by em- 
ployment, to conceal the emotions that 
were now swelling in my own breast, on 
being assured that the fondest hopes of 
our unhappy friend would be completely 

realised j when Dr. H seizing my 

arm, shook the last faggot from my hand, 
and exclaimed, " What the vengeance, sir, 
do you wish to set the house on fire 
the moment you put your foot in it ?" — 
Whilst Mrs. Grantley, on the other hand, 
quietly sipping her chocolate, seemed 
bent on putting her brother's fortitude 
to the test, by enquiring, in her placid 



DUDLEY. 181 

manner, whether it was the custom of 
this island for gentlemen to make their 
own breakfast. 

Now this was, as you are aware, Louisa, 
so very tender a point with Sir Eliot, 

that neither Dr. H nor I could ever 

have hazarded a word upon the subject ; 
we therefore exchanged looks, mutually 
dreading the effect it might produce ; 
when how were we amazed to hear him 
reply, after a moment's pause, with an 
air of cheerfulness and even gallantry, — 

" Yes, my dear Jane, in this house 
invariably, until the arrival of a lady to 
do the honours.'' — And from that hour 
he has given up his solitary breakfast, 
and partaken of the most social of all 
meals in our company. 

It was now that I fully understood 
and admitted the truth of Lady Alford's 
assertion, and which at first I found it so 
difficult to credit — that from the icy 
temperature of Mrs. Grantley's disposi- 
tion, she was the best companion for a 
person of her brother's warm and sensi- 
ble nature. 

I am aware, from my own experience. 



182 DUDLEY. 

that any other person would use artifice 
to calm Sir Eliot's spirits, and divert his 
mind, which artifice would, by being 
seen through, soon lose its effect — finesse 
usually defeats its own purpose : whereas 
Mrs. Grantley's genuine simplicity and 
honhommie, (if I may use the term,) 
though they at first startle the hearer, 
lead to this good-natured and indulgent 
remark — " Well, you are the most in- 
nocent, frozen, inoffensive, strange sort 
of woman I ever had to deal with !" 

Thus did this long-dreaded, this for- 
midable meeting, go off in a much more 
decent style than could be expected ; for 

which, Dr. H says, and with justice, 

we may thank him. Had he not arranged 
matters, a return of Sir Eliot's disorder 
might have been the consequence 5 and 
we, Louisa, to our sorrow, know the 
miseries attending a relapse. 

How I long to hear an account of my 
poor Dudley ; he was nearly recovered 
when I left England, and I hope to re- 
ceive in a few days a true bill of health 
signed by his beloved mother. — With 
such a mother, and such a physician as 



DUDLEY. 183 

Dr. V n, God bless him ! I still have 

good hopes. — 

You will hear from me twice more 
before I quit Teneriffe, in which letters, 
according to your wishes, I shall endea- 
vour to be as particular concerning the 
inhabitants of this enchanting marine 
hermitage as possible ; and also give you 
a little sketch of the place itself. 

Sir Eliot begs me to return you his 
most grateful thanks for consenting so 
cheerfully to my charitable visit, as he 
is pleased to call it, and desires me to 
say he does not despair yet of seeing 
yourself here on some future happy day. 
Ever, dearest Louisa, 

Your affectionate husband, 

Henry Clonmore. 



184 DUDLEY. 



LETTER XIV. 

The Re*o, Henrij Clonmore to his Wife, 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe, 

1 HANKS, mj dearest Louisa ! — your 
letter has afforded me the sincerest 
gratification, as by it I learn that 
my little Dudley at length acknow- 
ledges himself wholly free from pain. 
In return, I am happy in being able to 
inform you, that a great and visible 
change for the better has taken place in 
Sir Eliot's person, health, and spirits. 

The uniform composure, and yet 
kind attention of Mrs. Grantley's man- 
ners, operating on his mind like oil 
upon a troubled sea, wrought the first 
improvement, which was succeeded by 
his appearing to take great interest in 
watching Claudy's childish gambols, and 
attempts at improvement, under the tui- 
tion of her aunt. 



DUDLEY, 185 

My conversation, as it refers to our 
boyhood, and school and college life, 
soothes his mind; whilst the whims and 
blunt contradictions of the Doctor 
amuse, and Balfour and Zulvago's local 
and general information gratify and im- 
prove their hearer. 

On the second day after our arrival, 
Mrs/^Grantley accepted the charge her 
brother offered her, and without the 
smallest infringement on the calmness 
of her usual demeanour, seemed in- 
stantly to look and move the mistress of 
the house. 

I was the next morning seated with 
the Doctor at the window of the room 
appropriated to myself, looking through 
a fine telescope of Dollond's at the ship- 
ping in the roads, when a gentle tap at 
the door was followed by an enquiry, in 
a female voice, of — ** May we be ad- 
mitted ?" 

" Yes," cried the Doctor, <« this 
once ; but in future let widow ladies 
beware how they intrude into the apart- 
ments of a widower bewitched." 

Mrs. Grantley, followed by her bro- 



186 DUDLEY. 

ther, came in ; arad, with a placid smile, 
approaching me, said, whilst she looked 
round the room, *« I hope, Mr. Clon- 
more, you find every thing here snug 
and comfortable ?" I wish, Louisa, you 
could have seen Sir Eliot's countenance 
at that moment; a sudden gleam of 
pleasure passed over it as he repeated 
S7iug and co^nfortahle! and then added, 
** Those two words are so truly English — 
I have not heard them for such a length 
of time ; they bring England with such 
identity before my eyes, that I am 
almost tempted, Jane, to salute the dear 
lips which have given me such delight- 
ful retrospection." 

As quiet and composed as the statue 
of Vesta (which she resembles in fea- 
ture) Mrs. Grantley heard his remark ; 
and then turned to Claudy, who now 
ran in, and desired her to show me the 
pretty new apartments papa had given 
her. 

Away flew the impetuous child, whilst 
we were scarcely able to keep up with 
her, leading us up one gallery, and down 
another ; thrusting her little head in at 



DUDLEY. 187 

every open door, with, " This is it — 
no, this is not it ; Claudy right, and 
Claudy wrong," until she completely 
bewildered herself and us, when Sir Eliot, 
enchanted with her vivacity, caught her 
up in his arms, saying he would be our 
guide. 

It appears that Mrs. Grantley, pre- 
vious to her acceding to her brother's 
request of choosing her own apartments, 
had, attended by Martella, examined 
the whole of the house, and on perceiv- 
ing those which Sir Eliot had hitherto 
appropriated to himself, was at no loss to 
declare her choice. Accordingly, with 
her usual sedateness of voice and look, 
she silently fixed upon a suite of rooms, 
into which she immediately gave orders 
for her own luggage and that of Claudy 
to be removed. 

She now pointed out to us the arrange- 
ments she purposed making, at the same 
time alluding to future plans. " 1 think, 
brother, with your leave, this bed-cham- 
ber, dressing-room, and light closet on 
the right hand, must be Claudy's, and 
those on the left, mine ; whilst this larger 



188 DUDLEY. 

apartment, dividing and communicating 
with both suites, ought to be fitted up as 
a ladies' drawing-room, for our mutual 
accommodation ; and as I intend to de- 
vote it, hereafter, entirely to the business 
of education, I should wish it to be un- 
derstood, that no general company can 
ever be admitted here.^' 

Under what various shapes does ex- 
quisite sensibility show itself! A man 
possessing blunter feelings than Sir Eliot 
does would have given some kind of an- 
swer to these words ; he could give none. 
He threw her one look, and then turned 
away and walked to the window. Here 
I beheld another proof, how truly a dis- 
position such as Mrs. Grantley's -was 
suited to that of our friend. Any other 
than herself, mistaking that profound 
emotion of gratitude, tenderness, and 
admiration, (which prevented speech,) 
for, at best, indifference, might have 
followed him, and by exacting an answer, 
broken the charm : this worthy being, on 
the contrary, continued speaking to me 
and Dr. H of her various plan§ re- 



DUDLEY. 189 

specting Claudy and herself, as if her 
brother was no longer in the room. 

'* Ah ! 'tis all fine talking,'' said the 
Doctor, " but you forget one thing, 
and without that, I would not give a ^g 
for your prospectus, — the flogging-post, 
my good madam : — hoy ! hoy, Claudy, 
Where's he flogging-post." 

Good sense, affection, and propriety, 
thus in possession of a magic wand, her 
arrangements were all made in less than 
a week. The walls of the rooms are of 
highly polished white stucco : those of 
Claudy are hung with pale rose-coloured 
silk ; her own with draperies of light 
blue, the furniture of their drawing- 
room being a mixture of pea-green and 
brown. : — I was this morning permitted 
to take a survey of the whole ; and the 
elegance with which the latter is fitted up 
would do credit even to the taste of Lady 
Alford. The pictures with which it is 
adorned, the capital piano, book-cases, 
flower-stands, drawing and work boxes 
in short, every ornamental article with 
which ladies' apartments are usually 
decorated, are here to be seen. 



190 DUDLEY. 

To you, Louisa, as a young lady and 
a mother, all these trifling particulars I 
know will be interesting, conscious that 
you are, equally with myself, anxious as 
to the future welfare of little Claudy. — 
Could you but have seen her when her 
rooms were completed, and she was put 
in possession of them ! 

" Claudy's pink curtains, and Claudy's 
pretty mats," (the floors are all covered 
with fine India matting,) " dear aunt's 
blue sofa,'' (introduced at Sir Eliot's re- 
quest,) and " aunt's fine looking-glasses," 
were her themes for that day j and could 
you have witnessed the pleasure with 
which her father watched her bounding 
steps, as she jumped from room to room, 
eagerly and boisterously examining every 
thing around her, whilst she laughed and 
sang with joy, you must have shared 
in his delight. 

And now that I have introduced you 
into the ladies' apartments, suppose, my 
dear Louisa, you accompany me in im- 
agination back to my own. 

They consist of three rooms, opening 
i nto each other j a bed-room, dressing- 

12 



DUDLEY. 191 

room, and study, and are totally detached 
and secluded from the rest of the house, 
by a long passage, at each end of which 
are red baize doors. From one of the 
windows of the study runs a viranda, 
which, by a flight of steps on the outside 
of the house, communicates to the garden. 
The two first rooms are fitted up with 
every article that constitutes comfort ; 
and the latter in a style adapted for a 
male visitor and a bachelor, and for such, 
as it appears, these and other corre- 
sponding apartments are to be reserved. 

On my remarking to Sir Eliot, how 
greatly they resembled our chambers atthe 
University, and that I could almost fancy 
myself still a college fellow, he, with a 
conscious smile, drew back a small sliding 
board inserted in a pannel over the inside 
of the door, and I read, in gold letters, 
^« Clonmore's Dormitory." Whilst look- 
ing earnestly at this proof of friendship 
and attachment, he added, closing the 
sliding board, and clapping me on the 
shoulder, — 

" Whilst you leave your wife behind 
you, you must still consider yourself a 



192 DUDLEY. 

fellow: the next time you come, bring 
her with you, and you shall be put into 
more sociable apartments." 

And indeed, my dear Louisa, could 
you find leisure, and summon courage 
to attempt the voyage, the sight of our 
long valued and now nearly restored 
friend, and his beautiful abode, would 
be no trifling compensation for the 
fatigue. 

And beautiful, even you, my love, 
who are rather difficult in your taste as to 
the situation of country seats, would 
pronounce this. Perfectly secluded, as 
if the only human dwelling on the island, 
it yet enjoys all the advantages of se- 
curity, and social intercourse, by being 
within a short distance of the large city 
of Orotava, which stands on a rising 
slope, about four miles from the port of 
the same name. 

Instead of planting trees, and rearing 
shrubs to shelter and adorn his new estate, 
(with exception to a few of English 
growth,) Sir Eliot, having made his pur- 
chase, had to cut down a few acres of 
forest trees, in order to procure space 



DUDLEY. 193 

efficient whereon to build. The ground 
was cleared in the shape of an amphi- 
theatre, and the house of white stone, 
erected full fronting the sea, on a grand 
and sublime eminence ; at the back 
rises, in a gradual slope, an extensive 
forest of large chesnut and other trees, 
whose luxuriant foliage at once shade 
and protect it. 

On each side of the mansion, and at 
some distance from it, runs a marble co- 
lonnade ; behind which, like verdant 
v/ings, extends a thick grove of shrubs, 
called the heath tree, rising above twenty 
feet ; that on the right is terminated by 
an abrupt and tremendous precipice ; 
the one on the left, by a gigantic rock, 
upon the summit of which grow a few 
scattered cedars. 

The ground on this side of the house 
has been levelled, and sown with grass 
seed ; the verdure, kept smooth as the 
lawn at Oakland Park, and constantly 
watered, is here and there embellished 
with plots of flowers, (chiefly raised from 
English seed and roots,) and surrounded 
by basket work. 

VOL, I. K 



194^ DUDLEY. 

Before the south front of the mansion 
runs a wide green viranda, from which 
is carried, on each side, a double screen, 
in a concave shape, of light open iron- 
work ; between this are planted vines 
of the finest quality ; and whilst I now 
write, the whole surface of the screen is 
covered with the richest profusion of that 
species of grape, of which the best wine 
in i;he island is made. 

The kitchen, the laundry, and other 
offices, are wholly detached from the 
house, being built in a sort of grove of 
fig-trees, about a hundred yards distant, 
and yet connected by a covered archway, 
admitting four persons to walk abreast. 
The stables for the cows and mules, 
asses and goats, (for, as yet, he has no 
horses,) are situated still further, on an 
extensive plot of ground to the right. 

Sir Eliot is now opening through the 
forest an admirable walk of about three 
miles in circuit, which, when finished, 
will be a capital addition to the 
comforts of this residence, as, in alj 
weathers, it will afibrd the inhabitants a 
sheltered place of exercise. — I say shel- 



DUDLEY. 195 

tered, because, though that range of cy- 
press trees through which it runs is de- 
prived of all its lower branches, the top- 
most that are left form a canopy, exclud- 
ing, by their luxuriance, wind, sun, and 
rain. 

Besides these natural parasols and 
parapluies, he has erected others in the 
shape of elegant recesses, which are built 
of cedar and mahogany, and fitted up 
with benches, tables, and chairs, as we 
remember to have remarked and admired, 
some years ago, in the grounds at Clare- 
mont, in Surrey, To each of these alcoves 
is annexed a garden, on which the sun is 
permitted to dart its hottest beams ; and 
here grow, in profusion, melons, pears, 
apples, oranges, pomegranates, figs, 
peaches, lemons, and grapes. Indeed, 
all these fruits, and many others unknown 
to us, grow wild among the hills and val- 
leys of this island, and to a size and per- 
fection scarcely ever seen in Europe. 

At different openings of this forest- 
walk, as he calls it, we catch the most 
sublime views of the ocean, the moun- 
tains, and their valleys ; and in the south- 

K 2 



196 , DUDLEY. 

western horizon, the receding heights 
are crowned with the towering snow- 
covered Peak. 

My favourite walk, at present, is that 
which winds downward from the forest 
to the broken plains below. Streams of 
the ^clearest water gush from the cre- 
vices of the volcanic rocks, unite in 
little rivers, form a cataract in miniature, 
meet other cataracts, join forces in one 
grand^ majestic fall, and burst upon the 
rocks below with thundering noise and 
rising vapour. They then murmur for- 
ward, over a gently declining hill, and 
settle in calm tranquillity in a deep lake 
at its foot. To this spot I often bring 
my book, yet seldom read* Here, fenced 
by aloes, surrounded by hedges of myrtle 
and geranium, shaded by trees ever in 
fruit and blossom, 1 take idle pleasure in 
watching and listening to the large flocks 
of Canary birds, (of a yellowish-green,) 
parrots, and other tropical birds, with 
which the branches are thronged, whilst 
enjoying a sun, a sky, an air, a climate 
in short, of which a native of Britain 
can form no idea. 

*5 



DUDLEY. 197 

Have I given my Louisa any tolerable 
motion of the outside of this magnificent 
abode ? If I have, then imagine an in- 
terior displaying every foreign elegance, 
joined to true Lnglish cleanliness and 
simplicity. The building is of white 
stone, and flat-roofed. The ceilings and 
staircases, the floors and furniture, as is 
the custom in these islands, are all of 
cedar wood. The hall, the great and small 
library, the drawing, dining, and billiard 
rooms, are appropriately furnished and 
fitted up ; whilst above, (the house con- 
sists of only one story,) in every cham-' 
ber, dressing-room, and study, (or, as 
you ladies call it, boudoir ; and we men 
can be as sulky as yourselves,) nothing is 
left to wish for. 

In compliment to his Spanish friend, 
Sir Eliot asked Don Zulvago to name his 
habitation, as he had already, at his re- 
quest, placed the corner-stone ; on which 
he instantly replied, " Call it Euphor- 
bia:' 

This is the name of a large, juicy, in- 
digenous plant, which, when dried, serves 
the inhabitants for fuel. Great quantities of 
K 3 



19^ DUDLEY. 

this had been rooted up, and given to the 
neighbouring mountaineers, when clear- 
ing the ground to dig the foundations of 
the house. Sir Eliot immediately adopted 
the idea, and the estate is now known 
upon the island by the name of Eu- 
phorbia, 



I have now d-escribed to you, my love, 
the present appearance of this new abode 
of our friend's ; but I have no doubt 
every succeeding year will find it embel- 
lished : and, to be candid, I only hope 
that he will, (all idea of his return to 
England being over,) continue to take 
pleasure in extending and improving it ^ 
otherwise, be assured, his mind will sufler 
a relapse » 

How much the Balfours regret that 
Claudy is not a boy ; then might the work 
of education, they remark, soon begin : 
or were she a few years older, she might, 
in the course of a year or so, occupy 
his thoughts ; but, as Lady Alford, also, 
justly observes, Claudy, for four or ^\e 
years to come, will require no other in- 



DUDLEY. 199 

struction than what Mrs. Grantley is so 
fully capable and willing to impart. 

Zulvago opened his mind on this sub- 
ject to the Doctor and myself, the other 
day, in one of our walks j when the for-- 
mer gravely advised the Spaniard to set 
the rumour afloat, through the island, 
that a treasure of gold and precious 
stones is concealed in the hitherto unex- 
plored (because concealed) sepulchral, 
caves of the Guanches, (the aborigines 
of the island,) and advise Sir Eliot to set 
his native labourers to seek and open 
them ; adding, that by the time he is 
convinced no treasure is to be found, 
Claudy will be old enough to learn Latin. 

Don Zulvago, who reasons with that 
discrimination which shows a thorough 
knowledge of the human heart, said, he 
had long wished to propose to Sir Eliot 
a sail to Madeira or Lisbon, and at either 
place to remain a few weeks ; adding, 
*' Your friend has now so many blessings 
in his very grasp, that his hands will soon 
begin to relax, and he may lose them ir- 
recoverably. Let him be suddenly 
snatched, for a time, out of their reach, 
K 4 



SOO DUDLEY. 

and he will become more conscious of 
their value. To be thoroughly convinced 
what a treasure our home is, we must 
occasionally quit it. We must remove 
ourselves from the objects of our affec- 
tion, to be truly sensible how closely 
they are twined round our hearts. The 
heart then pulls them back j it seeks to 
hold, it persists in retaining them. We 
must fear to lose, ere we are inclined to 
struggle to hold, and keep." 

At these words I looked stedfastly at 
the Spaniard, and felt convinced he ar- 
gued from experience. There was an 
unusual glow of countenance, a fiery 
expression of the eye, not to be mistaken ; 
when, immediately aware of the infer- 
ence I might draw from his observation, 
he coolly turned away from us both, 
humming a scrap of an English march. 
As Lady Alford once remarked of this 
noble Castilian, he is more of a Petrarch 
than a Cymon ; — believe me, dear 
Louisa, his whistling is not from want of 
thought. 

Dr. H — — , who had not before seen 
this trait of character, stopped suddenly 



DUDLEY. 201 

with surprise ; and then, with droll mi- 
micry, repeated, in a solemn tone, " Sir, 

" Our only lesson is to learn to suffer, 

And he who knows not that, was born for nothing;" 

and ended with a whistle of " And we 
will a hunting go/' — This was no bad 
hit at the Spaniard, whose pocket com- 
panion, and constant study, are " Young's 
Night's Thoughts." 

I know not whether Sir EHot will con- 
sent to this trip to Madeira with Don 
Zulvago : if he does, we shall remain at 
Euphorbia until their return ; Mrs. Grant- 
ley to instruct Claudy, Dr. H to 

contradict her, I to romp with her, and 
Carlo to defend her. A little personage of 
great dignity is this same Claudy Howard, 
and she already begins to feel her conse- 
quence. 

Tell Dudley, Sir Eliot intends to send 
him by me a chest of oranges, gathered 
out of his own garden ; and that Claudy 
has presented me, for him, three red 
feathers from a parrot's wing, as a pledge 
of remembrance ; but whethef of love, 
X 5 



^0€ DUDLEY. 

or an opposite sentiment, her little lady- 
ship did not condescend to explain. 

Dr. H— accompanies me back to 
England, and has consented to spend a 
few weeks with us before he goes to 
town. Prepare Turner for my coming, 
as he may wish to look out for other 
duty. I wish I could get him settled 
here as chaplain. I have already sounded 
Sir Eliot on the subject ; and think, if I 
could bring it about, it would be no bad 
arrangement for either party. — The 
building a small chapel, and its conse- 
cration, is already talked of j and you 
may take an opportunity of speaking to 
Turner upon it : no bad speculation for 
him, unless, indeed, he has a bishopric 
in view, which many a 70/. a-year curate 
fancies he is born to achieve, while the 
archdeacon and dean have some doubts 
upon the subject. 

Adieu, dearest Louisa. — I shall write 
a few lines to you previous to my return, 
shortly after the receipt of which you 
may expect 

Your affectionate 

Henry Clonmore* 



DUDLEY. ^03 



LETTER XV. 

The Rev, Henry Clonmore to his Wife, 

MY DEAR LOUISA, Euphorbia, Teneriffe, 

1 HE trip to Madeira was proposed to Sir 
Eliot, who objected to it, and in that 
calm and decisive manner, which left no 
hope of a change of mind. We there- 
fore continue the same family party as 
when I wrote last, with the exception of 
one individual. — I think I mentioned in 
one of my previous letters, that Sir Eliot, 
in compliment to his sister, has, since 
her arrival, invariably breakfasted with 
the family. Yesterday morning he joined 
us, as usual, and at his entrance into 
the room, spoke to Perez, and received 
some sort of answer; but as I have as 
yet made no proficiency in the Spanish 
language, all I could understand was the 
name of Don Zulvago, repeatedly and 
K 6 



204f DUDLEY. 

rapidly pronounced by the servant. Sir 
Eliot turned to me, with a sort of smiling 
wonder, saying, " He is oft'." 

*' Who ? Don Zulvago ? He was 
here last night." 

" True ; but he is not to be found io' 
the island this morning. He rose at five 
o'clock, as Perez informs me, walked to 
Orotava, stepped on board a frigate bound 
to Porto Santo, fan island about 17 leagues 
N.E. of Madeira,) and is, by this time, 
beyond the Salvages, (a small island 
N.E. of Teneriffe.) 

Many remarks were made npon this 
mode of taking French leave; and we 
every one agreed, that his society would 
be much missed. Sir Eliot at all times 
took great pleasure in his conversation r 
by Mrs. Grantley he will be regretted at 

the whist-table ; Dr. H declares the 

backgammon-board may keep its mouth 
shut until his return ; Mr. Balfour will 
lose his equal in a game of chess, and I 
my superior at billiards. However, we 
were all very speedily reconciled to our 
loss of his company, when Mrs. Balfour, 



DUDLEY. ^05 

the same evening, remarked, " Perhaps 
he is gone upon the same errand which 
took him from the island two years since, 
to reHeve a few captives from Algiers.'* 

*' Very likely," added her husband ; 
" or to rebuild a burned village, or suc- 
cour a score or two of distressed emi- 
grants, or prop a mercantile house : in 
short, he goes through the most import- 
ant business of life with less indifference 
than I tie my neckcloth.'* 

Thus is our company lessened by the 
departure of a most invaluable member ; 
and we can only hope, that his return 
will be as sudden and unexpected as his 
flight has been. 

Our mode of life in this place, from 
its extreme simplicity and novelty, is 
very pleasing. The habits of civilization 
are so well blended with those dictated 
by nature and sound sense, — the polished 
manners of England so skilfully grafted 
on the customs of the island, peculiar to 
the Spanish character, that they cannot 
fail to strike a new-comer v^rith surprise, 
which ever ends in approbation^ 



S06 DUDLEY, 

As breakfast is one of the meaJs to 
which Claudy is admitted, she contrives 
to attract all our attention, by hopping 
round the table like a Robin Red-breast, 
or a Robin Goodfellow, to see what she 
can pick up, (this, at nine o'clock, being 
on an average her third breakfast.) From 
one, she receives an inch of cake ; from 
another, a spoonful of marmalade; a 
couple of grapes from a third, and a sup 
of coffee from a fourth. — These cere- 
monies being duly performed, she and 
Mrs. Grantley retire to their o*wn draw- 
ing-room 'y and we disperse, or remain 
together, as inclination prompts, to ride 
or walk, read or converse, or we return 
to our separate rooms for the purpose 
of writing or private study. 

By a large bell, hung from the top of a 
mast-head, which also bears the British 
colours, erected on the high summit of a 
rock, commanding a noble and extensive 
prospect, we are summoned to dress ; and 
in half an hour after we assemble in the 
library, and from thence repair to Sir 
Eliot's hospitable table, on which dinner 
is regularly served at twelve o'clock. — 



DUDLEY. 207 

Yes, Louisa, such is the fact j twelve 
o'clock is the established dinner-hour at 
Euphorbia ; and, however aukward I 
might find this primitive custom on my 
arrival, I am at present perfectly recon- 
ciled to it. 

Sir Eliot having totally abolished 
regular visits, and substituted the inva- 
riable custom of receiving at his abun- 
dant and elegant table, with the most 
friendly welcome, all strangers intro- 
duced by Don Zulvago, Mr. Balfour, the 
consuls, the Governor General of the 
Canaries, and ^ve or six other of the 
respectable inhabitants, we are ever 
certain of meeting with pleasant and in- 
telligent society every day in the week, 
excepting Sunday, which is reserved 
for the private enjoyment of a family 
party, and the strict performance of re- 
ligious duties, when I of course officiate. 

This plan of Sir Eliot's is most ad- 
mirable, and its effects proved, particu- 
larly by the master ^ his spirits are not 
jaded and harassed by the expectation of 
company, (as is too often the case even in 
the highest ranks of life, though assisted to 



208 DUDLEY. 

prepare for them, by stewards, butlerjs, 
liousekeepers and grooms of the cham- 
ber.) No one is asked out of mere com- 
pliment, and in return for visits paid. 
The very ignorance of who is coming 
gives a zest to the society, and the guest 
joins his host with all that glow of spirit 
which is produced by novelty; whilst the 
owner of the house, on his part, receives 
him with a fervour inseparable from the 
welcome bestowed on unexpected, yet 
approved visitors. ^ 

I ffrant that such a mode of life is 
only suited to a man of Sir Eliot's for- 
tune, and now peculiar situation : it 
could not be adopted, for example, in an 
establishment such as our's, where, having 
only a life interest in my property, and 
a young and rising family, a well re- 
gulated economy is the order of the day ;, 
but where it can be substituted for formal 
and ceremonious visits, it carries with it 
an excellent effect. 

Since Mrs. Grantley has taken up her 
residence with her brother, the wives, 
daughters, and sisters of the different 
consuls and others have_ accompanied 



. DUDLEY. 209 

their male relatives to Euphorbia, and 
this addition to his society, you must 
be convinced, Louisa, has not been the 
least pleasurable effect produced by her 
arrival. 

The wine vanishes with the cloth ! — 
even so, and we also vanish, but not with 
the wine. Mrs. Grantley leads the way 
back to the library or drawing-room, and 
here we find coffee and fruits. — We 
spend half an hour trifling over these : 
when — prepare for new wonders, Louisa, 
the siesta takes place, we disperse to 
enjoy the afternoon nap, and in about an 
hour meet again with refreshed spirits, 
good-humour, and well-prepared tempers, 
to join in any occupation and amuse- 
ment that may be proposed. And thus, 
even including the nap, one-third, at 
least, of the time is saved, which, with 
us, is consumed over our wine after 
dinner. As for the ladies, we do not pre- 
tend to guess what may be their employ- 
ment on retiring from, the dining-table ; 
but I have heard it often remarked, that 
the two or three hours between their 
move, and the introduction of tea and 



£10 DUDLEt. 

coffee, they find the most tedious through- 
out the day. 

By four o'clock, the company at 
Euphorbia either join in an excursion 
on mules, ramble in groups among the 
vineyards, or ride in a sort of covered 
machine, which Sir Eliot calls his socia- 
ble-calash, and which is drawn by oxen. — ' 
I generally ride towards the city, where 
I find abundant interest and amuse- 
ment in walking up and down the streets, 
lounging about the shops, examining the 
inside and outside of the churches, 
taking a peep at the convents, and 
getting acquainted with the inhabitants, 
and the manners and customs of the 
island, which, however, differ in a very 
trifling degree from those of Spain. 

At seven o'clock, the bell of Euphorbia 
is again heard, recalling her scattered in- 
mates to the evening repast, which is 
regularly served in a spacious saloon on 
the ground-floor, — one side, having fluted 
marble pillars, which support the roof, is 
entirely open, or rather, instead of a wall, 
there hangs from the ceiling in rich and 
ample folds a crimson damask silk cur- 



DUDLEY. Sll 

tain J this, according to the fineness of 
the weather, being drawn aside in fes- 
toons, displays the magnificent view of 
the adjacent country sloping downwards, 
richly covered with corn-fields, fruit- 
plantations, gardens, and vineyards, in- 
terspersed with hanging groves of laurel, 
myrtle, and orange trees, whose golden 
produce, when near enough to be dis- 
tinguished, give a peculiar richness to 
the scene. — On a fine evening, the spires 
of the churches of Orotava are beheld 
glittering in the sun, and beyond is the 
deep bluo sea, covered near the port with 
sloops, brigantines, frigates, merchant- 
men, fishing-boats, and indeed vessels 
of every description. 

Here, I repeat, we once more assem- 
ble ; but not, as at dinner, round a table : 
the ample marble slabs at the further 
end of this open hall are laden with the 
greatest variety of provisions ; the taste 
of every nation on the globe seemingly 
consulted : the Hindoo would here meet 
his plain boiled rice, and the common- 
councilman his turtle. We disperse, 
either taking our station under the roof 



212 DUDLEY. 

of the hall, or on the smooth green, to 
which it opens by a descent of three 
marble steps, on which are placed, alter- 
nately, urns of growing flowers, tripods, 
and other ornamental lamps. Whilst re- 
galing on fruits, ices, tea, or whatever 
inclination prompts us to fetch for Our- 
selves or the ladies, (for no servants are 
admitted to this meal,) we are here 
charmed by the wild notes of hundreds 
of Canary birds, who, whilst preparing 
to roo8t, sport around us among the 
branches of the trees. 

Once more the bell rings, (which> 
fortunately, has so sweet a sound, I was 
tempted to enquire was it of silver ;) and 
this last, given at ten o'clock, Louisa ! 
is the signal to retire. The guests glide 
away in the Zulvago fashion ; whilst we, 
according to the honest kind-hearted 
English mode, wish each good night be- 
fore we separate, when all repair to 
their rooms. 

I generally read for an hour ; but, at 
about eleven, I could safely lay any 
wager every individual in the house is in 
bed ; as to being asleep, that is another 



DUDLEY. 21S 

question. — By the by, you remember 
the old source of contention between me 
and Claudy, — going to bed at night ; 
and you may recollect, I had fairly con- 
quered her wilfulness on these occasions. 
Would you credit, that on her first arrival 
here, flattered by the indulgence of her 
fond father, and depending on his sup- 
port, she actually braved me, with the 
most impudent stare of her lovely eyes, 
and the prettiest saucy twist of her rosy 
mouth, when summoned by her nurse, 
and reminded by me to go to bed. 

No, there she continued, leaning on 
her father's knee, neither attending to 
Nurse Morton's " Come, Miss Howard !" 
or her aunt's '' Claudy, my dear, don't 

keep nurse waiting ;" or Dr. H 's 

loud laugh, and *« Comical little fish 1'* 
or Sir Eliot's fond whisper, of ** Go to 
bed, my darling.'^ 

All were useless, when I, as a family- 
man, exerted my authority, and, in spite 
of her screams and cries, and clasping 
Sir Eliot's leg with both her arms, forced 
her away, and carried her to her nursery. 
Here I shut her up in a dark closet 



2l4f DUDLEY. 

for half an hour, until the storm was 
hushed ; and, to prevent a recurrence of 
such rebellious behaviour, I desired her 
nurse not to let her come down to the 
drawing-room or hall the next evening. 
This punishment had its desired effect ; 
peace is happily restored, and we are as 
good friends as ever; though she fre- 
quently afterwards reproached me with, 
" You very naughty to poor Claudy." 

Thus, dear Louisa, have I given you 
a full and impartial account of our friend, 
and this his Atlantic habitation ; and, to 
be candid with you, my love, were yow 
and our children here, I should require 
no great persuasion to spend a few weeks 
longer in this enchanting spot : but, 
situated as we are, I begin to feel anxious 
to return to you, my poor Dudley, the 
rest of the dear little creatures, my ex- 
cellent pupil, and my worthy parishioners ; 
even eccentric John Turner, my young 
curate, and George Delver, my jolly- 
faced clerk, come sometimes across my 
remembrance. 

Let every one, then, soon expect me 
back to Bloomfield Rectory, and be pre- 



DUDLEY. ^15 

pared with a proper reception. Do you, 
my beloved wife, meet me with your own 
smiles ; Dudley with a rosy cheek ; his 
brothers and sisters with pretty beha- 
viour ; St. Eloi, with an English " How 
d'ye do, my friend?" my parishioners 
(though I am their rector, and not their 
curate) with a sincere ** Welcome home, 
sir;" Turner, with his pocket cork-screw, 
to draw a bottle of Madeira-Msideird ; 
and my honest old clerk, with a stiff 
band, and a clean surplice, (without one 
iron-mould spot in it,) for the following 
Sunday. 

Ever your affectionate husband, 

Henry Clonmore. 



216 DUDLEY. 



LETTER XVL 

The Countess of Alford to Mrs. GrantUy, 

MY DEAR AND MOST BELOVED JANE, 

Bath. 

There's an afFectionate beginning for 
you ! I like to begin well ; that is ge- 
nerally in our power ; but 1 cannot 
pledge myself for the conclusion, as a 
thousand circumstances may or may not 
occur, during my writing one letter, to 
put me out of temper. 

I have been spending a few days with 
my young friend Louisa Clonmore, whose 
loving mate is, with my old gallant, (Dr. 

H , you know,) lately returned from 

their visit to the outlaws of Teneriffe. 
Yes, Jane, outlaws, or absentees, if you 
prefer that still more odious word. You 
have both leaped the pale of English 
security and English honour, and must 



Dudley. ^17 

abide the consequence. The vessel 
in which Clonmore took his passage 
home was for many hours chased by a 
French flag, and narrow was the escape 
his Reverence had of being disembarked 
at Rochefort instead of Plymouth, and 
of ogling a pretty marchcmde de modes 
at Yerdan, instead of giving a pastoral 
dinner to his precious flock at Bloom- 
field. 

How fortunate that I was not silly 
enough to persevere in my intention of 
accompanying you ! No, no ; Heaven 
keep me from French privateers, Ameri- 
can buccaneers, and Barbary pii'ates ; and 
no attempting to reach your island with- 
out the chance of running foul of these. 
Never expect to see me among you, un- 
til I wish to learn a new quadrille from a 
Marshal of France, listen to the gallantry 
of a Yankee beau, and debate whether I 
should or should not like to become the 
mother of some future Emperor of Mo- 
rocco. 

Well, Jane, and you like TenerifFe, 
and you admire Eu-Eu-Euphorbia, the 
smoothest sounding title I ever heard! 

VOL. I. L 



^18 DUDLEY. 

It glides over the tongue like a lump of 
blanc-mange. The Spaniard was deter- 
mined the name of the place should be 
as romantic as his own ; and for my part, 
I w^ould not believe it was the name of a 
wild plant, until Clonmore found the 
passage wherein it is mentioned in Cook's 
Voyages, and then I was convinced it 
was as appropriate as Oakland, Bloom- 
field, and half-a- score others with us. 

And Clonmore, by his own account, 
has broken the noble spirit of my darling 
Claudy, the hector t locking her up in a 
dark closet. I suppose you, like a skil- 
ful general, made him your pioneer on 
the thorny road of education. Ah ! 
Heaven bless you all ! What between 
her sentimental father, her grave aunt, 
and the learned Spaniard, Claudy will 
turn out such a miracle of tenderness, 
prudence, and knowledge, that not a 
man on earth will be found worthy her 
sublime hand. 

Oh, these all-perfects ! these fruits of 
exquisite tuition ! For the life of me, if 
I know what one good purpose they ever 
answer. You, my dear Jane, were, I 



DUDLEY. S19 

think, taught by your mother, Lady 
Howard, to read, to write, to cypher, 
and to work ^ and yet, with this limited 
stock of accompb'shments, you contrived 
to gain the heart of worthy old Grantley ; 
to be sure, he contrived to gain the gout 
soon after marriage, but that was no 
fault of your's, you never bargained for 
that, you know, 

I have the honest soul now before my 
eyes ! with his parrot nose, and black 
velvet cap, put on something like that 
in Pope's portrait prefixed to the Iliad, 
his spectacles across his forehead, whilst 
unfolding his dispatches, looking asi m- 
portant as if, like Jupiter, with scales in 
his hand, he was weighing the fate of 
empires, — one gouty leg upon a chair, 
the other clad in a smart silk stocking 
and shining shoe, which plainly said, 
" there was once a pair of us :" his 
crutch on one side, his ptisan on the 
other. Such was diplomatic Grantley, 
at whom, and from whom, I have had 
many a good-humoured hearty laugh. 

As to my education. Lady Howard, 
my mamma, aware of her predecessor's 



limited acquirements, and your deficieff* 
cies, my excellent Jenny, ran into the 
other extreme ; and almost overlooking 
the trifling talents of reading, writing, 
and working, made me what I am — 
aye, and what am I ? 

Had you, Jane, paid me a visit the 
last time I was in Paris, I can assure 
you that your passport to the highe&t 
society there would have ran thus : — 
*< Mrs. Grantley, half-sister to the first 
private dancer^ singer, and performer on 
the harp and piano in the Republic." — 
Would this have pleased you, Jane ? I 
rather think I should have been more 
flattered, if presented, in our town of 
London, as *^ a near connection of prim 
Widow Grantley, one of the best daugh- 
ters, wives, and mothers, in the United 
Kingdom." — Well, with all my folly, I 
find I am a very sensible woman, at least 
when I am writing letters ; — in practice 
you shall judge. 

1 gave my frolicsome mother-in-law 
the slip at Bath, and went to Bloomfield, 
upon an invitation of a month or so, 
where I was well enough pleased for the 



DUDLEY. 2^1 

few first days ; but when the novelty of 
Clonmore's return was over, when I had 
fired off all my witty squibs against the 
Doctor, how heartily tired I did get of 
the whole set ! of you and all, of course ! 
Their description brought every one of 
you before my ** mind*s eye ;" and then 
we had for ever a repetition of Eliot's 
die-away adagio eccentricities, (for I 
find it is no longer allegro and con spirito 
with him ;) then followed your deep sky- 
blue silken rooms, Claudy's piony bed- 
curtains. Merchant Balfour's gliding 
smooth-the-way bows, and Don Zulvago's 
thoughtful whistling, when playing at 
bob-cherry with a bunch of grapes. 

Little Parson Turner, with his open 
mouth, his round dancing eyes, his hands 
in his pockets, and his stretched-out legs, 
mightily pleased ! devoured all this intel- 
ligence, wishing himself at Euphorbia, I 
believe, with no great aversion to all the 
good things it contains ; whilst I, happy 
to escape from the whole group of oddi- 
ties, winged back my way to Bath, and 
Clifton Mall, with all its delights; I 
pfiean the delights of the Mall, of the 
L S 



9f^% DUDI\Er. 

pump-room, the ball-i^oom, the concerts, 
and libraries ; for, as I never studied 
either drawing or botanj^ what the deuce 
inclination can I have for the beauties of 
nature? 

And so Eliot wanders about his new- 
fangled abode like an Arabian magician, 
at whose touch of the wand it had: sprung 
from the mines ? And the Balfours are 
sociable, chit-chat neighbours, are they ? 
And you do see a rational soul now and 
then ? But I am so sorry you have lost 

your piping defend me ! what was I 

going to say 1 — bulfinch, I vow. — Well, 
you know who I mean ; and he is gone to 
Porto Santo, is he ? I wish he had come 
to England, with our grum and grim 
physician, and jockey rector, • — I have 
so great a wish to see him. 

Their description of this Spaniard's 
person is really so indefinite and unsa- 
tisfactory, that though I put fifty ques- 
tions as to his length, breadth, width, 
hue, voice, manner, and dress, no in- 
formation could I gain. They describe 
tolerably well the latitude, longitude, 
and complexion, of all the rest of the 



DUDLEY. 223 

folks, but my dexterity has failed in 
finding out what sort of a spark is your 
Zulvago. 

Your Zulvago! the deuce is in my 
pen this day : the word is written, and 
must go, for I've no tear ready at hand to 
wash it out. Awful, ominous word! 
Take care, Jane ! Have a care, my pre- 
cious ! Remember, fat, fair, and forty ; 
Jat you are not, neither are you fair, 
sweet sister mine ; — but do you re- 
collect, Jane, how old / am? I think 
about nineteen, a few years more or less ; 
and I have been told, that shortly after 
my birth, you held to my scraggy lips the 
first silver boatful of — pap is so vulgar, 
of sponge-biscuit, reduced to a pulp ; and 
a very fine, tall, straight, proper young 
woman you were, within ten days of 
saying good-by to nine-and-twenty. 

Never mind, Jenny, you shall have the 
Don ; that is, because the fates have de- 
creed against my having him myself. I 
must shut my eyes to every man whose 
name begins with a Z you know, or 
perhaps you do not know. Lord, my 
dear, that was the only reason of my 
L 4 



224 DUDLEY. 

chusing Arthur Bradshaw, Earl of Al- 
ford, just to get as far as possible from 
the fatal Z. Had, however, the alphabet 
been twisted round my matrimonial 
finger, why then it is clear that extremes 
would have met. Never fear, Jane, the 
Don may be your's ; but I should like to 
see him first. 

I was half crazy to see Buonaparte, 
when a peace was clapped up to gratify 
my wishes, and I sprung from a sick bed, 
shaking off my nerves with my nightcap, 
and flew off to Paris. Should I ever 
come to Teneriffe, which, believe me, 1 
never shall, it will be for the sole purpose 
of seeing the Spaniard j then will I mar 
your proud hopes, my dear Jenny ! 
What excellent foils we shall be to each 
other. From between such a brace of 
widows I defy him to escape ; for should 
he slight the demure lady in the lobster, 
(you, Jane,) he falls a prey to the fasci- 
nating mermaid. 

How lucky that Eliot is not a married 
man, or this Don were a dangerous in- 
mate : he has lived at every civilised, 
and uncivil court of Europe, I under* 



DUDLEY. 2^5 

stand ; and, I have no doubt, has been 
the Cicisbeo to every civil husband's wife 
in Italy, France, &c. Now, that class 
of beings I — do — ab-hor. Give me an 
acknowledged matrimonial suitor, or a 
husband at once ; but none of that ob- 
sequious, dangling foolery, which, I be- 
lieve, is the cause of more evil on the 
continent than we are aware of. — I 
remember, when a wild girl, being hor- 
ribly lectured by an old fright of a virgin, 
all parchment and stilts, for saying that 
a Cicisbeo was the devil j and not content 
with this unlady-like expression, 1 
clinched my offence, by adding, " Why, 
Satan was the Cicisbeo of Eve j read your 
Milton else." — No, my pen is certainly 
bewitched this day ; but what wonder, 
when writing ol a bewitching subject. 

So to return to the subject of the 
greatest bore in nature, education ; do 
you and Eliot intend Claudy to learn 
Greek, Latin, Hebrew, Persian, Arabic, 
and Hindoostanee? the modern languages 
to come in by way of a dance, and a 
song between the acts. — Don will make 
an excellent master in most of these, and 
L 5 



2^6 DUDLEY. 

no fear of a second edition of St. Preux 
and Julie, for by the time the pupil 
has learned to construe Amo, the pre* 
ceptor will be putting off his shoes to 
step into his winding sheet. 

Have you a dancing-master in your 
part of the Avt)rld ? Are the Capriotes 
(fine-feathered songsters I am told with 
you) to be her only singing-masters ? — 
Eliot will himself teach her to draw, 
I conclude ; and then follow botany, 
chemistry, astronomy, astrology, and 
etceteras as long as a comet's tail. — 
Heaven help the unfortunate prodigy of 
the little island, who, I suppose, will be 
sent over in a few years to astonish us of 
the great island. 

Your children, Jane, I have heard, 
were wonders in their way ; what a pity 
it was they died, and just at a time when 
you might have looked to the reward of 
their labours, and your own solicitude. — 

Lady Augusta R says she often 

regrets them, — misses them very much 
at her parties. The astonishing pro- 
ficiency of your Mary in music, and Ed- 
ward's early skill in languages, are still 



DUDLEY. S27 

the universal themes of panegyric. — A 
friend of mine was speaking of them the 
other day to a gentleman who seemed to 
doubt his assertion, that their acquire- 
ments far surpassed all he had witnessed 
in young people of their age. The hearer 
grew unaccountably dull, and changed 
the subject with a deep sigh, which of 
course I at that time attributed to his 
sorrow at their early death ; but I have 
since heard he had a son, equally clever 
with your own, who died of over-study. 

Well, sister, and what news shall I 
send you in return for all the Teneriife 
news brought us by the divine and the 
Doctor ? — I had nearly written the 
divine doctor 1 two words which ought 
never to come together wlien speaking 
of honest H— — , who has noticing of 
clerical divinity about him, if we except 
his odious shovel hat ; — that hat ! that 
fright, which imparting to the face be- 
neath it twenty years in age, gives the 
look of an owl, without adding one grain 
of wisdom to the head within. 

Strayed from ths subject again, by all 
that's rambling ! What was the subject ? 
L G 



S^8 DUDLEY. 

As to politics, it is for those who sit in 
the gallery, the pit, and the boxes, to 
chatter about the scene before them ; 
we, who either see behind the scenes, or 
into the green-room, smile and are silent. 

Fashions, my love ! Shall I send you 
an account of the fashions? or the 
fashions themselves ? say yes, and by the 
time they arrive at Teneriffe — Mother 
Ship ton may wear them. 

Well then, new publications ; but I 
know of none. I do certainly read of 
them in Reviews, but my only study is 
the Peerage, as my late lord's w^as the 
Racing Calendar. 

What a different being is Louisa Clon- 
more \ and yet we were both brought up 
at the same school — 1 to be sure a high- 
flyer, she an humble bee. 

The soil was the same, but what a 
variety in the plants. — Louisa possessing 
most of my accomplishments, though 
not in so transcendant a degree, (what 
signifies mock modesty with you ?) joins 
all those solid ones which adorn my good 
sister; by which Mrs. Clonmore is enabled 
to educate her children herself, with 



DUDLEY. 2^9 

little or no assistance, except that of 
their father. 

Louisa flourished on the banks of the 
Thames a rose, I, a tulip. The rose was 
transplanted by the modest hand of an 
unbeneficed clergyman, to bloom the 
mistress of his lowly thatched parsonage ; 
I was selected by an earl, (not a Flemish 
earl, thank Heaven,) to captivate the 
eyes of a court. The lovely rose at this 
hour is adorned with beautiful buds of 
various growth, all promising to equal 
the mother in loveliness, whilst I, the 
titled high-prized tulip, rise from the 
earth on the single stalk, solitary and 
alone. 

Heigho ! my nerves are beginning to 
dance. Well, to return to Louisa, her 
children are certainly what are called 
fine children, handsome, strong, cheerful 
and good-tempered — all excepting a 
little boy named Dudley, of whom you 
may have heard speak ; the measles have 
totally ruined his constitution ; I don't 
pretend to argue in what manner, but 
the child is no longer the same, he has 
dwindled to a shadow within these last 



^30 DUDLEY. 

two years. The parents flatter themselves 
they will be able to rear him to maturity ; 
but I know to the contrary: depend upon 
it, Dudley will never see one-and-tvventy; 
it is a broken bud, which nothing can 
restore, a sickly, delicate living plant, 
that drawls out in a puny voice, " Yes, 
if you please," and " No, I thank you," 
to every question put to him, and takes 
no interest whatever in any one thing 
that is daily passing before his eyes : I 
repeat, it is the bud of the rose half-de- 
cayed, hanging downward, withering on 
the stalk. — I think I could write famous 
pastorals — I have so true a turn for the 
pathetics, when I've a new conquest in 
view. 

I am going to the ball to-night at the 

rooms. The regiment of Hussars 

is quartered near, and I mean to do ex- 
ecution among those who will soon do ex- 
ecution enough in Spain. There is an old 
saying, *' We love the treason, but hate 
the traitor j" now I confess to the reverse. 
I hate war, but love the soldiery and 
yet a soldier's wife I v/as ever determined 



DUDLEY. ' 231 

not to become. You may remark, that 
my dead-and-gone lord was colonel of 

the ; but that does not prove him 

to have been a soldier. 

He certainly did flourish a little in 
Holland some years ago, when that re- 
publican general, you know who I mean, 
— he, who afterwards went into the 
Temple in a way every one knew, and 
quitted the Temple (I mean his soul 
quitted it) in a way no one knew but 
himself. — His name begins with a P, 
that is all I can remember, except his 
civility to my good lord, to whom he 
used to send his high profonde consider- 
ation, saying. Not to hurry your march 
inconveniently. Colonel, I beg leave to in- 
form you, that / intend, by such an hour, 
(naming it,) to occupy the io-^n you now 
occupy. ' — Here was republican polite- 
ness 1 would a Bourbon have thus acted, 
or even had such promised, could such 
have kept their word. 

Got into politics again, 1 declare ! No, 
there I'm wrong, the word politics we 
confine to the recording of passing events, 
— the newspaper reports of the day ; — 



232 DUDLEY. 

let old Time put ten years' gazettes in 
his portfolio, and they constitute His- 
tory. And am I turned Historian ! is it 
possible that I can write half a page 
of history ! what neither governess, 
teachers, or masters of elocution and 
belles lettres, could ever obtain fiom me, 
during the three years they had me under 
their thumb-screws, stocks, and iron neck- 
swings in the noble county of Middlesex. 
Once more, and for the last time, (on 
this page at least, for I'm nearly at the 
end of it,) to return to the never-ending 
subject of our letters, thoaghts, and con- 
versation, — Claudy, my little angel, who, 
now tliat she is a thousand miles off, an 
infant Andromeda chained to a rock in 
the sea by a cruel father, (I do peep into 
Samuel I3oyse's entertaining Pantheon 
now and then,) 1 love better than 
ever. — She will receive by the next 
fleet that touches at Madeira, from 
-whence you can send your luggage-boat 
for it, a set of china from Staffordshire, 
which, if she breaks a hundred times, 
shall be as often replaced ; for though 
I do not positively declare she will be 



DUDLEY. ^83 

tny heiress (must look about me a little 
longer first), I think very probable, un- 
less, indeed I hope Don — I wish 

the man had a Christian's name — Don 
Zulvago, I hope he does not wear a wig, 
like my old beau the Doctor ; if he does, 
though he were the fire-king himself, 
the monarch of TenerifFe, I w^ould not 
be his queen ; I could not endure even a 
seraph in a wig. I have so great an 
aversion to a bald head, that my chief 
dread of a fever is the sight of a phan- 
tom opening my curtains, with a blister 
and a pair of shears in one hand, and a 
wig in the other. 

I assure you, Jane, old Sarah, Duchess 
of Marlborough, could not boast of a 
finer flaxen head — no, a finer head of 
flaxen hair ■ — than your killing sister Ca- 
roline ; and yet, that noble scold cut oflf 
her commanding tresses, and threw 
them in the face of the conqueror of 
Blenheim, as Lord Orford has it in his 
lleminis — a deuced hard word, and Tve 
no dictionary at hand ; a very entertain- 
ing book, by the by, over which Alford 
lias often fallen asleep with his two legs 



2S4i DUDLEY. 

(he had two, and fine ones) crossed, and 
resting on the chimney-piece, while his 
head and shoulders have been comfort- 
ably pillowed in an easy chair. 

And is it really easier to subdue thou- 
sands in battle, than one woman's spirit ! 
Louis Quatorze said it was, and we must 
allow him, poor man, to have been some 
judge : unable to keep the peace between 
the abandoned De Montespan, and the 
hypocrite De Maintenon (I detest that 
woman's character), he lifted up his 
perriwig, and stopping his royal ears, like 
Hogarth's enraged musician, swore it 
was easier to give peace to Europe, than 
to make two wrangling viragos hold 
their tongues. Poor Louis ! he was little 
aware at that time they were rivals, but 
whether from love to himself, or his 
crown and sceptre, let his death-bed 
scene witness. 

And does my Claudy really promise to 
become a scold ! then, for Heaven's sake, 
Jane, have your own way, or adopt 
Clonmore's, and let the dark closet break 
her spirit, that her husband may not run 
the risk of breaking her neck, and a cer- 
tain gentleman his. 



DUDLEY. 235 

Now do, my dear Jenny, write me a 
charming long letter, or I shall certainly 
exclaim — <* Defend me from all tor- 
pedo's flesh or fish !'' Write to me, and 
soon, or take the consequence j for as I 
find that Eliot has ceased his correspond- 
ence with me, and I am aware that 
Claudy cannot as yet guide even a 
skewer, I shall certainly, on not hearing 
tidings of the exile and his family, desire 
my yacht to get under weigh and spread 
her canvass. — L* Amour taught *< le 
premier navigateur'* the use of sails, 
so Squire Gesner the Swiss says, in his 
charming Idylles, (this is to shew my 
reading,) and sisterly friendship will pilot 
me to Teneriffe. 

Ever your enchanting 

Caroline Alforb* 



236 DUDLEY. 



LETTER XVIL 

Mrs. Grantley to the Countess ofAlforcL 
DEAR SISTER, ;^ Euphorbia, Teneriffe. 

You will no doubt be happy to hear we 
all continue in the best possible health : 
indeed, Eliot is so much improved in 
person and spirits since my arrival, that 
the picture at Oakland Park, I should 
think, can no longer be regarded as a 
resemblance. — I only wish that Claudy 
were a few years older, that she might 
begin seriously to occupy his attention, 
for, at present, she is only an object of 
amusement. 

My niece reads words of one syllable 
tolerably, and has learned many phrases 
in the Spanish language, from Rosalva, 
a grand-daughter of Martella's, a young 
girl who cannot speak English, but whose 
good humour, innocence, pretty face 



DUDLEY. 287 

and person, and rather correct pronun- 
ciation, have made her a very desirable 
acquisition to us. The child required a 
companion of the age of this Rosalva, 
who could enter with spirit into all her 
little plays, both within doors and out, 
and, at the same time, prevent her com- 
ing to any bodily harm. 

Claudy can also work at her needle, 
as you will see by the cambric handker- 
chief accompanying my letter. She can 
likewise form printed letters with a pen- 
cil, and dictate her thoughts to me with 
more intelligence than you might expect 
at her time of life. 

The costly service of china of English 
manufacture, which you sent Claudy, is 
used at our afternoon's collation, and 
much admired in this part of the world, 
particularly by our Spanish guests. 

By your account of Mrs. Clonmore, 
she must be an amiable woman : I re- 
gret I know so little of her, more especi- 
ally as her husband, from what I have 
seen of him here, is a worthy man. I 
trust, with the blessing of the Al- 
mighty, they may never know what it 



^SS DUDLEY. 

is to lose a child. Notwithstanding your 
unfavourable account of their little boy, 
he may yet recover, and I hope most 
sincerely that he will. 

I am, my dear Caroline, 
Your affectionate sistei', 

Jane GrantleYc 



BVDhEV> 239 



LETTER XVIII. 

* Sh^ Eliot Hoix)ard to the Eev* Henry Clonmore» 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe. 

All well with us \ but now to the prin- 
cipal purport of my letter. — Many- 
years since, I was told, by one of our 
mutual friends, that you, my dear Clon- 
more, had been heard to declare, you 
never had regretted nature denying you 
a brother, since you had known me, — 
You, perhaps, forget having made use 
of these words ; nevertheless they were 
spoken, and of me, and by you. Dr. 

H was my informer ; therefore all 

doubt on the subject is at rest. 

From that period we have lived toge- 
ther like brothers indeed, at Eton, at col- 
lege, and elsev/here, and yet upon terms 
of perfect equality \ for though my means 
far exceeded my wants, we were at par, 

* Many letters are omitted. 



Q40 DUDLEY. 

by your moderation reducing your want^ 
within your means. 

When you accepted from my lost wife 
the living of Bloomfield, as having been 
held upwards of thirty years by your fa- 
ther, in preference to that which I 
offered, though treble its value, I ap- 
plauded your conduct; and when you 
thought proper to reject that, and an- 
other benefice on my presentation, plu- 
ralities, and consequent non-residence, 
being against your sense of right, you 
may remember I did not persist : I 
listened to your arguments, I agreed to 
your objections, and disposed otherwise 
of my gifts. 

Let me now remind you, Clonmore, of 
a few circumstances that occurred during 
our stay at Eton : — Three times were 
you in danger of drowning, when I saved 
you. I being then a strong athletic boy, 
and you weak and delicate, I more 

than once rescued you from T , that 

tyrant of the school and neighbourhood. 
— And at Oxford, Clonmore ; remember 
my conduct to you at Oxford. It is 
now my plan to lay all the obligations 

lO 



DUDLEY. Ml 

you are under to me full before your 
eyes, that you may not have one solitary 
excuse for treating me with ingrati- 
tude. Search your own heart, for further, 
dearer proofs, of my former friendship, 
and then teach that heart, when now 
called upon, amply to reward me. 

This is a solemn, a most extraordinary 
preface, you may remark. What more 
solemn can b^ the request itself! — Is 
Mrs. Clonmore with you whilst reading 
this ? If not, lay by my letter ; read 
no more : — do not cast your eyes upon 
another sentence until your wife shall be 
at your side, for the prayer I have to 
make is to you both jointly. Without 
her full and voluntary consent it cannot 
be granted ; and I would rather trust 
for success to my own written pleadings, 
than any arguments you can hereafter 
propose to her. 

The idea I am going to impart is no 
new one : it has long been cherished, 
even before your visit, two years ago, to 
this place ; — it occupied my thoughts at 
that time, and has filled them ever since : 
it has been the dove of peace brooding 

VOL. I. M 



^i^ DUDLEY. 

over my mind, — the finger of hope, 
pointing to a heart- soothing perspective. 

To keep you no longer in suspense, 
Clonmore, Louisa, for I will suppose 
you now at the same time reading this 
together ; you have five sons, and I have 
none j — your family may increase, mine 
is for ever at a stand. At the birth of 
Claudy, I did not repine ; 1 said, ** May 
my next prove a boy ;" and I looked 
forward to becoming the father of many 
children. In vain : my wife died, and 
my daughter remains my sole child. 

Silence, Clonmore ! Harp no longer 
on that discordant string, it is hateful, 
agonizing to my ear. You, who knew 
Claudina, — you, to whom I, at the time, 
imparted every minute circumstance of 
our first acquaintance, (and every look 
and word is painted — painted ! en- 
graven, deeply engraven, on my heart's 
core, never, never to be obliterated,) — 
ought you to bait my ears with that com- 
mon-place, hacknied advice, of 

no, I cannot repeat the word. J marry 
again ! and whom ? and for what pur- 
pose? For the sole chance, in the 



Turkish style, of giving an heir to my 
title and estates ! No, no ; I love, I 
honour the sex too well to attempt 
branding them with c^^^honour, by offer- 
ing a hand, when I have no longer affec- 
tions, or even common regard to bestow j 
and how I should scorn that woman who 
would accept my name and wealth on 
such terms ; and yet such alone are now 
mine to offer. 



Pardon me, Clonmore, my mind was 
agitated ; I am now more calm. Claudy 
has just left me, after a visit of an hour, 
during which her incessant prattle, and 
restless vivacity, have had on me their 
usual magical effects. Since this dear 
child has been here, I have recovered a 
great portion of my original peace and 
cheerfulness ; and yet, like the infant 
Lama of Thibet, she is utterly uncon- 
scious of her power. 

Her future welfare is, at present, the 
never-ceasing object of my thoughts; 
and I verily believe my anxiety would be 
less, were I, instead of leaving her an 

M 2 



^44 DUDLEY. 

heiress, to be certain that poverty would 
be her lot. In the latter case, a serious 
and sober education, religious principles, 
early and thoroughly imbibed, preparing 
for rectitude of conduct, might bring 
her through the world with honour ; 
whereas, the favourite child of fortune, 
to what temptations may she not be ex- 
posed, should she be, early in life, de- 
prived of my protection. 

I should not wish her to marry under 
twenty years of age, yet should feel 
miserable were celibacy her choice. 
You will allege, that, setting aside a 
pretty face, and fine person, which she 
promises in time to possess, her money 
will inspire a swarm of suitors, to en- 
deavour at overcoming that resolution ; 
and therein consists my fear. — As Zul- 
vago once remarked, *< An heiress may 
be compared to a flying-fish, a defence- 
less, timid, harmless creature, who is, 
both in the air and the water, ever sur- 
rounded by enemies ; if it escapes man, 
and the shark, it falls a victim to the 
bird of prey." 

My wife was an heiress, you may ob- 



DUDLEY. ^4^ 

Serve to me ; but, Clonmore, I am con- 
vinced her nature, at the same age, dif- 
fered widely from that displayed at this 
time by my little daughter. Claudina 
was, as I was told, from her earliest 
childhood, ever gentle and mild, dis- 
pleasure being shown by gravity, not by 
violence ; and yet her temper, likewise, 
was all openness and candour, and, at 
times, affectionately ardent. 

Heaven itself is witness that neither 
of ics loved through the medium of for- 
tune ; for, as you, Clonmore, well know, 
at the moment I was resolved to make 
her mine, and present her to the world 
as Lady Howard, (and I was upwards of 
twenty years of age, it must be re- 
marked,) I knew not she possessed money 
sufficient to buy a wedding gown ; and 
in the hour that she first whispered to her 
conscious bosom her preference of me to 
all the men she had hitherto seen, she 
was ignorant that I was master of a 
second coat. 

To return, however, to the subject 
nearest my heart, and the chief induce- 
ment for my writing to you at this time. 
M 3 



S46 DUDLEY. 

The temper of Claudy, as we have daily 
proofs, is most violent and overbearing j 
and her inclinations, we perceive, already 
tend to pride and self-sufficiency, which 
evils must be checked, my friend, and 
soon, or their growth will exceed all 
power of reform. Mrs. Grantley cer- 
tainly could, and did awe her early 
childhood, but being now in her sixth 
year, every day makes the task more 
laborious ; for though we do our utmost 
to prevent it, surrounded as she is by 
courtiers in every shape, who anticipate 
her wishes, laugh at her whims, and obey 
her commands, Claudy is beginning to 
pride herself on the idea that she is the 
only child in the universe ; she forgets 
those she left behind in England, and 
since her coming here, has seen no 
other. 

You may readily surmise, that my ob- 
ject now is to convince her that there 
are other children in the world, of equal 
value with herself, and of as much, or of 
more consequence, who are worthy to 
share with her that attention now wholly 
engrossed by her own little person, 



DUDLEY. ^47 

'on which the care and admiration of half 
a dozen persons, at least, is daily lavished. 
— It is tlms only, that selfishness can be 
thoroughly eradicated from lier mind, 
and vanity and conceit stifled in the 
birth. 

My first idea was to adopt a little girl 
of her age, and rear them together as 
sisters, perhaps co-lieiresses ; for even 
half my present fortune is too much for 
an individual, and that a female: but 
here, Clonmore, even at the very time I 
was meditating on the means of expel- 
ling selfishness from the breast of my 
child, self came into niT/ consideration, 
and I reflected on the superior advantages 
and interest, the adoption of a boy in- 
stead of a girl might have on my own 
future life. 

To adopt a son indeed — to be his 
father, preceptor, guardian, friend, — 
Clonmore, is Louisa now at your side ? 
are you reading this together ? — this, the 
only request I shall ever make you, the 
only reward I shall ever claim of your 
friendship. — Are you prepared to show 
how deeply you feel for my irreparable 
M 4 



248 DUDLEY. 

loss? are you inclined, as far as lies in 
your power, to repair it ? can you, will 
you give me one of your sons? 

You can spare me one out of five, 
you can surely spare me one, my prayer 
is not so unreasonable, — Claudy herself 
will not be dearer to me, than a child of 
your's. I will be his father, and in my 
sister Grantley he will find the care and 
tenderness of a mother. If you consent, 
I promise to brush up my scholarship 
and follow your own plan of tuition, with 
as much docility as the veriest pedagogue 
living under your roof. And with Mrs. 
Clonmore, I make the engagement to let 
him visit England as often, and for any 
period she may wish to exact. 

Can I say more? — can I make a stronger 
appeal to your friendship, your humanity, 
your justice? — if I could, believe me I 
would not hesitate to do so. Adieu ! on 
your determination I rest my hopes of 
future happiness. 

Eliot Howard, 



DUDLEY. 249 



LETTER XIX. 

The Rev. Henry Clonmore to Sir Eliot Howard. 

Bloomfield Rectory. 

JN OT a moment will 1 keep my friend in 
suspense on the subject of his Isist letter. 
Louisa and I, as you surmised, ^d read 
it together, for it arrived about an hour 
since, when we were alone in her dress- 
ing room. *^ 

Our mutual observations on your offer, 
my dear and generous Howard, it is un- 
necessary to repeat j and now, for the 
sake of Heaven, do listen to me with 
patience : do not fly off in a paroxysm 
of rage, and destroy tliis my letter, at 
the early intimation I thus give of the 
state of our minds on reading your's; 
rather acknowledge, with your usual 
frankness and liberality of opinion, how 
unconquerable our objection to your 
prayer, as you term it, must be, when 
M d 



S50 DUDLEY. 

we both exclaimed, at the very same 
moment, whilst the paper trembled in 
our hands, and we looked suddenly up 
at each other, as if in painful suspense 
of the feehngs of each — think, I repeat, 
what must be the emotion of the instant, 
when we cried out in one voice, *' God 
forbid." 

This speaks of itself; it was the cry of 
nature ; the disinterested, involuntary 
sentence of the heart. You may think 
me unfeeling for not even endeavouring 
to sweeten this draught of disappoint- 
ment, by thanks, by excuses, by promises 
of what the future might lead to. I 
offer none ; let the future decide in its 
own time — our present resolution is 
this, had we twenty sons, we would not 
part with one. 

And you would call our compliance 
with this last, this noblest offer of friend- 
ship, a favour done to yourself! Kind 

and good Eliot ! would to God that 

But I have done, or I shall fancy I hear 
your voice echoing across the Atlantic 
with " Silence y Clonmore." 

Only suffer me to notice the remark 



DUDLEY. 251 

Louisa made but now. You will not be 
blunt with a lady, although she may 
chance to observe, *' The best compli- 
ment Sir Eliot could pay the memory of 
his wife, is to think the sex worthy of 
producing her counterpart. A man who 
had survived an unfortunate union, might 
feel averse to hazard a second — but our 
friend — " Well, I say no more \ however 
you may decide, it will be for the best. 

In one of your former letters, and 
again in your last, you remind me that 
I am thoroughly acquainted with the 
particulars of your first introduction to 
Lady Howard. Now I assure you, my 
friend, upon my honour, I do not remem- 
ber a single circumstance concerning it. 
I scarcely recollect when, where, or how 
you did meet ; and for this simple reason : 
at the very time you were detailing to 
me your newly-formed intimacy with 
your Ciaudina, I was, and I believe un- 
known to you, (not being secure of my 
prize,) courting my Louisa. 

I can recall to mind your transports 
and incoherency, when relating to me 
those very important particulars ; and I 
M 6 



252 DUDLEY. 

might unintentionally deceive you into 
the idea that I was listening with the 
most profound attention, by coming out 
with a " Ha ! indeed ! well sir ? and 
so ?" whilst my thoughts, instead of ram- 
bling with you into Devonshire, were in 
all likelihood basking in love's sunshine 
at Twickenham. 

You have declared you will never ask 
of either Louisa or myself a second proof 
of friendship ; but you have not forbid- 
den us to ask such of you. Could we 
prevail on you to favour us with a sketch, 
however slight, of the events you allude 
to, the better to make us acquainted with 
the character of our honoured and la- 
mented friend, the daughter of my 
father's early patron, it would to us be in- 
valuable. We have still the half-length 
portrait of Lady Howard, by Opie, in our 
drawing-room ; an account written by 
yourself of how the affections of so much 
excellence on both sides became mu- 
tually, and indeed, suddenly engaged, I 
repeat, Louisa and myself would regard 
as a real treasure. 



DUDLEY. Q53 

Dr. H has been here ; he is stay- 
ing witli a friend in the neighbourhood, 
at whose house Lady Alford is at present 
on a visit. Your letter was lying on the 
table ; sa?is ceremonie he took it up in 
silence, read it, took off his spectacles, 
wiped them thoroughly, drew in his lips, 
and fixed his eyes on the window, put 
his spectacles on again, once more read 
the letter over attentively, and then took 
a pinch of snuff. 

After a short silence, which neither 
Louisa nor I were inclined to break, the 
good gentleman observed, *' I see how 
this will end : that confounded fellow will 
go on lamenting his loss until his youth 
is frittered away ; and when he becomes 
the " slippered pantaloon," the first little 
Spanish girl with oblong eyes and casta- 
nets that comes across him, will dance 
her way into his notice, until she bears off 
the matrimonial ring. Such are the usual 
finales of extravagant and romantic reso- 
lutions." 

Though I have no fear of the castanets 
and oblong eyes, I must confess there is 
some truth in the Doctor's remark j and. 



^51. DUDLEY. 

my dear Howard, to argue with you in 
sober friendship, can we assert with per- 
fect sincerity that there is the least ra- 
tionality in this plan at your time of life 
of devoting the remainder of it to widow- 
hood. As a Christian, I repeat, you 
ought to resign yourself, even with cheer- 
fulness, to the will of Providence ; and 
as a member of society, its interests be- 
come your duty to improve. Can this 
be done more effectually, I ask, than by 
giving the world a family to perpetuate 
your virtues. 

I waive all comment on your remark, 
that any woman who might consent to ac- 
cept your wealth and title (dispensing 
with your regard) would be an object of 
your contempt; as Louisa herself de- 
clares, in her generous ardour to do 
you that justice you deny to yourself, 
that there is scarcely a man on earth, 
in her opinion, to be preferred to your- 
self. 

I proceed, in the next place, to the ac- 
count you give us of Claudy : — it does not 
certainly bear a promising appearance ; 
but let me observe, that if it is really 
6 



DUDLEY. ^55 

your wish to remove your child from the 
dizzy pinnacle on which, I agree with 
Don Zulvago, heiresses usually do stand, 
you cannot carry your purpose under a 
better form, than by giving the saucy 
little beauty half-a-dozen brothers and 
sisters. Should, however, your own judg- 
ment ultimately decide against innova- 
tions of this nature, do not have recourse 
to adoption. Be patient ; time, as you 
yourself observe, does glide much quicker 
than w^e are aw^are of. Claudy is at pre- 
sent a child, but a very few years hence, 
and we shail find her approaching to 
womanhood. 

My eldest girl, who is now about six 
years of age, was seated the other day on 
a footstool at her mother's side, and in 
appearance wholly unoccupied. We at 
last observed her counting her fingers, 
each hand alternately, until she came 
to twenty.five, — there she stopped, and 
gave a deep sigh, " Twenty-five ! Oh 
dear! and then I shall soon be an old 
woman !" — We laughed, and yet is 
there not more truth in the idea than at 
first appears ? — From our birth to a 



256 DUDLEY. 

quarter of a century, we seem to pursue 
old age as he flies in the distance before 
us ; but at twenty-five, my friend, old 
age halts, and yet we proceed — he then 
turns slowly round, and at every step we 
make, he hastens to meet us. 



This seems a levee-day with us. Dr. 

H was succeeded by Mr. Miles 

Cavendish, who came to take leave, be- 
ing on the eve of his departure for 
Portsmouth to join his ship ; and now 
Lady Alford is just arrived. She and 
Louisa are gone up stairs to look over 
some new purchases, and have left me to 
finish my letter. 

The Countess complains bitterly that 
you never write to her, and seems still 
indignant at the receipt of a not€y as she 
calls it, upwards of a year and a half 
ago, from Mrs. Grantley, to inform her 
that Claudy knew E. from F. and could 
hem a pocket handkerchief. I asked at 
the time to see the note ; but slie replied, 
that she wished to prove, whether it was 
the custom at Teneriffe to write on 
asbestos paper, and that the happy 



DUDLEY. ^57 

experiment had procured it the fate it 
deserved. 

When Claudy shall be able to handle 
a pen, or a pencil in any sort of fashion, 
do let her write to her aunt, who is cer- 
tainly very fond of the child, and really 
takes your silence as most unkind. Your 
younger sister is a fashionable, I allow ; 
but still she has a heart, and a generous, 
and a feeling one 5 it should not be un- 
necessarily pained by neglect : and 
though her letters are, I acknowledge, as 
flighty and whimsical as her conversation 
and behaviour, none of them, I trust, 
have the slightest tincture of unbecoming 
levity. 

Her anxious curiosity respecting Zul- 
vago still affords the highest amusement 

to Dr. H and myself; and to keep 

it alive, it would actually appear we had 
connived in giving a contradictory de- 
scription of him. I think I am the 
most accurate, as I took particular ob- 
servation of his person ; but the Doctor, 
whether out of perverseness or forgetful- 
ness, I do not know, does not agree with 
me in any one respect when speaking of 



258 DUDLEY. 

him. So that at last, out of all patience 
with us both, the Countess exclaimed, 
" Well, this Spaniard must be a charm- 
ing fellow: a very tall, short, middle- 
sized man ; sufficiently corpulent, if he 
was not so thin : with fine black, sandy 
hair and beard, and blueish-brown eyes, 
which by the way must be green — a 
very sweet smirking frown upon his face j 
and a complexion as dark as nut-brown, 
though rosy and fair as a Swede.*' 

Apropos, I ought to inform you, that 
I have been applied to, in your absence, 
by several noble suitors, who are very 
desirous of becoming your brother-in- 
law. Cavendish I suspect amongst the 
rest ; but his prospects in life do not 
authorise him as yet to speak out. The 
Countess's birth, connections, vivacity, 
beauty, juvenile appearance, (so wholly 
devoid of art,) and last, not least, most ex- 
cellent jointure, with the usual appendages 
of town house and country seat, equipages, 
plate, jewels, &c. render her no undesir- 
able object of attention. Dr. H - 

insists upon it, and has offered in her pre- 
sence to lay a pot of coffee, that some 



DUDLEY. ^9 

spark from Kilkenny, whose whole for- 
tune w^ill consist of his smart coat on 
credit, (no creditable suit,) will yet pay 
her home for all her flirtations, especially 
at his expense. 

I, of course, referred the noble pre- 
tenders to the charming widow herself, 
who, however, seems in no great haste 
to part again with her liberty, for she 
laughs at one, rattles with another, 
takes summary leave of a third 5 and as 
for the Honourable Miles Cavendish, she 
treats him like a school-boy, wonders at 
his assurance, desires him to wait for her 
seven years, and promises that, if at the 
end of that time she has found no one 
more to her fancy, she, perhaps, may con- 
descend to think of a cabin-boy, as she 
calls the young lieutenant. 

Should Lady Alford, however, se- 
riously change her mind, and accept 

the offers the Marquis of and 

Viscount have made her, I would 

advise you, Howard, to speak in time, 
and you may have a fair chance of 
being permitted to adopt a nephew or 
two. 



^60 DUDLEY. 

Earewell, my friend ^ that Heaven may 
bless and prosper you and your's, is the 
united daily wish of 

Henry and Louisa Clonmore. 



DUDLEY. 261 



LETTER XX. 

*S//' Eliot Howard to The Rev. Henry Clonmore, 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe. 

i^RivoLOUS and insulting man ! was this, 
this which now lies before me, was this 
an answer suited to the letter you re- 
ceived from me ? I wrote to you, my best 
feelings guiding my pen ; you seem to 
have written to me from the billiards 
table. 

It shall never be said you granted to 
compassion what you denied to friend- 
ship, or I would attempt to describe the 
sufferings of suspense I endured from 
the time of dispatching my, letter to 
England, to the receiving of your's, — 
this, this death-blow to my hopes. 

Had you seen me stretch out my hand 
to take it, my endeavour to break the 
seal, the cold agony that came over me 
when I read the first few lines — / 



$262 DUDLEY. 

*« fly off in a paroxysm of rage !'* No, 
no, such were not then the feelings that 
came over me. I sat down quiet and 
silent, the letter falling from my hand to 
the floor, my eyes resting on those two 
words, — words which decided my fate 5 
but though my sight was fixed on them, 
fixed stedfastly, my lips refused to pro- 
nounce those words ; — I did not, I 
cannot even now. -— No, never will / 
say to that prayer of mine, " God for- 
Udr 

And you deny me ! you both deny me 
the only request 1 ever did, or ever shall 
make either of you : ** had you txventy 
sons, you could not spare me one /'' this 
sentence I forgive, it escaped you, it was 
an oversight, it was not premeditated, 
although you applied it to him who had 
no son. 

No, Clonmore, do not add deceit to 
cruelty; this determination of not parting 
with any of your boys, is not owing to a 
repugnance to a separation, for part with 
them you must ; nay, you will rejoice so 
to do. Are they not destined for pro- 
fessions ? do not schools and colleges 



DUDLEY. ^63 

await them ? — regiments, men of war, 
India, and foreign counting-houses, yet 
look forward to receive them. No, I 
repeat, it is to me you will not confide a 
son — to me, whom you regard as incapable 
of the charge ; the madman, the lunatic 
of TenerifFe. God help then my sister 
and my child, now wholly in my power, 
prisoners to my will ; what must their 
situation be ! — Well, be it so, I sub- 
mit 5 yourself and wife have decided, 
and though the unexpected refusal has 
been a stab to hopes long and fondly 
cherished, I forgive you both, — and now 
we will drop the subject. 

Your account of my sister Caroline's 
being sought for by many in a second 
marriage, does not surprise me : my only 
astonishment is that she has remained a 
widow thus long. May her choice, if she 
does make one, prove as fortunate as was 
her first, and the subject of it longer 
lived. — To be sincere with you, I wish 
she were married, as it would serve in a 
great measure to detach her from her 
dissipated mother-in-law, who, I am con- 
vinced, is the principal agent in her 



^64f DUDLEY. 

schemes of running wild from one part of 
the country to another, and never being 
fixed in any place for more than a couple 
of months at a time. 

Does Lady Alford show no sort of pre- 
ference to any one of these suitors in parti- 
cular? I should think that Viscount , 

as a steady middle-aged man, of sound 
principles and good understanding, might 
have the best chance ; his nobler rival, 
I suspect, is rather involved in specula- 
tions of some nature or other ; and with 
respect to Cavendish, he being as young, 
as volatile, and thoughtless as herself, I 
hope he may not succeed ; otherwise his 
family and character are unexception- 
able. 

Mrs. Grantley continues the same ex- 
cellent creature as ever ; not a shadow 
of change have I seen in her, except at 
the reading of Lady Alford's last letter, 
received long since : she wept over that 
without controul, but as she did not offer 
to show it to me, I could only respect 
her sorrows and be silent. I am aware 
that it is in Caroline's power to make 
me smile 5 but I knew not she possessed 



DUDLEY. ^65 

sufficient influence over Jane to cause 
her to shed one tear ; unless, indeed, as 
I suspect, she referred in her letter to 
Mrs. Grantley's deceased children. 

I shall write to Caroline by this con- 
veyance, and acquaint her that Claudy 
will soon commence a correspondence, 
as her aunt is assisting her to compose 
a famous epistle formed of printed letters 
of various shapes and sizes. 



And you tell me, Clonmore, you nei- 
ther recollect when, where, or how 
Claudina and I first met; and yet the 
circumstances that attended our acquaint- 
ance, were sufficiently striking, and in- 
deed romantic, to engage the attention 
of any young man, — a man in love ex- 
cepted. 

On looking back, I do find that 
that was the period of your own court- 
ship, and therefore acquit you of all 
finesse in endeavouring to prevail on me 
to relieve my mind by relating past, and 
not uninteresting occurrences, even were 
they to meet the eye of a stranger. 

VOL. I. N 



266 DUDLEY. 

The task to me will be no difficulty, I 
have it bi/ heart, even to the most minute 
particular ; it has long been the subject 
of my daily retrospection, it will occupy 
my thoughts to the verge of the grave. 



You remember the spring of 17 — 
(need I doubt your and your Louisa's 
remembrance of it), when you hastily 
quitted Oxford for the North, to attend 
your dying grandfather, and take pos- 
session of your first curacy ; and I, bent 
on a frolic and a pilgrimage, walked off 
alone for the South of England, neither 
annoyed by spies in the shape oi' servants, 
or bound in trammels by fellow travellersj^ 
calling themselves a party of pleasure. 

No doubt you forget, at the instant of 
our separation in High -street, your 
thrusting your head out of the chaise 
window, and calling after me to put on 
a better coat, or I should be taken for 
a strolling player ; and my answer, that 
my well-shaped shining hat, and fashion- 
able boots, would speak to the contrary. 
Away you rolled, covering me with a 



DUDLEY. S67 

cloud of* dust; whilst I, exhilarated by the 
morning air, shouldered my fowling- 
piece, whistled for Rover my spaniel, and 
briskly set off, in my pocket a pair of 
pistols, and my purse enriched with 
about forty shillings. Determined not to 
hazard my safety by taking more money 
with me, I had previously arranged 
a method of receiving at the provincial 
towns I should pass through, sufficient 
to complete my southern tour; and from 
the danger of footpads and higliwaymen, 
I trusted to my fire-arms. 

The morning of our parting was serene 
and delightful, though, I suppose, even 
of that you have no recollection. I 
walked on with a feeling of independ- 
ence and enjoyment never experienced 
in any sort of carriage, or even on horse- 
back, and the first day had travelled 
nearly eighteen miles. 

On arriving at B , I sauntered into 

the Rose and Crown Inn, asked whether 
the mail-coach had left a portmanteau 
for a Mr, Eliot ; received at first an im- 
pertinent stare from head to foot, as the 
reception due to a tramper, and then an 
N 2 



^68 



DUDLEY. 



officious, " Yes sir, yes, walk In sir, 
pray," &c. challenged, I suppose, by my 
college tone of voice, and Oxonian mode 
of carrying my head and limbs, which 
certainly possess that decisive superiority 
that quickly changes insult to respect. 

In imitation of princes and other po- 
tentates, I assumed the, travelling designa- 
tion of «^ Mr. Elioty'' in preference to 
substituting a false one, as it equally pre- 
vented my being known, and still was in 
fact my real name. Thus from day to 
day, from stage to stage, I travelled on 
with new delight, and without the small- 
est molestation reached S , within a 

few miles of Honiton in Devonshire. 

Pleased and interested by the new and 
various scenes this place presented, I de- 
termined to spend a longer time here 
than I had hitherto done in any preceding, 
village j and having taken up my quarters 
at the sign of the Plough, and rested 
half an hour, I ordered dinner and 
sauntered across a common, where w^ere 
several children at play, and from thence 
to the turnpike road. 

An equipage now and then, or a few 



DUDLEY. S69 

equestrians, a mail and a stage coach, 
lA^aggons and market carts, passed me in 
rapid succession, as I sat upon a log of 
timber near the road ; but to none of them 
did I pay the slightest attention. A fa- 
vourite author, generally Cervantes in 
the original, or my sketch-book and 
pencil, gave me an appearance of occupa- 
tion, which I occasionally varied by 
handling my fowling-piece and powder- 
horn, when attempting to shoot sparrows. 
One of my favourite amusements was 
visiting the church-yard, and reading the 
epitaplis, many of which afforded me a 
hearty laugh. Amongst the rest were 
two, which from their profound stupidity 
greatly pleased me ; these I read aloud 
several times, and repeated so often for 
many days afterwards, that I remember 
them both to this hour. 

" Alas ! no more I could survive, 
For I is dead, and not alive : 
And thee in time, no longer shalt survive, 
But be as dead as any mon alive." 

The other ran thus : 

-' Here lies I, no wonder Ise dead, 
For a broad-wheeled waggon went over mine head." 
N 3 



^0 DUDLEY. 

I might have had the grace to restrain 
my mirth, had I known there were tv/o 
spies in the shape of little boys behind 
me playing at marbles, and watching my 
strange behaviour ; but I did not per- 
ceive them, until I heard one whisper 
aloud to the other, in the broad Devon- 
shire dialect, which I can neither write 
nor imitate — " He's laughing at our 
great-grandfather," 

This recalled me to propriety, and I 
turned from the tomb-stone to look in at 
the windows of the church, (for the door 
was locked,) and make the circuit of the 
walls ; an expedition which took me about 
two seconds and a half j and I thus came 
again to the spot where the little clowns 
were still at play. 

I was on the point of asking them 
could they not find a more proper place 
for their game than the church-yard, 
when I recollected they might answer 
me by this question — *' And could you 
not find a more proper object to laugh at 
than the tomb-stones of the dead ?" — 
Leaving them to the correction of their 
pastor and his clerk, I was quitting 



DUDLEY. !^7l 

the spot, when the elder of the two, 
stopping suddenly in his play, the marble 
poised on his fore-finger, and the knuckle 
of the thumb ready to shoot, looked up, 
and, without a touch of his hat, or a 
*' Pray," or a ** Sir," bawled after me, 
** What's o'clock ?" In the same tone 
of voice and dialect, 1 called out, 
** Past twelve :" and at that instant I 
heard, and close to me, (but whence it 
proceeded, or from whom, although I 
looked, after the first astonishment was 
over, above, below, and around, I was 
totally incapable of finding out,) I heard 
the sweet and playful sound of a female 
laugh, without a doubt occasioned by 
the ludicrous manner of my reply to the 
boy. 

A low wall, covered with ivy, di- 
vided the church-yard from a field where 
a cow and a horse were grazing, I looked 
over it, and on all sides, but no one was 
visible ; and I remained for some time 
standing on the same spot, anxious to 
hejir the sound again, hut it came no 
more. 

N 4 



^^ DUDLEY, 

Y0U5 Clonmore, can have no idea of 
the impression it made on my fancy ; it 
was like what we may suppose the free 
and charming voice of Ariel when invi- 
sible, the young, the prolonged, and 
jocund laugh of a sylph, and seemed to 
come direct from the heart. 

Surprised and disappointed, I turned 
to make some enquiry of the boys, but 
eagerly and rapidly they were pocketing 
their marbles, it being past their school 
hour, as I supposed ; and deaf to all my 
commands that they would stop and 
answer me, away they scampered over 
the graves, and out at a little gate near 
the entrance of the church-yard, disput- 
ing at every step they went, each ac- 
cusing the other of having pocketed 
more than his share. 

Slowly, and often looking back, I 
quitted the place, and walked towards a 
cluster of cottages, or rather mud hovels, 
which however bore a clean and cheerful 
appearance, from the outside being 
white-washed, and the thatch covered 
with a coat of bright-green moss. Each 
stood in its own little garden territory. 



DUDLEY. ^7^ : 

and was shaded by one or more apple, 
pear, or cherry trees, at that time in full 
Wossom. I sat down on a bank near one 
of these, and listened with delight to 
the song of the wild goldfinch, and 
watched a lark singing and soaring in 
the deep-blue sky ; until the sun becom- 
ing oppressive, I was glad to seek the 
shade of one of the cottages. 

Here, leaning over the half-door, which 
v/as bolted on tlie inside, I for some 
time watched what was going on within. 
About twenty girls, from five y-ears of 
age to fourteen or fifteen, were seated 
behind each other, intent on their little 
lace pillows. Their uniformly n 5 eagre, 
sickly, and dejected appearance, struck 
me at first with surprise ; for I had not 
then learned to attribute it to their being 
for so many hours pent up in a small, 
low-roofed, dark, close, and smoky hole. 
As I examined, with compassion, the 
wretched countenances of these infant 
manufacturers, I could not help wishing 
that they were all let loose, to enjoy full 
exercise and libeity, and the free bless- 
n5 



^7'^ DUDLEY- 

ings of nature, equally with the cheiTy 
blossom, the goldfinch, and the lark. 

As my presence, of course, had at- 
tracted their attention, I thought it 
necessary to speak ; and I asked the child 
nearest to me, who seemed to be about 
six years of age, would she sell me a 
few yards of her lace to trim my night- 
caps. At this most singular question 
the little girls looked askance at each 
other, and held down their heads, in 
vain trying to suppress a tittering laugh, 
whilst the elder scholars of this lace 
school smiled, or looked grave, or co- 
loured, or affected not to hear me, as 
the emotion of the instant prompted* 
The bobbins seemed, however, to rattle 
faster than usual, and the thread to be 
uncommonly inclined to break, — very 
ominous symptoms of inattention. Pre- 
sently, however, the girls were recalled to 
order and decorum, by a sharp, cracked 
voice, proceeding from the chimney 
corner, that of their mistress, as I sup- 
posed, for she was not visible from the 
door where I stood. Having amused 
myself, for some time, by sly winks and 



DUDLEY. 275 

nods to the children, I threw a few shil- 
lings into the lap of the little girl to whom 
I had spoken ; and then, afraid of being 
the cause of their incurring further dis- 
pleasure, for an appearance of insub- 
ordination was rising among them on the 
sight of the money, I quitted the spot, 
and continued my walk. 

About a quarter of a mile further I 
came to a place I had not before visited : 
it was a wide, level green, the grass of 
which was as short, as smooth, and soft 
as velvet, dotted here and there with 
furze bushes, covered with their brightest 
blossoms. At the further end stood, 
detached, a low, wide cottage, the slant- 
ing roof of which, much deeper than 
the walls were high, was entirely spread 
with moss of the most luxuriant colour. 
On one side grew, in clustering profusion, 
dark and variegated ivy, chmbing over 
the top of the tall chimney ; and on the 
other, and behind it, bloomed an apple 
orchard, the rich white and red blossoms 
being at this time in full perfection. 

The Vr'hole view, with the distant 
prospect behind it of ey^ry thing that 
N 6 



^7^ DUDLEY. 

constitutes beauty in landscape, hill, val-* 
ley, wood and water, with the sea in the 
back-ground, being really a subject worthy 
of the pencil, and I, as you must ac- 
knowledge, no despicable draughtsman, 
I took out my sketch-book, and having 
chosen my position, sat down upon the 
stump of a tree, and made a tolerable 
drawing. 

Whilst touching and retouching my 
performance, admiring and improving 
it, I said aloud, *« What a sweet place 
for a few months' solitary retirement, 
supposing for myself and a fellow col- 
legian. What an admirable spot for 
study j such peace, such serenity, such 
harmony." 

The words were scarcely pronounced, 
than my ears were assailed by the loudest 
and most horrible discordance I had ever 
heard, — and proceeding from this very 
identical cottage of harmony and peace. 
I listened ; the noise died awav to a 
sort of mingled buzz, like that issuing 
from a nest oi hornets, and was succeeded 
by a low murmur, which ended once 
more in profound silence, — I need not 



DUDLEY. 277 

inform you that this was the village 
school. 

I put my drawing in my pocket ; 
and resolving, like a wise and intelligent 
traveller, to see all that was to be seen, 
sauntered towards the open door. Here 
I beheld about fifty children, of both 
sexes, and every age, some sitting on 
benches, others in groups, and all va- 
riously employed. 

Beside a venerable dame stood a little 
boy, reading aloud, whose figure caught 
my attention. His face was a deep 
brown, and his hair a silver white : his 
red jacket, much too tight for his robust 
upper limbs, had worked its way to his 
chest : his buckskins, as much too large 
for him, hung about his lower limbs, 
displaying a large roll of check shirt be- 
tween the two articles of dress ; whilst 
his scarlet legs were just seen between 
his knee and his worsted stockings, one 
of which fell over his thick nailed shoe 
and little brass buckles. It was plain 
that this rural urchin could dispense with 
both braces and garters. 



S78 DUDLEY. 

At sight of me the lecture stopped, 
and he turned, with a grin, to the re- 
spectable personage at whose elbow he 
stood, which action drew my attention 
towards her. The brown stuff gown, 
with sleeves just covering the elbows, 
the check apron, clean white handker- 
chief, covered with another of black 
silk, the mob cap, and grey hair neatly 
combed over the forehead, the leaden- 
mounted spectacles, and half-knit stock- 
ing with three needles employed, and 
one stuck in the apron string, whilst the 
kitten played at her feet with a ball of 
worsted on the sanded floor, at which 
the conscious mischief-loving children 

laughed, reminded me of . But there, 

Clonmore, read every description of vil- 
lage school-mistresses, from Shenstone 
downwards, and you may form an i^ea 
of old Dame Withers. 

On observing me, for when the boy 
stopped reading she looked up at him, 
and followed his eyes to the door, she 
took off her spectacles, and with a mild 
and benevolent voice, asked me to walk 
in, and desired the lad to place a chair 



DUDLEY. 279 

for me. Her graciousness called forth 
mine ; and, contrary to my sad behaviour 
at the lace school, I here apologized for 
my intrusion, and was turning away, 
when she entreated me to come in, say- 
ing a great many of the gentry came 
there to see how the little lads and 
maids improved in their learning. 

I fully understood the meaning of this 
hint ; therefore felt my pocket with one 
hand, whilst I took off my hat with the 
other, and accepted the seat offered me 
by a little girl, who, having first dusted 
it with her apron, threw me a smile, and 
dropped me a courtsey. 

The room being spacious, and the 
door and windows open, I did not feel 
the heat oppressive ; but yet, I drew my 
chair as near the entrance as possible, 
that I might make my retreat when I 
should think proper. — This I was very 
soon on the point of doing, for the strong 
dialect, to me scarcely intelligible, and 
a nasal twang that was most horrible, 
joined to their invincible stupidity and 
dulness, made me feel so weary in body 
and spirits, that in less than ten minutes, 



S80 , DUDLEY. 

taking advantage of a dead silence, I 
?*tarted up, and, slipping a silver token 
of personal remembrt iice into the good 
woman's hand, and iaynig on the little 
round claw-table at her side, a piece of 
silver paper, towards the benefit of the 
school, I was going away in haste, 
when 

O Clonmore ! now is come the hour, — 
until now, I have been repeating pro- 
logues to your ear, — the eventful play of 
life, or rather of the best passions of our 
nature, is now begun ; I touch at the 
moment, when my heart, for the first 
time, beat with strong uncontrollable 
emotion. 

The voice I now heard came over mv 
senses like the unexpected sound of an 
Eolian harp in the dead of night, when 
the storm is hushed to peace. I could 
not be mistaken, nor was I ; I felt in- 
ternal conviction that the sudden laugh 
of the invisible Ariel, of the hidden 
sylph, which I had heard in the church- 
yard, and the voice that now spoke, was 
music proceeding from the same lips. 



DUDLEY. 281 

At the farther end of the room I had 
already distinguished a group of boys 
standing in class ; but on the supposition 
that they surrounded a comely old lady, 
the counterpart of her I had before my 
eyes, my curiosity, I confess, did not 
lead me a step farther than where I had 
placed my chair. — The sentence spoken 
was simply this : 

** You are not attentive, James, spell 
that word again."' 

But the tone, the manner, Clonmore, 
the accent, — whether it proceeded from 
the powerful contrast to the dissonance 
to which I had long been listening, I did 
not then enquire, but in my life I had 
never heard a voice of more mellow 
sweetness, more softened elegance, and 
grace. 

As you may suppose, I instantly 
stopped, turned, and gently approached 
the class. On looking over the boys' 
heads, I could certainly distinguish a 
female figure, but that was all — shf was 
sitting in a very low high-backed chair, 
and had on a coarse straw bonnet with 
so tremendous a poke, that as she held 



^82 DUDLEY. 

down her head, looking at the book ori 
her knee, I could not obtam the slightest 
glimpse of her face ; add to which, the 
part of the room where she sat was dark, 
and that the children stood in a half- 
circle close before her. 

The hopeful James was easily distin- 
guished from his companions by his 
downcast foolish face, whilst the rest of 
the boys were alternately looking at him, 
and then up at me, with a half smile. I 
laid my hand on his shoulder, and look- 
ing over at his features, distinguished my 
church-yard friend: — Oh, oh! thought 
I, if " What's o'clock ?" had been con- 
ning his lesson instead of playing at 
marbles, this disgrace had been averted ; 
but in that case, I should never have 
heard either the bewitching laugh, or 
the still more bewitching speaking voice. 
He has been unconsciously a friend to 
me, and I'll now stand his friend. 

" So my fine fellow, you seem a bright 
scholar ; why we shall see you clerk of 
the parish in time, if you go on in this 
style. — Pray, ma'am, what is the word he 
can't spell ?" Of course had the female 



DUDLEY. 283 

answered me, she must in common 
civility have looked up j but before she 
possibly had time to do this, an officious 
young rogue at the bottom of the class 
called out the word. I then in a whisper 
spelt it to James, but either he had not 
the cleverness to catch the letters, or he 
had too much honour to take advantage 
of my partiality, for there he stood an 
unmoved block of clownishness. 

** James has lost his place," said again 
the sweet voice, whose modulation and 
tones were most perfect ; "he has fairly 
lost it, do you take it, Richard." The boys 
exchanged places, and the lesson went 
on without farther interruption, during 
which, not for one instant was the in- 
sufferable poke bonnet raised, whereby a 
feature could be seen. 

Rather cooled and disgusted by this 
rustic parade of prudery, yet still en- 
chanted by the voice, and now convinced, 
from the figure, that it was that of a very 
young person ; I again clapped James 
on the shoulder, and slipping half-a- 
crown into each of his hands, as he held 
them behind him, said, *< There, young 



984 DUDLEY. 

dunderhead, there's to buy marbles ; but 
never let me catch you gambling in the 
church-yard again." 

I paused a moment, my eyes fixed on 
the bonnet, to watch for the smallest 
sign of recognition, or secret understand- 
ing ', but perceiving none, I turned off 
with real indifference as I imagined, and 
quitted the house, saying in my own 
mind, (referring to the supposed condi- 
tion of the young person,) " A daughter, 
or niece, of the old woman, perhaps, or a 
girl hired to assist in the school ; as such, 
considering who and what / am, it 
might be prejudicial to her, my making 
the slightest enquiry as to who or what 
she is. — Charming voice though, and 
not unlike that of Mrs. Jordan in the 
Country Girl. — I wonder whether she 
sings." 

Now, Clonmore, you and I are well 
convinced that very few of our Oxonians 
or Cantabs, but would have lingered near 
this cottage to question the children, or 
persist in seeing the face hidden by the' 
bonnet ^ but I was as yet not sufficiently 
in love, to forget that my dinner was 



DUDLEY. ^S5 

waiting for meat the inn — add to which, 
in proportion as I distanced the place of 
temptation, the object of it became fainter, 
and by the time I was seated in my little 
parlour dissecting a fowl, many good 
resolutions were formed ; amongst 
others, that I would neither visit the 
church-yard nor the school again, but 
continue my peregrinations to the coast. 



Sir Eliot in continuation. 

I kept my determination ; and the next 
day, accompanied by Rover, quitted my 
inn (having given orders concerning the 
forwarding my portmanteau) and walked 
upwards of eight miles, totally regardless 
of a heavy rain, by which the roads were 
rendered almost impassable. A distant 
village spire was my direction, and on 
consulting my map, I determined to 
make it my next bating place. Under the 
idea of gaining it sooner by a short cut 
across the fields, I quitted the turnpike 
road, and struck at once into them ; the 
two or three lirst of which offered f^ 



^86 DUDLEY. 

tolerable firm footing ; but at length 1 
found myself in a newly-ploughed field, 
where I sunk at every step deep into the 
wet furrows, dragging each foot after me 
heavily laden with clumps of earth : thus 
sliding and slipping as I walked, I reach- 
ed a turnip iaclosure, across which lay 
a beaten path, on one side a gate, and 
a narrow gravel road leading to a thick 
hazel copse. 

Here I stopped to scrape the lumps of 
wet clay from my boots, to take off my 
shooting jacket, which I had put on that 
day instead of my dusty black coat, to 
shake from it the rain drops that had 
fallen from the trees as I passed under 
them, and to rub the moisture from my 
fowling-piece. — The shower was over ; 
and the sun now shining with heat and 
brilliancy, I sat dowm on the top of the 
gate, admiring a fine effect of sunshine 
on the distant hills and heavy rolling 
clouds in the horizon. 

My thoughts were at first wholly en- 
grossed by the present scene, but by 
degrees they wandered back to the 
village I had quitted, perhaps, for ever^ 



II 



DUDLEY. 287 

I took out my watch, and having looked 
at the hour, kept swinging the chain 
in my hand, whilst beating time with 
the heel of my boot on the bars of the 
gate, as one leg lay across the top, and 
the other hung down, when I heard a 
voice behind me say, " Will you give 
me leave to pass ?'* 

To turn round, to leap from the gate, 
to hold it open, to touch my hat, was 
the work of an instant. The speaker was 
a young female, wrapped in a long red 
and green plaid ; a deep straw bonnet 
was tied down with a black ribbon, and 
her face concealed by a green crape veil ; 
in one hand she carried a small bundle, 
and in the other a basket. 

She passed through the gate with a 
slight bow of thanks, and I let it slip 
from mv hand, when it closed with a loud 
noise. As you may conjecture, the voice 
alone convinced me, however unaccount- 
able her present appearance at the dis- 
tance of eight miles from the place I had 
quitted, that this was no other than my 
village school-mistress. Hastily recollect, 
ing myself, I followed li^r, remarking 



SS8 DUDLEY. 

V 

that the sky threatened another shower, 
and asking could I procure her an um- 
brella, or carry her bundle and basket, 
(an offer I do not think I should have 
made in the environs of Oxford.) 

She, however, declined all my civilities, 
saying she was only going to the cottage 
yonder at the end of the field, (an habita- 
tion I had not before observed,) and 
wished me good morning. Fortunately, 
however, for me, she had not gone a 
hundred yards, when the path sloping 
downward, she slipped, and in endea- 
vouring to recover herself, let fall the 
basket «" which, by its contents, I con- 
jectured to be her dinner) and her 
bundle, both in the mud. The wand was 
now high, the plaid entangled her steps, 
and the veil perplexed her sight and 
caught in the hedges, when my assistance 
becoming absolutely indispensable, I 
most willingly offered it. 

To my surprise, instead of showing 
the least degree of vexation, or rustic 
shame at this untoward accident, she 
laughed at it, and, with what emotion 
you may imagine, 1 heard again that 



. DUDLEY. 289 

same ^^ jocund and prolonged laugh,'' 
which had in the church-yard struck my 
ear with such genuine pleasure. Calling 
to my dog, (after a " What's his name ?" 
to me,) ** Rover, Rover ! here, poor fel- 
low," she made him eat up the remains 
of cold meat and bread that lay scattered 
in the path, and on the grass around us, 
observing, as she took her bundle from 
me, ** This is the most unlucky part of 
my adventure ; this line new dress, all 
my notable work, is quite soiled. — What 
a succession of accidents I have met with 
to-day — it has been to me truly un- 
fortunate." 

The rest of the speech was apparently 
in character ; but the words succession 
and truly jarred my feehngs : they were 
fine words, or rather they were too pro- 
fessional, and immediately placed before 
me the humble country school-mistress, 
whilst the mention of new dress and 
notable *work, suggested the idea, that to 
her occupation of teacher, was added 
that of village mantua- maker, or semp- 
stress, in order to increase the means 

VOL. I. o 



S90 DUDLEY. 

already derived from following an honest 
livelihood. 

Under these new impressions, and, I 
frankly acknowledge, encouraged by her 
own vivacity, I ventured to remark, 
*' You call this day unfortunate, my 
dear, whilst to me it has appeared most 
superlatively happy." I was resolved 
also, on my part, to introduce a fine 
word or two. 

I wish, Clonmore, I could give you 
the slightest conception of the instanta- 
neous effect produced by this speech of 
mine. She stood in a suspended attitude 
a moment 5 her figure, perhaps uncon^ 
sciously, assuming one in which 1 could 
trace a heightened stature, a graceful 
retreat of person, and a sort of elegant 
air, that, however, at once said, and in 
pretty plain English, " You are now 
become very familiar and impertinentj^ 
whoever you are ; and so good morning 
to you." 

Le premier pas was over, therefore I 
did not hesitate to take the second. I 
went suddenly past her, and stretching 
out my arms, as if obstructing her way. 



DUDLEY. 291 

though, as I kept walking backwards, I 
in reab'ty did not touch her, smiled, 
sajing, *< You do not pass me, my 
charming girl, until you consent to lean 
upon my arm as far as your cottage, for, 
as you have already proved, it is impos- 
sible to walk thither unassisted." 

At that instant, by a sudden gust of 
wind, her bonnet blew back, and her 
veil came off, her plaid flew widely open, 
and her whole person, Cclad in white,) 
from head to foot, was presented to my 
astonished eyes. True, I expected, and 
I know not particularly why, a pretty 
rustic face, perhaps a little sunburnt or 
so, with shining red cheeks, and round 
black eyes, full of animation and plea- 
sure, though pretending otherwise, at 
my attention and implied flattery j but 

here I beheld Oh, the sensations I 

experienced at that moment, are never, 
never to be forgotten ! 

Here were features, with which, when 
painting, an artist might have become 
enamoured ; a look and expression he 
might have given the angel, " severe in 
youthful beauty." Here was the finest 
o 2 



292 DUDLEY. 

shaped head, the most luxuriant glossy 
hair, I had ever seen ; the form, the figure, 
the attitude, all was matchless grace. — 
She stood before me, within a yard or 
two, (her eyes filled with gravity, yet 
sweetness, fixed full on?mine,) the breath- 
ing statue of beauty unparalleled, beauty 
in its first bloom — all harmony, majesty, 
and love. 

Fve lost her ! she's gone ! for ever 
gone ! There still hangs her picture ; 
such as she was at that precise hour ; 
such as, for a few years, she blessed me ; 
such as I shall never behold again : that 
look, that very look, at once tender and 
reproachful, now meets mine. The soul 
of each, at the very instant I have de- 
scribed, seemed to dart towards the other, 
as if saying, (according to the beautiful 
hypothesis of a celebrated writer,) " We 
twain are one spirit, we parted in heaven, 
and now meet for the first time on earth.'' 
Pardon me, Clonmore, these digres- 
sions, the sad wanderings of a deeply- 
wounded mind, which, whilst looking at 
the past, cannot refrain a murmur at the 
present, or check a hasty expression of 



DUDLEY. ^93 

despair, at the prospect held out of the 
dreary future. 

The effect this sudden apparition of 
exquisite loveliness, whose colour was 
heightened by exercise, and improved by 
an expression of sensibility I could not 
then account for, was magical. I felt a 
chill, an awe, an astonishment, that 
prevented speech 5 and, stepping back 
out of the path, I suffered her to pass in 
silence, and watched her until she disap- 
peared at the cottage door. 

For some time I lingered in the field j 
but not perceiving the appearance of any 
intention on her part to be seen again, I 
continued my walk towards the village, 
found out the principal inn, gave my 
orders to the landlord, returned to an 
early supper, and went to sleep, still 
perplexed to account for the young 
stranger being at so great a distance from 
the village where I had first seen her, 
and not able to decide as to which was 

really her residence, the school atS- , 

or this retired cottage, eight miles far- 
ther on the Dorsetshire road, 
o 3 



^94 DUDLEY. 

The next day was Sunday, and having 
resumed my black coat, newly brushed, 
and my fashionable boots, newly mended, 
I rose early, returned to the village I 
had quitted, and joined the congregation, 
already assembled in the parish church. 
At my entrance I looked about for the 
clerk, and he not being in the way, I, 
of my own accord, stepped into an empty 
pew, hung round with green silk cur- 
tains. Here I was searching for a prayer- 
book, and in vain, for they were all 
locked up in a drawer in the seat, when 
the clerk appeared, and accommodated 
me ; on which I observed, I hoped I had 
not intruded. 

" Oh no, sir," he replied ; ** you are 
very welcome to sit in it ; for I dare say, 
as the old lady is ill, none of the family 
will be here to-day." 

Thus satisfied, I, with perfect uncon- 
cern, took possession, and began looking 
out the psalms : the church filled, the 
clergyman came in, and the service 
began. He was reading the absolution, 
when the door of my pew was opened, 
and a female figure glided in, drew a 



DUDLEY. ^95 

hassock towards her, and took her place 
near the entrance. 

Had I been, at that moment, in any 
other place than a church, I should im- 
mediately have apologized for my in- 
trusion ; but, as I consider such cere- 
monies in the house of God as unneces- 
sary, not to say improper and indecorous, 
I remained during the service, wholly 
devoting my attention to the duty of my 
Creator. 

The sermon over, I turned round to 
observe the person who had shared my 
pew; and as she was quitting it, had no 
difficulty in recognizing my lovely ac- 
quaintance, though the straw bonnet, 
and green gauze veil, were exchanged for 
a deep black mourning bonnet. 

A new impression now formed itself on 
my imagination, when, being once more 
alone, I sat ruminating in the little Gothic 
porch. " My lady is ill I" I said, repeating 
the words of the clerk, and this young per- 
son came into the pew as one of the family, 
— perhaps a relation : but then the school, 
and her trudging eight miles through 
rain and mud, and the basket of work, 
o 4 



296 DUDLEY. 

and the bundle of cold provisions : no, 
that is not in character. Perhaps, — and 
the mortifying idea made no small re- 
volution in my mind, — perhaps a lady's 
maid, sitting in the pew in the absence 
of her mistress. Well, even so, what- 
soever, or whomsoever she may be, she 
is the most perfect beauty my eyes ever 
beheld, and lias the sweetest voice I 
ever heard. 

Thus, like Sir Roger de Coverley, and 
his fine widow, and her lovely hand, I 
concluded every sentence of doubt as to 
the situation this young woman held in 
society ; for as to the rank in which na- 
ture had placed her, of that there was 
was no doubt, it was one of decisive su- 
periority over every woman I had hi- 
therto seen. I rose, and, still deep in 
thought, walked back again the eight 
miles, and returned to my inn. 

About ten o'clock the next day, I was 
standing at the door, in conversation 
with my landlord, whom I was deter 
mined to question as to the different 
families in the neighbourhood, when 
he should have concluded his expatia- 



DUDLEY. 597 

tions on a mare which he was per- 
suading me to buy. Though my dress 
was now become thoroughly degraded, 
he, I suppose, went on the strength of my 
appearance as a gentleman, and asked 
forty guineas for the mare, for which, 
had her internal qualities agreed with 
her external, he ought to have asked a 
hundred. 

As we were debating the subject, a 
travelling post-chariot, with one out- 
rider, in a plain drab livery, drove up to 
the door to leave some message with the 
landlord, who hastily quitted me, and 
went to the chaise ; whilst I, still stand- 
ing on the same spot, mechanically looked 
at the heads of those within. The one 
was elderly, having the dignified air of a 
dowager duchess ; the other youthful, 
and with great simplicity in her appear- 
ance. My eyes became rivetted on the 
face of the latter : it was herself; — our 
eyes met, and I received an almost im- 
perceptible bow, which I as uncon- 
sciously returned. 

A beggar stood at the door of the 
chaise, to whom, just before it drove off, 
o 5 



^^9S DUDLEY. 

the young one threw a shilling ; by which 
means I saw a white and delicate hand, 
tinged in the palm a bright and lively rose 
colour. On the third finger sparkled a 
ruby guard. I looked again, and sted- 
fastly, when a death-like coldness ran 
through my veins, for I thought I also 
distinguished the marriage-ring. I felt 
however suddenly relieved, by observing 
that it was the right, and not the left 
hand, which I had been admiring. 

No, I repeated, with firm conviction, 
that hand is not the hand of a menial : 
and again addressing the landlord, as he 
stood looking after the chaise, I asked 
whose it was. 

" It belongs to a Miss Powis,'' he re- 
plied ; and before I could put a second 
question, the London mail, followed by 
a stage-coach, arrived, and fully occupied 
his attention. Determined on getting 
all the information from him I possibly 
could respecting the object of my in- 
creasing curiosity, I again accosted him 
in the evening with a remark, that there 
were two ladies in the chaise, *« Who 
was the other?" I enquired 



DUDLEY. S99 

'' The other !" he replied, with a sort 
of a careless, levelling air of contempt ; 
*' oh, the poor friend, I suppose, or com- 
panion, as it is called, I believe — some- 
thing of that kind." 

** And where does this Miss Powis 
live?" 

" At S , a few miles hence, not 

far from Honiton ; and is now going for 
some months to Sidmouth." 

So, thought I, as my landlord was 
called away from me, a few steps higher 
in life; — my lady's maid now turns out 
to be the companion of some rich old 
maid of quality, who might have had the 
grace to assume the title of Mrs, ten 
years ago, at least. This young beauty, 
then, is the humble dependant on wealth 
and old age, perhaps of whim and ca- 
price J in all probability, the child of a 
destitute clergyman, the orphan of a 
military or naval officer, but still the ob- 
ject of charity, and of the world's com- 
miseration. The lovely hand, and sweet 
voice, are now accounted for j her skill 
in music being, no doubt, one of the 
requisites necessary to iill the situation, 
o 6 



300 DUDLEY. 

wherein she is expected to sooth and 
amuse the mind of her employer. 

I now clearly see the whole affair, I 
continued, debating in my own mind on 
probabilities. When I first saw her, she 
was deputed by her old lady to assist in 
the instruction of the village children, 
(perhaps the school itself a foundation of 
this ancient Miss ;) and at our second 
interview, she was carrying the fruits of 
her own labour, and the offerings of her 
patroness's bounty, to some poor cot- 
tager. The carriage, perhaps, was wait- 
ing in the road, when she. got out, and 
tripped across the fields, with her charita- 
ble donations. Her entrance into Miss 
Powis's pew at church was a matter of 
course ; and equally so, her occupying 
the left-hand seat in the carriage of her 
benefactress. 

And they are gone to Sidmouth ! and 
for some months ! That is a place I 
must see , — and, Clonmore, in less than 
four days afterwards I did see it. From 
the right-hand window of the York Hotel, 

watched the variety of company on the 
parade ; but seeing no face I had ever 



DUDLEY. 301 

seen before, I walked out, and down to 
the beach. As I now felt secure of 
meeting with the venerable dowager and 
her protegee, some time or other, I be- 
came perfectly indifferent wJien ; and 
yet, thought I, it may be as well to en- 
quire wliere they live, or, unintentionally, 
I may stand staring at their very lodgings, 
or walk to and fro before them oftener 
than I otherwise should do. 

Under this idea, I went the next morn- 
ing into Wallis's library, entered into 
conversation with a shopman, and asked 
at once did he know where Miss Powis 
lived. 

" Miss Powis is gone,'* he replied 5 
*« she took a house here for some months, 
on the Parade ; but gave it up, and went 
away yesterday.'* 

" Gone !" I exclaimed, (and where 
was my indifference at that moment I) 
« And where is she gone ?" 

« Really, sir, I cannot inform you ; 
but you may know by enquiring at the 
Post-office." 

*< And where is the Post-office ?" — 
Though without waiting for an answer, on 



302 DUDLEY. 

observing the direction of his finger, I 
walked on with rapid strides, still en- 
quiring as I pursued my way, yet scarcely 
stopping to gain the necessary inform- 
ation, until meeting with a stupid staring 
boy, without a hat, who was looking up 
in my face with a grin of wonder at 
something very unusual in my appear- 
ance, I gave him a push that nearly 
knocked him down, saying, ** Don't 
stand there, you little rascal, with your 
eyes and mouth wide open ; but run on 
before, and show me the way to the 
Post-office/* 

He did run, yet I overtook him ; and 
in my haste had nearly overturned the 
stalls of fish, flesh, and fowl. With a 
loud rap of my stick on the wooden pan- 
nel of the window, I summoned a girl, 
and called to her in the true Oxford 
word of command, " Ho ! what's the 
present direction of Miss Powis, who did 
live on the Parade, and went away yes- 
terday ?" 

The girl stared, as if more at the vehe- 
mence of my manner, than from igno- 
rance J and I was on the point of taking 



DUDLEY. 308 

notice of her ill-timed consternation, 
when a man's loud voice answered from 
within, " The Post-office, Exeter, for one 
week only.'* 

I returned to my hotel, ordered a 
chaise and four, threw my portmanteau 
and myself upon the seat, chucked in 
Rover, satisfied the master of the hotel, 
in a manner that made him nearly bow 
his head off with thanks, and wishes for 
a safe journey, and dashed from the door. 

You will now, and with truth, pass 
judgment upon me, Clonmore, and say, 
•* His hour is come, he is in love." 

On arriving at Exeter, I quitted the 
chaise, desiring the postillions to put up 
at the principal inn, and went on to the 
Post-office, where, having assured myself 
not only of Miss Powis's being within 
the city walls, but of her certain place of 
residence, I became, once more, calm 
and indifferent. I sauntered towards the 
cathedral, examined its in and ea:'terior, 
walked about the streets, and went into 
several of the shops. 

The next day I was standing at the 
counter of a jeweller, who was fitting a 



304 DUDLEY. 

key to my watch, when some persons 
came into the shop, whose faces, as my 
back was to the door, I could not at first 
distinguish ; but the voice was sufficient: 
there was no occasion to turn my head 
to be convinced that one of them was 
the object of my thoughts. She ad- 
dressed the jeweller with some enquiry 
about a bracelet ; and then drawing for- 
ward a high stool, said to her old lady, 
who was leaning on her arm, ** You had 
better sit whilst we stay." 

The master of the shop, instantly 
quitting me and my watch key, went 
round to attend on the females ; whilst 
the shopman as hastily took his place, 
for the double purpose of serving a cus- 
tomer, though for a trifle, and having a 
sharp eye on the opened glass of jewel- 
lery, which I was now, whilst hanging 
over, (my back still to the ladies,) exa- 
mining with apparently profound cu- 
riosity, when, at the same time, every 
faculty was really absorbed in that of 
attention. 

" Yes," observed the young female, 
** the bracelet will do very well ; and 



DUDLEY. 305 

now I'll timnk you to show me some pearl 
ornaments for the head." 

" Mock, or real, madam?" 

*' Real, of course," said the old lady ; 
" pearls are pearls." 

These were produced, and the young 
one seemed to select, for her patroness, 
what she herself thought most becoming; 
though the answer of the latter was al- 
ways, '* Please yourself, my dear ; you 
are the best judge." Is it possible, I 
thought, that this old fanciful spinster 
can think of decorating her grey locks 
with pearl crescents, and aigrettes ! And 
the other seems eager to make her expose 
her folly ! Aye, this is part of her trade, 
— flattery and obsequiousness. 

" You go to the ball, I presume, 
Ma*am," said the jeweller; but which 
of the females it was he addressed I was 
not able to know, for they both answered 
in the affirmative, — the lady for herself, 
and the companion, as I judged, for her 
lady. 

** Do you take tickets, sir ?" said the 
shopman to me ; spreading them, and a 



306 DUDLEY. 

number of hand-bills, on the counter, by 
which I saw the ball was to be given that 
night, for the benefit of some charitable 
institution. — I made no reply, but, tak^ 
ing out my purse, pocketed a few of the 
tickets, and offered a bank note to pay 
for them. At that moment, an empty 
barouche and pair, and postillions in dark- 
green and gold liveries, and an outrider, 
drove rapidly to the shop door. The 
old lady rose, with a bend of her head 
to the jeweller, whilst the young one 
offered her arm. Miss Powis being, with 
some assistance, placed in the carriage, 
the companion, with an elastic step, 
sprung in after her, called out " Go on," 
returned the jeweller's bow, when the 
vision vanished from before my eyes. 

I stood for a few seconds, pondering 
on what I had seen and heard. As I 
now had had a complete view of their 
persons, I was led to think that the pa- 
troness spoiled her young friend, and by 
indulging her in habits unbecoming her 
retired and obscure rank in society, might 
yet be the means of exposing her to 
much mischief. The former was dressed 



DUDLEY. 307 

suitable to her time of life, in dark co- 
lours, of seemingly excellent quality, and 
well and closely wrapped up. The other 
certainly proper, in respect to age and 
personal loveliness, but not as to situa- 
tion ; — the richly-embroidered light silk 
pelisse, the kid boots, and straw-coloured 
feathers, which played with the motion 
of the carriage as it drove on, gave her 
so decided an air of fashion and supe.. 
riority, that, but for the voice, and 
transcendently beautiful face and figure, 
I should have found some difficulty in 
believing this was the same person 1 had 
seen in the deep poke bonnet, and the 
Scotch plaid. 

I was at length roused from my reverie, 
by the shopman offering me change for a 
twenty pound note. 

" What's this for ?" I asked. 

*< Your change, sir, for the note you 
gave me for twenty pound." 

" Twenty ! I gave you a five pound 
note." 

** I beg your pardon, sir ; but here it 
is still, as you laid it on the counter." 



308 DUDLEY. 

" And to which," added the master 
jeweller, who now joined us, casting on 
me a penetrating look, *« you will have 
the goodness, sir, to put your name, and 
place of residence." 

Here was a dilemma ! But I have in- 
variably found, through life, that de- 
ception, no matter how innocent the in- 
tent, brings its own punishment. I 
might certainly have taken back the note, 
and given a five pound, which would 
have paid for the tickets, but this would 
have raised suspicion ; and I therefore 
very calmly took the pen that was offered 
me, and wrote, " Sir Eliot Howard, Bart. 

' — Inn, Exeter," determined at 

once to throw off my travelling designa- 
tion of Mr. Eliot, and, on my return to 
my inn, to arrange the direction on my 
portmanteau accordingly. 

The jeweller bowed most profoundly, 
begged to be honoured with my com- 
mands during my stay, and offered me a 
few shop cards, which I put into my 
waistcoat pocket, at the same time say- 
ing, ** Who were those ladies in your 
shop just now ?" 



DUDLEY. 309 

" A Miss Powis, from S- , near 

Honiton.*' 

** And the other ?" 

" Upon my word, sir, I don't know 
the name of the other. Do you, Tho- 
mas ?'* addressing the shopman ; who, 
however, made no reply, but had his 
eyes fixed intently upon my right hand. 

At last, as I was leaving the shop, he 
came suddenly between me and the door, 
saying, '* Sir, that umbrella you have 
just now been examining, and which 
you are walking away with, is not your's ; 
you certainly had no umbrella when you 
came in ?" And he took it out of my 
unresisting hand, which was no more 
conscious of the difference between that 
and its own little cane switch, than the 
eyes above them of the difference of a 
five and a twenty pound note. 

So wholly unconscious, also, was I 
of the honourable suspicions the fellow 
entertained of me, that I very calmly 
said, ** True ;" and stood bending my 
cane against the door, and talking to the 
jeweller, who kept watching me most 
intently, when, once more, the barouche 



310 DUDLEY. 

drove past the door, and I darted into 
the street. 

The waving feathers attracted my at- 
tention J and I observed my fair incog- 
nita, as she rattled onward, noticing her 
acquaintance and friends on both sides, 
with all those delicate and discriminating 
shades, or degrees of intimacy, which a 
thorough knowledge of the rules of so- 
ciety can alone teach, from the slight 
and dignified bow of bare recognition, 
to the warm kiss of the hand, the look 
back, the nod, and Hebe smile. 

*' This is indeed carrying dependence 
off with a high hand," I said, as I turned 
back slowly and dejectedly to my inn. 
** A little more diffidence and sensibility 
would not be amiss." I blamed, I ex- 
culpated, I framed excuses ; could find 
no excuse ; I ventured, even young as I 
was, to hazard a conjecture on what 
might be the future consequences of 
Miss Powis's imprudent indulgence, un- 
less she intended to place her favourite 
out of the reach of temptation, by se- 
curing to her a handsome independence; 
when the two interviews I had had with 



DUDLEY. 311 

the young person flashed upon my recol* 
lection, and I saw her again arrayed in 
innocence and purity. 

She that could take such genuine, 
such heart-felt interest in the improve- 
ment of the infant poor, performing the 
duty she had taken upon herself with 
such cheerfulness, such perseverance, 
such mild entreaty, can have no common 
mind ; and then her visit to the cottages, 
like a ministering angel, with food and 
clothing, regardless of fatigue or per- 
sonal inconvenience ; and such, no 
doubt, though I chanced to meet her 
only once, was her usual, perhaps her 
daily practice. The sudden and effectual 
check she gave my presumption, whether 
proceeding from pride or offended mo- 
desty is immaterial, since it had the 
desired effect ; — and then her conduct 
at church, so devout, so self-concentrated, 
so strictly proper. — I'll go to the ball 
to-night, however ; for though, perhaps, 
the rules of society preclude her ad- 
mission, the dowager will be there. I'll 
contrive to get acquainted with hevy at 



312 DUDLEY. 

all events, and from her I'll learn every 
particular concerning this girl. 

During my soliloquy, the waiter had 
been trying, by dint of a couple of 
brushes, to turn my coat of brownish- 
black to a raven hue, and having tolerably 
succeeded, was assisting me to dress, 
(the shops of Exeter having supplied me 
with all that was otherwise requisite,) 
when the landlord made his appearance 

at the door, saying that Mr. , 

naming the jeweller in whose shop I had 
cut so respectable a figure, had been to 
enquire had a Sir Eliot Howard put up 
there. I saw clearly by this, that all 
travelling tricks must now be laid aside ; 
and feeling myself amenable to the laws 
of the land, and indeed the laws of so- 
ciety, I immediately opened my port- 
manteau, and taking out letters, and 
other documents, convinced the master 
of the house of my identity. 

He and the waiter, as I was now 
dressed, left the room ; and I once more 
turned my thoughts on the beautiful ob- 
ject which, I could not but acknowledge 
to myself, was rapidly filling my heart, 



DUDLEY. 313 

to the exclusion of all others. I was re- 
solved not to sleep until I had discovered 
iier name, birth, and situation. If the 
•latter are respectable, — if her character, 
fiom the cradle to the present hour, can 
be traced as irreproachable, no matter 
lor her name, she shall not keep that 
long. I'll snatch her from dependence, 
from the horrors of a precarious liveli- 
hood, the uncertainty of future benefit ; 
she shall learn to hear me call her my 
deavy without a tragical start, a young 
blush, and a raised eye-brow. As Lady 
Howard, she may wear feathers, and 
feathers do certainly become her : as my 
wife, she may even Here my rhap- 
sody was suddenly arrested by that acute 
sensation of pain arising from doubt, 
doubt leading to suspicion, suspicion to 
jealousy, and jealousy almost to madness. 
Suppose her affections should be al- 
ready engaged. My mere personal ap. 
pearance, it is evident, has not made the 
slightest impression on her imagination, 
as she left me, as she thought, many 
miles distant, and for ever ; and here I 

VOL. I. p 



S14 DUDLEY. 

find her at Exeter, glowing in all the 
brilliancy of health and conscious beauty. 
Besides, I think I distinguished two mi- 
litary men, to whom she bowed very 
graciously, when, like a conqueror, scat- 
tering her nods and smiles on each side 
of the street, as she rattled furiously 
down it. 

Though she were paying the " How 
do you do?" honours for her patroness, 
she ought to be a little more reserved, 
more humble, more conscious of the 
really melancholy situation which she 
fills in life. — I'll this very night make 
every enquiry concerning her of Miss 
Powis, ask permission to call upon her 
the next day, — obtain an introduction, 
cultivate an acquaintance. I am of age, 
I am my own master; she cannot be 
more than eighteen. Yes, this night de- 
cides my fate. — Prophetic words indeed, 
Clonmore, for before the clock struck 
twelve, my destiny was fixed. 



DUDLEY. 315 

Sir Eliot in continuation. 

1 entered the ball-room rather late ; 
dancing had been long begun, though, 
at the moment of my going in, the com- 
pany were either seated, or walking in 
pairs. At a glance, I saw the place was 
thronged with military men, whose band 
was playing in fine style ; but accustomed, 
as I had been lately, to so many hours 
of the fresh open air, I felt the heat in- 
tolerable, and was turning away to seek 
the card-room, where I thought it most 
probable I should find my old spinster, 
when my arm was seized, and my hand 
heartily shaken, by one of the officers, 
in whom I recognized Charles Maxwell, 
our old college chum, then a cornet in 
the dragoons. 

We got clear of the crowd, and into a 
corner, where ancient times were talked 
over, and present affairs debated upon. 
On my remarking the full attendance of 
this ball, he replied, " There is not a 
black, a red, a blue, a green, or a brown 
unmarried coat, ornamented or plain, in 
this room, that is not attracted hither by 

p o> 



SlG DUDLEY. 

the heiress who is expected here this 
evening, for the first time." 

*' And who, Sind what is she ?** 

" A Miss Powis, of Dorsetshire." 

" Powis! Had you said a dowager, 
instead of an heiress, the term would 
have been more appropriate." 

*' Oh, oh ! You, Howard, I see, are 
one of the numerous disappointed covet- 
ers of this golden fruit, now under 
dragon guardianship. She was just now 
called a dowdy, by that fellow you see 
yonder in green and gold, who, in return 
for his amorous suit, received a suit of 
rejection. Her uncle. Colonel Powis, of 
Oakland Park, is a worthy man enough : 
he is expected here to-night, with Mrs. 
Powis, to introduce their niece for the 
first time to an Exeter assembly." 

" I think she is quite old enough to 
<(0 alone, ^* 

<« Why, she's not yet fifty,** returned 
Maxwell, with appropriate gravity ; *« she 
is not, upon my honour." 

The certain conviction that he was 
now bantering me, had the effect to 
banish a rising suspicion in my mind, 
J5 



DUDLEY. 317 

which, strange as it may appear to you, 
Clonmore, had never before entered my 
imagination, — that the younger lady 
might be Miss Powis, instead of the 
elder ; and I now answered, pettishly, 
*' Well, well, try your luck with her; 
you brave, hot-headed, wild Irishmen, 
generally have a happy knack at these 
things ; I would advise your red coat to 
try and bear off the prize from every 
'Other colour assembled here/' 

*' Not 1 : though a soldier of fortune, 
ergo, of no fortune, I'll never be beholden 
to a wife for a guinea. If I marry, (if 
ever I should marry, and of that I doubt,) 
my girl shall look up to me, not I to 
her. May all the evils of that worst sort 
of slavery fall on me, the reproaches of 
a rich wife, if ever I change my mind 
on this subject. Now you^ Howard, 
indeed, you have pretensions ; your pei'- 
son, title, and wealth, authorize you to 
address this universal idol.*' 

" Thank you ; but I'm in no hurry to 
worship idols not yet fifty." 

** Oh, you would choose them above 
that mark. Is that your taste ? Well ; 
p 8 



318 DUDI/RYi 

step to the card-room within, and from 
one of the whist- tables you may pick and 
choose." 

" For Heaveri*s sake, Maxwell, be se- 
rious for one moment, and tell me, as 
you are acquainted with this Miss Powis, 
perhaps you also know she has a com- 
panion ?'' — And I felt myself redden 
as I pronounced these words. 

" A companion ! to be sure she has ; 
there are lilies and roses! and blooms 
and Venus' smiles for you. A Perdita ! 
a Paragon 1 a youthful Minerva ! — And 
so, Howard, this is your taste after all !'* 

Completely deceived by his manner, 
I said^ " Can you introduce me to her, 
my dear fellow ?** 

** Hush !'* he replied ; and looking 
towards the folding doors (rf the room, 
which were now thrown open, he drew 
me back a step or two, still enjoining 
silence. 

T perceived a circle forming near the 
door, which prevented my seeing the 
figures of those who had just come in ; 
but it opened a few minutes after, when 
I recognized the old lady, and alone ; — ^ 



DUDLEY. 319 

by alone, I mean her companion was not 
with her ; for the venerable Miss herself 
was leaning on the arm of an elderly 
gentleman, who having led her to a seat, 
returned to the circle, which had now 
advanced to th€ centre of the room, and 
had become still wider and deeper, by; 
the addition of almost all the male part 
of the society, excepting Maxwell and 
myself. 

He soon quitted me, and I remaine^ 
in the same corner, from whence I had a 
good view of the respectable maiden, 
whose rich, dark velvet dress, was simple, 
close, and very becoming. In vain I 
looked for the pearls ; her head seemed 
enveloped in a lace hood, which set off 
her pale, yet elegant and placid features^ 
to the greatest advantage. 

I soon after met the eyes of Maxwell, 
who immediately drew near me with the 
elderly gentleman I had before observed, 
and whom he introduced as Colonel 
Powis. 

" I was an old friend of your father's, 
Sir Eliot," said the Colonel, shaking 
hands with me ; ** he and I were at col- 
p 4 



3^0 DUDLEY. 

lege at the same time, and served in 
more than one campaign together in 
America : and if you come this way, Fli 
present you to an old friend of your, 
mother/' 

I followed, and met with a cordial 
reception from Mrs. Powis. 

" And now," said he, " you must be 
acquainted with my niece, not the least 
charming of the three, I assure you." 

I followed in silence, when the bril- 
liant throng opening at the instant to 
admit him, there in the centre I beheld, 
dressed with richness, radiant with jewels, 
more radiant in beauty, my village 
school-mistress, my humble mantua- 
maker, my lowly lady's maid, my poor 
companion. The spell was broken ; she 
was now the queen of the night, the 
golden fruit, the universal idol j in short. 
Miss Powis, the lovely heiress. 

** Claudina, my dear," said the Colo- 
nel, ** allow me to introduce a young 
gentleman, whose father, Sir Frederick 
Howard, you have often heard me men- 
tion with friendship. — My niece, Misa 
Powis." 



DUDLEY. 321 

All this was the affair of a moment j 
but judge, Clonmore, of my feelings, 
when the young lady, after the slight 
courtsey which common politeness ex- 
acted, scarcely, indeed, honouring me 
with a glance, turned round, and con- 
tinued her conversation with those near 
her ; and yet I' could perceive that 
her looks wandered, that her mind 
was pre-occupied, and, in short, any 
where, but where it ought to have been. 

Her attention was, however, soon re- 
called by the good old Colonel, who said 
to her, whilst looking at me, V', Are you 
engaged, my love, after the four first 
dances ? if you are not, perhaps — " 

" But, indeed, my dear uncle, I am, 
and for the wliole evening; that, how- 
ever, can be no disappointment to your 
friend Sir Frederic Howard ; let him 
only look around, and he will see that 
there are many more ladies than gentle- 
men, among whom he cannot fail of 
choosing a far superior partner.'* 

Chilled and mortified at this reception, 
so far different to what I had expected ; 
disgusted at an affectation of humility, 
p 5 



32^ DUDLEY. 

(and particularly at her pretending to 
mistake my Christian name,) conscious, 
as she must have been, that she was the 
reigning planet of the evening, I step- 
ped back, murmuring in my own bosom 
the unconnected phrases of *' Stately 
grandeur ! pompous pride ! heiress, and 
affectation. Oh, that my fond hopes 
had been realised, that you had been, 
indeed, the poor obscure, humble girl I 
at first supposed you, — then might you 
have become mine j now, you are lost 
to me for ever, or rather, you are, you 
have been, you can be nothing to me." 

How singular, Clonmore, that at the 
very instant I was for ever renouncing 
her, our souls w^ere on the point of 
uniting in indissoluble bonds ! Maxwell, 
I believe, began to understand the error 
I had been in, and now saw the state of 
my agonised and disappointed feelings. 

" You are not well," he said, putting 
his arm under mine ; ** you had better 
leave the room." 

** The heat is, indeed, oppressive," I 
replied, suppressing my emotions througb 



DUDLEY. 323 

respect to the company ; " if I could get 
into the air it would be of service.'* 

As I spoke, and was retreating, I could 
not avoid casting one, as I thought, List 
look at that noble, that lovely, that 
beauteous countenance ; when, judge 
my astonishment ! I perceived her eyes 
fixed on me, steadily, nay rapturously, 
her attention awakened, as was but too 
evident to all around, by my voice. She 
took a hasty step or two towards me, 
exclaiming involuntarily, " Mr, Eliot P* 
when the blood rushed to her cheeks, 
and she turned to the spot where sat her 
female friend, (the real companion,) and 
exchanged with her one single glance. 

This, though unintelligible to every 
soul in the room, excepting themselves 
and me, fell upon my heart with so 
overpowering a sensation, that I could 
scarcely support myself; neither would 
I have exchanged that one look given to 
her old friend, for hundreds of the 
tenderest nature to myself. That ex- 
clamation, that remembrance of my 
voice, that look to the companion, spoke 
volumes : by these proofs alone, I ob- 
p 6 



324 DUDLEY. 

tained the full certainty, that — • (how or 
wherefore, I had yet to learn) but that I 
was valued, and solely for my own sake^ 
I no longer doubted. 

Aware of her situation, however, the 
object of universal scrutiny and at- 
tention, she instantly recovered herself, 
and turning playfully to the Colonel, 
said, ** My dear uncle, this gentleman 
and I have met before; but how came 
you to introduce him as Sir Frederic 
Howard ?'' 

" My dear niece," returned the Co- 
lonel, with good presence of mind, " this 
gentleman and you seem to have met 
before to very little purpose, since it is 
plain you don't know his name ; I intro- 
duced him to you as Sir Eliot Howard, 
(which by the bye he did not,) the son of 
my old friend, the late Sir Frederic ; but 
really your little brain is so bewildered 
with thoughts of all the conquests you 
mean to make to-night, and the expect- 
ation of proposals I shall receive to- 
morrow, that you gave him but a sorry 
reception." 
■ Then turning to me, he said, " Never 



DUDLEY. 325 

mind that girl, Sir Eliot, she's the great- 
est flirt in my family ; she'll coquet 
with you this evening, and, perhaps, to- 
morrow, give you the stare of * Who are 
you ?' Never mind her, but trust the 
word of an old soldier, who will be 
heartily glad to see you on Wednesday 
at M near Dawlish." 

The Colonel gave me his card, but I 
could make no answer. I was so per- 
fectly giddy that I could scarcely stand;- 
Maxwell, therefore, grasped my arm, and 
led me fairly out of the house. With 
much delicacy he continued as silent as 
myself during our walk to my inn, where 
he left me, saying he would breakfast 
with me the next morning. 

Oppressed with a weight of happiness^ 
do you think, Clonmore, I could close 
my eyes that night in sleep ? The morn- 
ing came, and the cornet was true to his 
promise. As he took his place at the 
breakfast-table, throwing down his sword, 
helmet, sash, and gloves, whilst I tra- 
versed the room, I enquired, had he re- 
turned to the rooms on leaving me ? 



3^6 DUDLEY. 

He had. «' And I suppose that dan- 
cing was kept up till late ?*' 

" It was." 

" Who did you dance with ?" 

** With Miss Chalmers, and Miss — " 
adding half-a-dozen other names equally 
unimportant to me, when I interrupted 
him with, " At what hour did Colonel 
Powis leave ?'* 

*' At three o'clock." 

<« And the spirit of the night did not, 
I suppose — — *' 

" Come, come, Baronet, I am here to 
breakfast, not to talk 5 so if you don't 
make the tea, I will." And he began 
doing the honours, by helping himself 
and me most plentifully to every thing 
that was spread before us. 

After a moment's consideration, I re- 
solved to relieve my mind at once by 
communicating the whole of what had 
passed to Maxwell ; and I firmly believe, 
that by this determination I escaped a 
fever. He listened to me with the pro- 
foundest attention, interrupted at times 
by, *< Hand me the muflineer j" « Give 



DUDLEY. S^ 

me the cream ;'* " Another shce or two of 
tongue;" " Confound this egg, 'tis cold;'* 
until my patience being entirely ex- 
hausted, I started up, exclaiming, " Well, 
sir, when you have finished your break- 
fast I'll talk to you, and not till then." 

" And when you have finished 7/our 
breakfast," said Maxwell, pouring out 
his sixth or seventh cup of coffee or tea> 
^« I'll talk to 7/oUj and not till then,*' 

1 looked at him steadily, and saw there 
was meaning in his arch good-humoured 
face; and taking his friendly advice, I 
sat down quietly to my meal, which after 
a sleepless night was much wanted, and 
wliich now greatly refreshed me. 

** The devil's in you lovers," said 
Maxwell, as the table was clearing j 
" you will neither eat yourselves, nor 
suffer others to eat.'* 

I then resumed the subject, and be- 
ginning at the circumstance of hearing 
the Ariel voice in the church-yard, re- 
lated every particular that had occurred 
to the present hour. 

*' And now," I said, " speak out 
frankly. What have you to say to me 



-> 



5^8 DUDLEY. 

What did take place after your return to 
til e rooms?" 

Instead of entering into detail, Max- 
well started up, and wringing my hand, 
said, " I wish you joy — I do, faith. — 
I am always desirous of hearing a gentle- 
man's story first, through delicacy to the 
lady ; but I now repeat, 1 do most 
sincerely wish you joy. It is a settled 
thing j she is your's. I would bet fifty 
to one, that Miss Powis is Lady Howard 
in less than six months.'' 

" Nonsense, you have only received 
the confessions of one of the parties ; 
you cannot judge of the state of her 
mind towards me." 

" No ! had you been present last 
night in the ball-room, after your de- 
parture, (as we would say in Tipperary,) 
your modesty would have been put to 
the blush. At my return. Miss Powis, 
who was ray partner in the two second 
dances, enquired of me, were you re- 
covered from the effects of the heat ; ap- 
proved highly of your determination not 
to return to the rooms that night, — and 
then -^" 



DUDLEY, 5^9 

** Well, and then !" I exclaimed, im- 
patiently. 

** Why then," continued Maxwell, 
** like a woman of good sense, scrupulous 
delicacy, and perfect politeness, she 
danced for the remainder of the night 
with all to whom she had engaged her- 
self, and with a spirit, a grace, a cheer- 
fulness, that showed she had the perfect 
command of her own feelings, and was 
aware of the deference due to those of 
others ; instead of playing the heroine, 
insulting the gentlemen with whom she 
had promised to dance, by pleading ill- 
ness, affecting low spirits, or absence of 
mind, or having recourse to airs of sensi- 
bility, (a fine word sometimes for sulky 
selfishness,) she behaved just as — the 
future Lady Howard ought to behave, 
and thereby secured the admiration and 
good wishes of all present, even of un- 
successful rivals. '* 

" But you do not think, Maxwell, 
that the emotion she showed on first re- 
cognizing me, was observed by any but 
myself?" 

** Depend upon it, it was, by her uncle, 



BBO DUDLEY, 

by her aunt, by me, and by above 
twenty others. It was nature itself 
speaking ; it was too powerful for con- 
cealment, though, with real propriety, 
she as quickly recovered herself. The 
effect of your presence was instantaneous, 
was visible, was certain. Your emotion 
assisted her's j and the general belief 
now is, that a mutual, though secret, at- 
tachment exists between you, which, as 
you are equal in every respect, will in 
due time be crowned with success." 

" But, good heavens, man, we have 
never exchanged above a dozen words." 

" 'Pon my life," returned Maxwell, 
** that's no business of mine: though 
you may not have exchanged a dozen 
words, it is plain you have exchanged 
hearts, and I believe, in the long run, 
that will do equally as well." 

At this moment Colonel Powis was 
announced, and Maxwell soon after took 
his leave. A pressing invitation to quit 
Exeter, to take up ray abode at Dawlish 
for the present, and to dine with him the 
next day, were communicated by the 
Colonel, and willingly agreed to by me. 



DUDLEY. 331 

I saw him depart with as much plea- 
sure as I felt at his entrance ; and then 
gave way to the fond indulgence of 
thought, — the luxury of tracing the 
past, the delight of anticipating the 
future. 



How apt we are, Clonmore, as we get 
on in life, to blush at the recollection of 
the juvenile trifles that first give rise to 
courtship, and that attend its progress, 
the wind up of which is. Heaven knows, 
serious enough, whether successful or 
otherwise. It is playing with iron and 
flint ; we persist in striking, perhaps in 
sport, until the spark is caught 5 — it 
may be as suddenly extinguished ; it may 
in its consequences prove useful and 
cheering, or awful, and tremendously 
destructive. 

Trace courtship to its source, and then 
reflect on its results. It may begin with 
a transient look, a silly or a sincere com- 
pliment, followed by a sillier, or a more 
or less sincere reply ; the picking up a 
fan, or the purloining a pocket-book j the 



332 DUDLEY. 

breaking a parasol, the finding a stray 
ring, the admiring a picture, the acci- 
dental assistance afforded in a walk, 
whether in town or country. In short, 
no two courtships perhaps ever had the 
same beginning ; therefore the attempt 
to enumerate the rise of each, even 
among our own acquaintance, is utterly 
impracticable. From, however, the slight- 
est cause,* perhaps originating without 
any decided intention in either party, 
arises a preference 5 this ripens into a 
vague wish of settling in life ; a mutual 
explanation and engagement follow, (or 
perhaps, an engagement without any 
explanation;) friends on both sides, or on 
one side only, are or are not consulted ; 
and at length the holy, solemn, and in- 
dissoluble tie of matrimony is formed y 
and then, perhaps for the first time, the 
parties begin to look about them. 

Thus, (like the banian tree, which, 
springing from the minutest speck of ve- 
getable life, expands into a forest,) 
generation succeeds generation, until the 
final extinction of the human race. — . 
Thus, from the trifle of a moment, are 



DUDLEY* 333 

formed the sacred connections of brother, 
sister, father, mother, and child ! Po- 
pulation increases, society spreads, worldly 
happiness or misery is produced, union 
and disunion in private families, harmony 
and discord among crowned heads, 
friendly alliances are contracted ; and, 
frequently, depopulating wars, are the 
result of individual and domestic griev- 
ances. The factions and intrigues of 
courts are otherwise to us of little impor- 
tance ; but the origin of your and my 
courtship is to us, and our descendants, 
of the greatest. 

I recollect your betraying to me your 
secret at its very commencement, and 
discovering your intentions, before per- 
haps you had formed any, (as Maxwell 
would say,) and simply thus : — We were 
together on Richmond Terrace one fine 
frosty morning in December, walking 
briskly to and fro, conversing on^ — I for- 
get what subject \ but I remember your 
frequently putting up your spy-glass, 
watching the opposite meadows, and 
then dropping your hand impatiently ; 
when, at sight of a boat putting off from 
the other side, you broke from my arm, 



334 DUDLEY. 

saying, " I must go to Twickenham ;— 
we'll meet at the Star and Garter, Kew 
Bridge. Good-bye ; she yesterday lost 
this little fur tippet, (taking it from your 
pocket,) during her walk with her mother 
up the hill from Petersham, and I must 
return it to her." 

** Send it to Twickenham by the 
boatman yonder," I called out after you. 

" No, no," was the loud reply ; " I 
must give it into her own hands ; it may 
be of consequence." 

This tippet " of consequence" was 
perhaps woi'th a couple of shillings. In- 
deed, Mrs. Clonmore has since herself 
declared, that she did not think a Jew 
would have given sixpence for it j — and 
it was not until three hours afterwards, 
when we did meet again, and I raved at 
you for keeping me and our horses 
waiting, that I knew to whom the elegant 
but expressive appellation of she referred. 

"Beg pardon, Howard," you called 
out, when you could distinguish my long 
and impatient face y ** beg pardon for 
keeping you ; but the young lady was 
with one of her masters, and I had to 



DUDLEY. 335 

wait until the lesson was over. I thought 
she might have some message (and she 
had) to send back by me to her mother 
at Petersham.'^ 

** And who is this young lady, for 
whom you have taken the trouble twice 
to cross the Thames, and walk upwards 
of four miles to take messages, and re- 
store a paltry rabbit-skin ?" 

*' A Miss Louisa Vivian," you replied, 
" who is at school at .'* 

" What, where my sister Caroline is 
a boarder 1 — You might have informed 
me you were going there, I would have 
accompanied you, though I saw the dear 
little girl the other day. Did you see 
Caroline ?'' 

" No,'' you replied ; " I only saw 
Miss Vivian.*' 

These words were really true enough ; 
as it afterwards appeared by Caroline's 
own account, that though she with other 
of the pupils were present at your en- 
trance into the parlour, you had no eyes 
but for Louisa. — We mounted our 
horses ; and though I saw by your glow- 
ing face, and half-bitten lip, endeavour- 



336 DUDLEY, 

ing to hide a conscious smile, how it was 
with you, I was determined not to give 
you the lead of explanation, as at that 
time I despised all affairs of that nature, 
as unworthy of occupying the mind of a 
man of sense. 

Some years after, your marriage fol- 
lowed ; and at this present hour, I, in 
idea, behold you both the fond and 
aifectionate couple, the anxious and in- 
dulgent parents, the rulers of a well- 
established household, and the pastor 
and the mistress of an extensive parish. 

This was the origin of your courtship, 
Clonmore ; and for your present happi- 
ness, you have to thank the old fur tip- 
pet. What gave rise to mine I have 
now detailed, whereby we may see and 
trace the endless chain of causes and 
effects. Had I not thought proper to 
stand laughing at ridiculous epitaphs, and 
watching a couple of little Devonshire 
clowns at play in the church-yard, I 
might not at this instant be inhabiting 
Teneriffe. 



1>UDLEY, 337 



Sir Eliot in continuation. 

I arrived at , near Dawlish, the 

same evening ; and the next day, accord- 
ing to appointment, went to the house 
of Colonel Powis. — "I fear I am late," 
I remarked, whilst ringing at the gate, 
and taking out my watch. Had 1 looked 
at it before I had rang, I should certainly, 
on perceiving it was only three o'clock, 
have returned to my inn. But it was too 
late to retreat ; a servant had seen me, 
and I was ushered into the drawing-room, 
where, to my great confusion, I found 
Mrs. Powis alone, and reading ; and by 
her looks, evidently not expecting to see 
dinner guests at that hour. 

The Colonel, however, almost imme- 
diately entering, relieved my college 
embarrassment, by letting me at once 
see that he knew the cause of my early 
appearance. 

« Well," said he to Mrs. Powis, in 
a very loud yet cheerful voice, and 
taking out his watch, " and what are we 
to do with this young Ovid until the rest 

VOL. I. Q 



S8S ' DUDLEY. 

of the party come? You, my dear, I should 
think, could not talk over college affairs 
with him, as I could, were I not forced 
to attend a brother magistrate. Do 
you know any thing of i'ellows and 
students, proctors, doctors, wranglers, 
and masters ? You cannot even enquire 
after the round-wigged porter, or the 
black-eyed bedmaker, as I could. What 
shall we do with him \ it is now three 
o*clock, and we dine at six.'* 

I suppose I coloured, and looked 
aukward and sheepish ; for as the con- 
tinental wars had excluded our generation 
from making the grand tour, I had no 
other shield than English modesty ; and 
this, perhaps, in the eyes of this worthy 
couple, was preferable to the brazen 
target of foreign assurance. 

« Well, well," said the Colonel, " at 
one-and-twenty all this is fair; at one- 
and-thirty, indeed, we might have to wait 
dinner for you; and, believe me, Sir 
Eliot, the first error is the most excusa- 
ble. But I am serious as to how I can 
amuse you ; for my wife being deaf; you 
and she will only be in each other's way ; 



DUDLEY. SS§ 

and I am forced to attend justice duties; 
unless, indeed, you will follow me to my 
study, and help my clerk to sign a mit- 
timus or two. — Eh, M?\ Eliot P" 

At this proof that Miss Powis had 
communicated to him the circumstances 
of our first meeting, my embarrassment 
increased; and I was beginning an ex- 
planation of the truth, when Mrs. Powis, 
who had rung for refreshments, observed 
that there were here books, and portfolios 
of prints and drawings, in looking over 
which, she had no doubt, I should find 
some amusement. The Colonel judged 
otherwise; or rather, as I watched the 
door of the room, he read every motion 
and change of my heart in my varying 
countenance, on which neither time nor 
fashion had as yet fixed their seal ; — 
after I had joined them in their sand- 
wiches, and wine and water, he led me 
to a glass door, which opened from the 
drawing-room upon the lawn. 

** Suppose,'' he said, ** I turn you 
out of the house again at once : I have 
no doubt you will prefer it to the re- 
straint of remaining within. Just cross 
a 2 



340 DUDLEY. 

the green in a diagonal direction, enfilade 
a little gate on the right, make a sortie 
on the downs beyond; and if you should 
feel inclined to reconnoitre the beach, 
I have some suspicion you may meet 
there with a certain guide, who will be 
happy to show you all the neighbouring 
strong holds and posts, — that is, if yoi| 
are inclined to follow." 

I understood him — I heard no more ; 
but, snatching my hat, was off like a 
rocket, to use his own phrase ; shooting 
through the gate, I crossed the downs, 
and reached the sands. I had not walked 
ten yards, when I overtook two females 
busily employed in searching for shells 
and sea-weeds, with which they were 
filling a small basket placed on the 
ground between them. The memorable 
straw poke-bonnet and black ribbon, the 
green veil, and the Scotch plaid, were, 
indeed, certain guides. And before I 
drew quite near, I gave a loud hem, for 
the surge was rough, and the wind so 
high, that footsteps could not easily be 
heard \ besides which, I distinguished 
once more that full, clear, enchanting 

12 



DUDLEY. 341 

laugh, so expressive of innocence and 
good-humour* 

My loud hem was all-sufficient ; Miss 
Powis turned round, and on perceiving 
me exclaimed, with evident delight, 
** Mr. El — ! I beg your pardon, Sir 
Eliot ; but I am really so accustomed to 
this Mr. Eliot." 

Here was inadvertence, Clonmore ! 
here was full confession 1 I was at first 
resolved not to take advantage of the 
confusion which her cheeks plainly and 
instantly betrayed 5 and stooping, I took 
up the basket with some remarks on the 
shells and sea-weeds ; when a suspicion 
coming across me, (though how to recon- 
cile it with my personal identity, I knew 
not,) that she might have a friend of the 
name, I completely laid aside my deli- 
cate reserve, and remarked, ** Perhaps, 
Miss Powis, you are acquainted with a 
Mr. Eliot ?" 

Truth ever sat like a cherub on her 
lips, and she quickly replied, " Oh no, 
I know no person of that name except 
yourself." 

And then, conscious of the interpreta- 
Q 3 



34^ DUDLEY. 

tion I might put on her words, and as if 
determined to summons all the strength 
of prudence, by changing my course of 
ideas, she said, " And what have you 
done, Sir Eliot, with my uncle and auntj 
for I see by your appearance you have 
been at the house.*' 

« The Colonel,*' I replied, « is ac- 
quitting or committing some delinquent 
or other; Mrs. ^^ovvis is criticising the 
Quarterly critics \ and not knowing how- 
to get rid of me handsomely, they di- 
rected me where to find you, that I 
might throw myself on your mercy." 

« I am infinitely obliged to them," 
she replied, gaily. 

" Then perhaps, Miss Powis, you will 
take a turn or two with me on the 
sands ?" 

<< With pleasure;" and with an ex- 
pression of archness not to be described, 
speaking to the other female, (a servant 
in appearance,) she said, imitating the 
broad dialect of the county, and glancing 
at me, ** but the hour ! — Susan, Whafs 
o'clock r 

The apple-cheeked, dark-eyed girl. 



DUDLEY. S46 

with a smirk of pleasure at her young 
mistress's whimsical mode of address, 
though forgetful of the latent meaning, 
and which gave me such secret delight, 
stood silent, as not knowing what to an- 
swer J when I, with an expressive look at 
Miss Powis, a look of perfect explanation, 
said in the same dialect, " Past twelve,^* 

" Past twelve !" said Susan j "la, sir i 
it must be past four,** 

** Well, no matter," replied her mis- 
tress ; ** do you go home, and take this 
basket with you ; and tell Bates it is 
time enough to dress an hour or two 
hence. I shall walk a little longer ^ and 
Susan, do forget to remember fastening 
the garden gate as you did yesterday, by 
which I had to go above half a mile 
round." 

Away went Susan, with her broad 
good-humoured face, her thick shoes 
th ruffing through the pebbles, whilst we 
turned downward to the sands, the tide 
being out, and walked leisurely. 

Miss Powis's first remark was, " How 
welcome and refreshing the air, and 
the light spray of the sea, after being 
Q 4 



344 DtJDLEy. 

confined so many hours in that insuffer- 
ably hot room last night, surrounded by 
a crowd of persons one had scarcely ever 
seen before, and not one of whom one 
would perhaps wish to see again.'* 

The ice thus fairly broken, and by 
herself, it was my turn to observe, 
" There was one individual among the 
crowd, whom you had seen before, were 
you displeased at seeing him again ?" 

" And pray, if I may venture on so 
slight an acquaintance to make the en- 
quiry, what might you be doing so long 
at S— in Dorsetshire. My guardian 
lives there, his house, or rather my house, 
for he is my tenant until I shall be of 
age, adjoins the parsonage, and one of 
the fields is only separated from the 
church-yard by a low wall, under which 
grow the sweetest violets ! Susan and I 
often went to gather them." 

With the most playful vivacity she 
then repeated both the epitaphs, and 
for the first time her laugh was mingled 
with my own. 

" My dear old friend, Mrs. Stewart, and 
I/' she continued, " in our walks, rides, and 



DUDLEY. S45 

drives, frequently saw you when rambling 
about the village and its neighbour 
hood/' 

'* Was that Mrs. Stewart, whom I saw 
with you in the chariot, at the door of 
the inn, and at the ball ?" 

** It was J she is the widow of a naval 
officer, and a most excellent creature : she 
was the early companion of my mother, 
since whose death she has lived with me, 
and whilst I exist, my roof, table, and 
equipage are as much her's as my own.' 
(You remember, Clonmore, how faith- 
fully this promise was kept, for Mrs. 
Stewart, soon after our marriage, died in 
the arms of Claudina, and in your pre- 
sence.) 

" But to return to my first question," 
continued Miss Powis ; ** what motive 
could induce you to take up your abode, 
and for so long a time, in such an obscure 
village as S . We observed you fre- 
quently drawing and reading. — My old 
friend conjectured you were an artist 
come down from town to take views." 

«* And what was your conjecture ?" 

« Oh, th3i\ you were a poet, and that 
Q 5 



546 



BUDtEY. 



you lived thus retired, not from choice 
but necessity ; whilst my old guardian, 
to whom we often mentioned you, 
growled at our suppositions, and said 
you were certainly a strolling actor. One 
day, that we had met you in the dress of 
a sportsman, (sporting in the month of 
May !) I believe verily his old wife did 
say something of fortune being your 
sport '. on which I most wittily remarked, 
*« No, ma'am, this Mr. Eliot seems to be 
the sport of fortune 5" when Mrs. Stewart 
retorted, " and I hope fortune may yet 
overtake him.^' 

** But my name, Miss Powis; I have 
yet to learn how you came to know 
that?*' 

<« Nothing more easy. Susan, the very 
girl who has just quitted us, was passing 
the inn-door at the moment of your ar- 
rival on foot, when you enquired aloud, 
(and in a proud, grand manner, « like a 
real gentleman,' as Susan said,) * was 
there a portmanteau there for a Mr. 
Eliot.' She was with me, as I mentioned 
before, when I was gathering violets 
under the church-yard wall, and checked 



DUDLEY. 347 

my risibility by saying, ^ Hush ma'am, 
Mr. Eliot will hear you,' apparently as 
familiar with your name, as if you had 
been an old acquaintance of her's." 

" But that was the only time you saw 
me unobserved by myself.'* 

" I beg your pardon, Mrs. Stewart 
and 1 seemed doomed to meet with 
you every time we stirred beyond our 
own walls. — My carriage one morning 
had nearly run over a lame pedlar, cross- 
ing the road; the horses were restive and 
unmanageable, and drove on rapidly; 
but my anxiety was greatly relieved by 
seeing you from the window assist him 
to a bank, and pick up the money I 
threw out, which he seemed so thank- 
fully to receive. 

*' Another day, I passed you on horse- 
back, as you were trundling a heavily, 
laden barrow up a steep hill for the very 
identical old woman to whom I was car- 
Tying a dinner and a flannel dress, when 
Mrs. Stewart and the carriage were wait- 
ing for me in the road 5 for it is a maxim 
I learned from my mother, to give with 
my own hand, and to vspeak with my own 
Q 6 



348 DUDLEY. 

voice. You had once taken your station 
on the village stocks, setting all the 
ragged boys of the place scrambling for 
apples, a whole stall of which you had 
previously overturned for the purpose. 
One of your exploits, Sir Eliot, was 
perfectly Arcadian ; you stood the friend 
of a lamb separated from its mother by a 
rapid brook, which neither party were 
able to cross. We watched you carry- 
ing the bleating little creature in your 
arms, and restoring it to the ewe." 

Thus did Miss Powis enumerate a 
variety of similar adventures, which could 
only happen to a pedestrian and an idler ; 
but which, it seems, had made an indeli- 
ble impression on her youthful, ardent, 
and rather romantic disposition. It was 
not, as you may suppose, at this time, 
and indeed not till after our marriage, 
that she acknowledged her having formed 
an opinion, that I was a tall, well-looking, 
elegant young fellow, with some share of 
courage, good-nature, generosity, and 
tenderness — which compensated, in her 
mind, for my rusty black coat, brown 
hat, and mended boots 5 add to which, 



DUDLEY* 349 

she had on some occasion or other re- 
marked the extraordinary appearance of 
my hands ; and let me assure you, she 
said, " That no matter to us, whether 
a man's face is as brown as Tippoo Saib's, 
provided his hands are white and delicate 
as those of Adonis." 

" And now, Baronet," concluded the 
charming girl, " answer for yourself." 

I caught a portion of her vivacity, and 
replied, " First, heiress, answer ^ov your- 
self; for against my shabby appearance, 
I have your * James, spell that word 
again.' Your basket of provisions and 
bundle of needle-work, you have al- 
ready accounted for ; but the school -— " 

" Is my own — I founded it about 
three years ago, and placed over it old 
dame Withers, whom you saw when you 
intruded among my scholars, with your 
< shillings,' and * dunces,' and « parish 
clerks j' at which, I could scarcely keep 
my gravity. When at home at my guar- 
dian's, I make it a daily practice to attend 
to the children myself, for about an hour,, 
and hear the classes." 

« And at church?" 



350 DUDLEY* 

" You were in my pew ; though, as I 
observed before, that, and the great 
house and lands around it, are at present 
rented by my guardian. I saw you again 
at the inn-door, on my way to Sidmouth, 
where my uncle and aunt were to have 
met me, and where we designed to pass 
some months ; but there on my arrival 1 
found a letter, saying military circum- 
stances had obliged him to change his 
mind, and desiring us to come on to him 
at Exeter. And now Mr. — I was going 
to say Mr. again — well. Sir Eliot, are 
you now satisfied ?" 

" No, you have only drawn a slight 
sketch, when I expected a finished paint- 
ing, complete in all its parts, and deci- 
sive in its colouring." She perfectly un- 
derstood my meaning, and was therefore 
silent. ** You have omitted one of our 
accidental rencontres," I observed at 
last J ** that in the jeweller's shop, when 
you were ordering some pearl ornaments 
for the ball.'* 

" Were you there also ? I do now re- 
collect seeing a gentleman standing at 
one of the counters behind me, but had 



DUDLEY. 351 

not the slightest idea of its being you. 
He seemed clad in a very superior style 

to the wandering solitaire of S ; 

therefore 1 paid no attention to him. 
Had I been aware it had been t/ou, in- 
deed 1 — " 

" And who was /, Miss Powis ?" I 
replied, my soul beaming in my eyes, 
in return for this artless, this candid 
avowal of involuntary preference. " You 
knew not who I was. 1 had never been 
introduced to you. I was not, therefore, 
to be put on the footing of the most 
distant acquaintance. Passing over our 
interview in the field, which was acci- 
dental, you in the innocence of your 
heart were wrong, in acknowledging me 
by a bow from your carriage at the inn j 
but far more indiscreet in claiming me 
as an acquaintance at the ball j unless, 
indeed, it was in consequence of the 
Colonel's introduction, though not by the 
same name you concluded to be mine. 
Supposing, for an instant, I had been in 
reality a totally different character to 
what I am, — a sharper, a swindler, a 
gambler, — we must not always judge by 



S52 DUDLEY. 

externals ; — we will say, supposing I 
had been such, what might have been 
the consequences to you, in the eye of 
society, your thus publicly acknowledg- 
ing an intimacy with a person of that de- 
scription. — I now conclude my sermon j 
and am so confident that it will be taken 
in good part, I make no apology for giv- 
ing it." 

Indeed I saw, by the expression of her 
countenance, I had nothing to fear on 
that head ; and yet it was a mixed ex- 
pression ; — there was something passing 
in her mind I could not well understand ; 
and upon which it was equally impossible 
to question her. 

What an union of firmness and delicacy 
the female mind of honour ! Had a 
naked blade been held to Claudina's bo- 
som, or a pistol to her head, the fear of 
death perhaps had failed to extort a con- 
fession of what then filled her thoughts ; 
and it was not till some days {ifter our 
marriage, that, on reminding her of the 
circumstance, she communicated it to 
me. I cannot give you the exact words ; 
but it was something of the same nature 



DUDLEY. 855 

that occupies the mind of Juliet, when, 
after the ball, she sends her nurse to 
make enquiries concerning Romeo. — 
Miss Powis knew I was unmarried, but 
she could not be assured I was disen- 
gaged J and this was her doubt at the 
time. 

She thanked me for my advice; ac- 
knowledged that having early lost her 
parents, she perhaps had contracted a 
sort of independence of character, not 
suited exactly to her time of life ; and 
candidly added, that^ but for her good 
Mrs. Stewart, she should have fallen into 
the commission of many follies, from 
which good sense, experience, and know- 
ledge of the world, had preserved her. 

** For example," continued Claudina, 
** I was once actually on the point of 
stopping you on the common, when you 
were walking in one of your deep reve- 
ries, to ask you whether you drew por- 
traits as well as landscapes, when Mrs. 
Stewart checked me, by saying it was 
rather improper for me to speak first. 

" ' But where is the harm?' I argued ; 
< if he exercises his talents for a liveli- 



354 DtJBLEY. 

hood, he must be a man of honour ; and 
I, as a rich girl, ought to employ and 
reward him. — Well then, my dear old 
friend, do you speak to him.' This she 
intended to do, when you started from 
your meditations, took a leap over a 
hedge, and disappeared. 

** Another time we saw you reading at- 
tentively, as you lay stretched in the sun 
on a log of timber. You repeated a few 
lines aloud, when I observed, * He is a 
poet, and I will go and ask him the sub- 
ject of his muse. I am confident he is 
in the pastoral line.' You were reading 
' The Farmer's Boy ;' for we passed 
without being perceived close behind 
you. But bold as I was at a distance, 
when it came to the point I had not 
courage to address you first ; and on 
seeing you frequently afterwards, read- 
ing, drawing, or stationary, when ad- 
miring the views around, I yielded to my 
friend's advice, though at the same time 
I thought it perfectly absurd and unrea- 
sonable. You were a stranger to me, it 
is true ; and there are many whom I 
have known from infancy, who to this 



DUDLEY. 355 

hour appear strangers to me ; whilst you, 
whom I have not seen to speak to above 
three times, seem an old acquaintance. 
I could almost fancy you and I were 
introduced to each other before the 

creation " 

She stopped abruptly ; once more 
aware of the conclusion I could not fail 
drawing from this full and complete 
avowal of approbation. — Approbation ! 
ridiculous ! Had you beheld the eyes, 
w^hich, though cast upon the ground, I 
could see were filled with tenderness ; 
— had you watched, as I did from my su- 
perior height, (the wind being now per- 
mitted to blow back the bonnet,) the 
varying blush, the, averted head ; — nay, 
had you heard the tone of sensibility 
with which these words were rapidly 
pronounced, you would now allow me 
to change the word tenderness to that of 
love. 



The first dinner-bell sounded as we 
reached the lawn. Claudina returned to 
the house a private way ; and I went 
through the glass door into the drawing- 



356 DUDLEY. 

room, where I found several persons as^ 
sembled, and amongst other military 
men, to my great relief, Charles Maxwell. 
The conversation became general, until 
the door opening, Claudina again ap- 
peared, simply, yet elegantly dressed. 

Our eyes met no more ; I did not at- 
tempt to sit by her at dinner ; but with 
alacrity took my place on the right hand 
of Mrs. Powis, and neither accosted Clau- 
dina during the meal, nor even glanced 
at her but once, when, with great satis- 
faction, I saw her engaged in a spirited 
conversation with Maxwell, whose eye 
having once caught, I afterwards avoided, 
as I felt his look made my cheek glow 
with inward satisfaction. 

The dinner over, I was one of the last 
who joined the ladies ; when the Colonel, 
soon after coming into the drawing-room, 
called out, to my great surprise and 
pleasure, " Come, boys and girls, lend 
a hand j clear away ; off with chairs and 
tables, push back the sofas, and now for 
a country-dance, this fine cold May even- 
ing : that's the delight of my old soul j 
better by half than all your piano thrura« 



DUDLEY. S57 

ming, and opera-singing. My wife and 
I would dance also, only we are both 
lame ; her ladyship has the rheumatics, 
and I the gout." 

At the mention of the word dance, 
Claudina and I exchanged looks ; I went 
up to her as she stood near the window, 
and without a word on either side, her 
hand was in mine. 

" That's right," said the Colonel, 
throwing us a glance, as he lifted a 
screen out of the way ; '* the Baronet 
was disappointed of his amusement last 
night, so we must make him amends 
now." 

Two servants w^ere called in, who each 
played on the violin, and a third the 
tambourine : a cold collation followed ; 
and at three o'clock the next morning, I 
found myself at my own quarters, in a 
state of mental happiness of which you 
have had some experience. 

You will not be surprised that the 
next day found me at the Colonel's. I 
had ransacked my portmanteau for every 

drawing I had made at S , and 

amongst others, that of the village school. 



358 DtJDIrEY. 

I took them with me ; and saying to 
Claudina, they were perhaps of peculiar 
interest to her, being views of a part of 
the country which I now understood to 
be her own property, 1 begged her to 
accept of the whole, about twenty in 
number. 

She politely consented, and with 
thanks 5 then placed them in a small 
portfolio, on which she wrote my name 
as the artist, and left them on one of the 
tables in the drawing-room, for general 
amusement. 

Thus was I for two months the daily 
welcome guest of the Colonel 5 and as I 
could perceive, no less a favourite with 
him than with Mrs. Powis and Mrs. 
Stewart. Claudina and I walked, rode, 
and sailed together, either in parties or 
alone. During which time I had the 
pleasure of secretly hearing from Max- 
well, that all my rivals, Claudina's suitors, 
(and these were more than three or four 
in number,) had been decisively dismissed, 
but- with every expression of grateful po- 
liteness, delicacy, and regret. 



DUDLEY. 359 

Neither the Colonel nor Mrs. Powis 
knew exactly what terms their niece and 
1 were upon ; but such was their reliance 
on our coming to some decision, and 
soon, that they did not think proper to 
interfere ; and thus were we still situated, 
when the period arrived I had ^xed upon 
for my return to Oxford. 

It was on a Sunday, a sacrament Sun- 
day, and, as usual, I had accompanied 
the family to church. After the service, 
Claudina retired to her own room, and 
I walked out alone on the sands. We 
met at dinner 5 but the Colonel being 
gone to Exeter, and Mrs. Powis not well 
enough to leave her room, we formed 
only a trio at table. After dinner I 
would have taken my leave for the re- 
mainder of the day, much, however, 
against my will, when I received a mes- 
sage through Mrs. Stewart, from Mrs. 
Powis, requesting me not to go away un«- 
til the Colonel returned; adding, that if 
she was well enough she would join us 
at tea. 

** And have you no message for me, 
old friend ?" enquired Claudina. 



360 DUDLEY. 

" Yes, little harum scarum ; that you 
stay and entertain Sir Eliot, and give 
yourself no airs of prudery." 

*' Oh yes, 1 look so like a prude! 
don't I?" exclaimed Claudina, with a 
dancing step. — ** Entertain you, Sir 
Eliot," she added, as Mrs. Stewart quitted 
the room, to go above and sit with Mrs. 
Powis : ** I have never found that very 
difficult yet ; you are easily pleased. If 
there was not a thick fog, and it 
did not rain, and was not as cold as 
March, we would take a walk before tea : 

but as it is here Hobert, (to the 

servant, who now entered, my present 
Robert,) go and fetch a faggot of wood 
large enough to burn ten Guy Fauxes, 
and then bring us lights, let down the 
curtains, sweep the hearth, turn out the 
cat, and send in Rover, — my own fa- 
vourite Rover !" she continued, patting 
and caressing my spaniel. 

Whilst the man obeyed the latter part 
of her orders, I was actively employed 
on the former. Fram behind the outside 
green door, where they were piled, I 
fetched several logs of wood, and laid 



DUDLEY. 361 

them on the fire, which extorted an ex- 
clamation from Claiidina, who often at 
that time spoke without reflection, of — 
*' Bravo, Ferdinand 1" 

*« Thank you, Miranda," I replied, 
and looked even more than I could ex- 
press. 

We were once more alone, and stand- 
ing together near the chimney, when she 
started away, saying, ** Because the good 
old ladies are not here, don't let us for- 
get that this is Sunday ;" and going over 
to a table at the farther end of the room, 
she brought back a book, — ** Now I pro- 
mise to indulge you in your strange un- 
couth college attitude of two elbows on 
the table, and your face half buried in 
your hands, if you will indulge me by 
sitting down on the opposite sofa, that I 
may have a full view of the preacher, and 
reading me a sermon." 

" Willingly," I replied, " but not in 
the attitude you condemn in the shape 
of permission ; it may be suited to the 
perusal of a play, or a pamphlet, of a 
poem, or a newspaper, but not to that 
exterior respect due to the sacred Scrip- 

VOL. I. R 



o6^ DUDhEY, 

tures, or any writings of a religious ten- 
dency/' 

I sat down on the sofa to which 
Claiidina had pointed, whilst she took 
possession of that opposite. 

*' And now," she said, whilst I drew 
forward the sofa-table, and the lights, 
** read well, and distinctly, and harmo- 
niously, and just loud enough, and not 
too loud; for your preferment, perhaps, 
depends upon this lecture : at any rate, 
I shall be ready to do you justice, and 
wish that, instead of being a baronet of 
fortune, you were an humble curate, 
that I might present you with a living 
now in my gift — and Bloomfield Rectory 
in Wiltshire is not to be despised, I 
assure you. It was held upwards of 
thirty years by my father's worthy friend 
and tutor; and I now hold it until his 
only son is old enough to take orders. I 
think my little play-fellow, Henry Clon- 
more, will make a smart pietty parson 
enough." 

" Henry Clonmore ! what of Exeter 
College, Oxford?" 



DUDLEY. 363 

Thus a new point of interest arose be- 
tween Claudina and myself. I endea- 
voured to recollect your having men- 
tioned the name of Powis to me, but if 
you ever had, I had forgotten it ; and 
now I had no time for indulging in 
wonder, being reminded of the sermon. 

Although I had selected a discourse 
at random, it was appropriate to the 
Sacrament of that day, on which subject 
having dwelt for a few pages, it pro- 
ceeded to expatiate on the various other 
institutions am.ong Christians, those of 
Baptism, Confirmation, the Ritual of the 
Dead, Ordination, and lastly Matrimony. 

My voice was perfectly steady whilst 
reading what concerned the former, but 
certainly failed me at tlie latter. The 
discourse painted the happiness existing 
between a wedded pair, united by love, 
and sanctioned by religion ; it touched 
on the evils attending the state, but made 
the good greatly preponderate; described 
the sympathy of husband and wife, 
pointed out their duties, laid before them 
the awful responsibility of becoming 
parents; and finally represented them 

R 2 



364 DUDLEY. 

united for ever in the eternal mansions 
of bliss. Adding, and surely those 
words were ominous, " Immaterial which 
of the twain should be first recalled, 
to which it should be said, * Tarry yet 
upon the earth for a season,' — your time 
must come, and whether that be days or 
years, it is but a span compared to eter- 
nity — once united in heaven, the union 
is for ever." 

1 finished the sermon. Determined to 
conclude my task without the smallest 
interruption, I had not even looked up ; 
but I now shut the book with a violence 
I could no longer restrain, and giving a 
sudden loose to the swelling emotion of 
my breast, I quitted my place, and went 
to the opposite sofa, where sat Claudina, 
her head reclining on her hand : as she 
leant on the cushion nearest the fire, I 
took that which was next to me. 

" Claudina," I said, and pressed her 
hand in mine, ** Claudina, this morning 
we, for the last time perhaps, worshipped 
together at the altar of our Maker. We 
repeated the same words, word for word ; 
we put up the same supplications, we im- 



DUDLEY. OOIj 

plored the same Divine protection ; this 
clay we have, side by side at the holy 
table, partaken of the cup of salvation ; 
one blessing was pronounced on both, 
and with one sound and one heart we 
repeated before the minister of God, the 
devout ' Amen.' " 

I stopped, overcome at once by my 
own feelings, and the consciousness of 
what I liad yet to say. Claud ina wept, 
— she had long been weeping, though 
unknown to me. She now sobbed — I 
clasped her hand still closer in mine, but 
the pressure was not returned, neither 
was the hand withdrawn. 

*' Claudina,'* I continued, " is there 
not another sacred rite, in which, kneel- 
ing side by side at the holv table, before 
the minister of the Almighty, we might, 
not indeed repeat the same words, but 
others, by which our souls, now divided, 
would become one ? Speak, dearest 
Claudina, were you asked to give your- 
self to me, could you again repeat the 
devout ' Amen ?' 

** Still silent ! speak, only say one 
word. Should you determine against 
R a 



566 



DUDLEY. 



me, I am gone to-morrow, and through 
my life it shall be my study to avoid you. 
Should, on the contrary, your answer be 
favourable speak, Claudina,*' I con- 
tinued, in a low voice, yet with passion 
and vehemence, " this silence is not na- 
tural, it is not like yourself — put your 
answer in any shape you please ; but 
speak, let me hear the sound of your 



voice." 



Slowly she lifted up her head, and 
turned towards me, a brilliant sun-beam 
piercing through the rain ; — the smile, 
the bkjshing look, even the tears, were 
those of love, of overflowing happiness. — 
" Wait," she said, <' until Henry Clon- 
more is in orders, and in possession of 
Bloomfield Rectory : if, when kneeling 
at his feet, and in his church, he put the 
question of ' Wilt thou ?' how should I 
be able to refuse ?" 

She said no more — no more was ne- 
cessary — thousands of words after these 
were superfluous. She was mine, mine 
from that hour, wholly mine, everlast- 
ingly mine ! — Everlastingly ! and she is 
mine no longer ! — And after this, all 



DUDLEY. 367 

this that I have been detailing, you 
would talk to me of marrying again 1 — 
Can you restore the bloom to the peach, 
the dew-drop to the rose, the broken lily 
to the stalk, the faded rainbow to its 
tints? — she was all these to me — she was 
my earthly charm and hope — the flower 
of my life — the pride, the treasure of 
my existence. 

Had she died and left me a tribe of 
children, I should still have mourned her; 
or had she never become a mother, I 
still had loved her : it was for her own 
sake, and for that dlone, I doted upon 
her, and as it plainly appeared she loved 
me for myself, preferring me to the 
whole world. You, Clonmore, united 
us, you blessed us, and we were blessed 
— the following eight years of my life 
were uninterrupted sunshine — her piety 
to her Maker, her universal benevo- 
lence, her active charity, her unabated 
cheerfulness, and her affection to me, 
were unparalleled — love mellowed into 
firm and constant friendship. This is no 
anti-climax, Clonmore, as you, a fond 
husband, must be now aware 5 and so €x- 



368 DUDLEY. 

cellent a mother to her child, a mistress 
to her servants, an hostess to her guests ! 

— all, all was contirmation, that in mar- 
rying my Claudina, I but accepted the 
wife that Heaven itself offered me. 

And Heaven has thought proper to 
take back the blessed gift — its will be 
done. But had that Divine Will re- 
called us at one and the same moment, 
how many bitter hours I had been spared 

— what fruitless anguish, what extre- 
mity of despair. Like those who, having 
lost a limb in battle, assert they feel the 
sensations of pain, and cold, and heat, in 
that severed limb j I still seem to feel 
Claudina ever near me, to sympathise in 
her emotions, to hear her voice, to era- 
brace her form, to receive her caresses. — - 
That beauteous form is dust ; that angel 
voice is silent ; those emotions are dead. 

— She is dead — I love to repeat these 
w^ords ; I repeat them frequently through 
the day — Claudina is dead — • she is 
dead. 

Of that you have heard — no doubt 
you have, and long since, for I recollect 
she died on the ^8th of June. — Oh 



DUDLEY. 369 

God! this very day! — now four years 
since — this day, this very day ! — I feel 
weary, and I cannot see to write any 
longer — the sun dazzles me, and yet it 
is so dark I can no longer see to write. — 
What is all this ? — my head is bewildered 
— it aches, it throbs, it burns. 

The paper I write on is spotted with 
blood — it is not ink ! I tell you, Clon- 
more, it is bJood, .and you will find it 
such. — I laughed at it at first; yes, 
laughed aloud, and dipped my finger 
into it, and dabbled in the spots — yet 
still I write on — I soon shall reach them ; 
they are here, close, close at hand — 
every thing I touch, every thing I look 
at is blood — the sky, the earth, the 
sun itself is blood — but it is not the 
blood of Claudina ; her's, her's is dried 
up long since, parched — withered — 
withered like my heart which I now 
strike — and which beats with a violence 
that 



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 



Printed by Strahan and Spottiswoode. 
Printers- Street, London. 
