                   EARL OSRIC;

                       OR,

             The Legend of Rosamond

                    A ROMANCE

                  BY MRS. ISAACS.
Author of "Tales of To-Day,"--"Wanderings of Fancy," &e. &e. &e.

                IN THREE VOLUMES.
                    VOL. II.

                     London

PUBLISHED BY C. CHAPPLE, ROYAL SUBSURIPTION
CIRCULATING LIBRARY, 66, PALL-MALL, AND
SINPHIN AND MARSHALL, STATIONERS' COURT,
LUDGATE STREET.

                       1820

      
                   EARL OSRIC;

                  OR, THE

              LEGEND OF ROSAMOND
                    _____
          
                   CHAP. I.
                    _____ 

"Are not these woods
More free from peril than the envious court,
Here feel we but the penalty of Adam,
The season's difference; as, the icy fang And churlish chiding of the winte's wind;
Which when it bites and blows upon my body,
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile, and say
This is no flattery:

 And this our life, exempt from public haunt,
Finds tongues in trees,books in the running brooks. 
Sermons in stones, and good in evrything."   
                                       Shakspeare.

    ______________________________________

THE Lady Eleanora requested, that Al-
mina, accompanied by Bertha, might pass
a day at the Castle of Fitz Oswald, before 
their departure, and the Earl was too anx-
ious to secure the friendship of his fu-
ture lady for his ward, to influence her

VOL II.        B2               EARL OSRIC.

refusal. Bertha would fain have declined,
for she feared and disliked the Baroness,
but Almina strongly urged her to accom-
pany her, and Bertha was too goodna-
tured to refuse. All at Fitz Oswald Cas-
tle was conducted with the form and
punctuality of the feudal system. The
dinner was spread exactly at eleven, in
the noble hall, where at one table, the
Baron and his Lady presided, and at ano-
ther the vassals and retainers took their sta-
tion. Only the different members of the
family and the visitors were admitted to
the Baron's board, except that the lower
end was occupied by the well-fed con-
fessor, and confidential director of the
Baroness and her household. The relics
of the meal were distributed to the poor
at her gates, by the hands of the Baro-
ness and her daughter, after which the
Lady Eleanora and her young visitors
amused themselves as they pleased, till
the hour of supper, at six.

   Throughout the day, it was impossible                 EARL OSRIC.            3

for Almina to avoid noticing the particu-
lar observation, bestowed on her by the
Baroness, whose penetrating eye pursued
her every moment.  She asked numerous
questions, as to her former life, and future
prospects, and seemed to regard little the
diffidence of her auditor, or her unwilling-
ness to allude to the melancholy tale at-
tached to her birth, and Almina thought,
that while thus closely questioned, she
could at times perceive an indefinable ex-
pression in the countenance of the Baro-
ness, which too nearly resembled a sneer
to be agreeable.  Not all her respect for
Lady Eleanora, nor her wish to conciliate
the friends of the Earl, could induce her
to view the Baroness with any feeling but
dislike, and she was not a little relieved,
when the hour of departure arrived.  The 
day indeed seemed to have passed heavily
with all, and Bertha, who never concealed
her sentiments, had no sooner got clear
of the great gates than she exclaimed,
” well I am heartily glad that visit is over.4              EARL OSRIC.

The virgin defend me from such another,
and if the lady Eleanora should ever live
to resemble her honoured mother, why
Earl Osric need not fear that any noble
Knight will envy him his wife.” “ And
why Bertha," said Ahnina, “ have you
taken such a dislike to the Baroness ?"
 “ Truly Lady, you may well ask the ques-
tion, for it was rather to thee than me
that her haughty glances were directed.
Poor me she seemed to consider a little
interloping nobody, who ought to be say-
ing paternosters, and counting my beads
instead of intruding into her high and
mighty company. Well! if the Earl
had not a tolerable stock of pride already,
he would soon learn to borrow it from
his Lady mother in law.” “ Surely,” said
Almina, “ the Earl has not more pride,
than is becoming his high station and the
dignity of his character.” “ Indeed I
believe not,” she answered, “ he is an ex-
cellent Knight and has the good word of
every one. I wish I could say as much

              EARL OSRIC                 5
for those he will soon belong to."  Almina
sighed to herself, her opinion perhaps
was in unison with that of her thoughtless
companion, but it was imprudent to de-
clare it, and she changed the subject of
discourse.  In two days they were to bid
adieu to De Mowbray.

   "Let us," said she, "say farewell, in
our way home to Sir Edwin, the time will
be fully occupied till our departure, and
he may feel it unfriendly if we omit to 
visit him previously."  "True," said
Bertha, "and by the time we reach the
eot the moon will be arisen and we shall
probably find him wandering by her pale
light."  And so they did, but not alone-
Dame Maddelina had seized the opportu-
nity of their absence to visit her brother,
and to remonstrate with him on his reso-
lution to lead a life of seclusion, but her
arguments were unavailing, though she
had hoped that the beauty of Almina
would have wrought a change, and in-
duced him at least to take up arms.
                      B 36 EARL OSRIC.

   With Edwin, however, love had a con-
trary effect, he deemed his passion hope-
less, for its object was devoted to the
world, and he had now only another sub-
ject for meditation in his solitude.

   "I rejoice ye are come Damsels," said
the Dame. "Once more I am urging to 
this obdurate boy, the necessity of acti-
vity, and would have you aid to persuade
him, that a life of solitude, in man, is a
life of idleness, and consequently an of-
fence to the being who created us to be
useful to the world.-Besides which, I am
assured that if he would make the experi-
ment, he would find social, for preferable
to solitary comfort."

   "While I find happiness here," said
Edwin, "why should I seek father?-
There," he added, pointing to some books
and his lute, for they had now entered the
cottage, "there is my store, and here the
long winter evenings are past regardless
of the storm that roars without, or the
cold blast that blows unheeded by."-He           EARL OSRIC.             7

paused, and meeting the eye of Almina,
a smile animated his expressive features,
and he went on, "more than once have
I been fated to witness the horrors of
a shipwreck. From my little casement
have I noticed the dreadful scene, when
the furious billows, beating against the
defenceless vessel, have at length swal-
lowed it up, and the merciless waves were
the tombs of the hapless inmates. Then,
how often have I, with conscious pride,
turned to the cheerful blaze in my rus-
tic chimney and exclaimed--"these are
the boasted advantages of living in the
world, and thus are its wretched inhabi-
tants exposed to the fury of the waring
elements. From such evils, at least I am
exempt, and from a fate so dreadful--oh,
sweet asylum, peaceful retreat of my
youth, thy humble walls secure me!--
have the stuccoed roofs, the sumptuous
palaces of the great, the same advantage?
No, for they must not detain their high
bred owners, when the numerous avoca-

            B  48                EARL OSRIC.

tions of their rank call for their pre-
sence.  In these woods and wilds I am a 
monarch--sovereign over the rocks, I
ramble amidst their intricacies, contem-
plate the ocean or the misty mountain
from afar, and return with an appetite to
my frugal fare.  'Tis true no company
greets my return, for the poor simple be-
ing, who attends me, has only truth and
nature to recommend her.  The voice of
flattery never reaches my ear, for books
are my sole companions, and I fly to their
society, when fatigue or bad weather bids
me seek the comforts of home.“

  ” And such, my dear Edwin,“ said 
Dame Maddelina, smiling, ”is the so-
phistry with which you convince your
better reason, that you are in the right.--
Alas, my brother, one day wilt thou be
convinced of its fallacy and assuredly con-
viction will e're long be given thee, that
the ills, incidental to mortality, are so
equally dispensed, that the monarch on his
throne, and the peasant in his hut, have             EARL OSRIC.      9

each, at stated times their sweets to ren-
der the cup of life palatable, while bitters
are sometimes infused into the draught,
lest both find its relish too high--nor
do I believe that you, Edwin, are formed
of materials so different from the rest of
your species, as to expect that you are
to be exempt from the misfortunes of life,
because you have taken up your abode in
a cottage, instead of a castle. To the 
single misery of shipwrecks, doubtless 
you are not exposed, but has your boasted
philosophy strength to repel the arrows
of private calamity?--or will your con-
tempt for the world enable you to ward
off the attacks of sickness?--No, believe
me, my brother, as your system is not
founded in reason, the whole fabric will
soon totter and be finally overthrown.--
Of this I am fully convinced, that shortly
will you be aware of the absurdity of
your present opinions, and soon will you
act more worthily of the noble house from.
whence you sprung."
                   B 5
10                EARL OSRIC.

With this speech, the Dame arose to
return.  Edwin attended them a short dis-
tance towards the Castle, and when he
took his leave, he besought his sister not
to think hardly of him.

  "Ere you quit De Mowbray," said he,
"I may find courage and opportunity to
open to you my heart.  And then if you
continue to reprove, pity may be mixed
with your reproaches."  So saying, he
disappeared.

  "Now my life on it," said Bertha,
"our good Dame will have to listen to
a love story, and you Lady," to Almina,
"will be the subject of it."

 "Poor Edwin!" said the Dame, "he
may smile to hear a professed recluse re-
commend the duties of active life, but
our situations widely differ.  He is only
entering the world.  I am preparing for
my retreat from it, and an unmarried
female may find as much occasion for use-
fullness in retirement, as in more public
scenes; but men, on whom chiefly theEARL OSRIC. 11
great business of this mighty globe de-
volves, should seek a wider sphere, and
devote themselves to its duties. Edwin
was educated by an old relation, who in-
herited the very spirit of romance from
his father, and has I fear transmitted it to
the nephew of his adoption. Instead of
teaching him the use of arms, and enuring
him to warlike and manly exercises, he
procured him free admission to the library
of a monastry, and taught him to pursue
studies which have led him to worship
solitude, and disdain all commerce with
the world."
Almina could make no comment on
the Dame's discourse, for she feared she
also had contributed to feed the romantic
fancy of Edwin, and she retired to her
chamber, to deplore such an effect of her
presence at DeMowbray, and to dream
of the haughty Baroness of Fitz Oswald.
Earl Osric had no interview with Al-
mina, except in the presence of the Dame
Maddelina, during the short interval that
B 6elapsed, between Lady de Mowbray's summons, and the time appointed for her departure. he informed her that a courier from St.Albert had brought him intelligence, that every enquiry had been made concerning the persons, who had assisted in carrying off Almina, but both they and their search had hitherto proved fruitless. The Lady Elfrida and her attendants had only been detained in the wood for a few hours, and then left alone to find their way back to the Castle. He had also received information of the near approaching Marriage of the Lady Elfrida, who would be presented at Court immediately afterwards, and thus Almina would probably soon again behold her friends and nearest relatives.

       The romantic Edwin appeared no more at De Mowbray's; the confidential communication he had promised his sister was reserved, till the danger of Almina's society was removed.                  EARL OSRIC.               13

 The good Dame parted from her young
charge with extreme reluctance. Mo-
nastic ansterity had not yet chilled the
warm current of social affection in her
breast, and on  Almina in particular, she
bestowed the most fervent benedeictions.-
For the gay light hearted Bertha, she
had few apprehensions, but for the sen-
sitive, the highly gifted Almina, she felt
all those anxious fears, which genius, 
talents, and susceptibility must raise,  in
a heart deeply sensible, that qualities so
valuable were sure to create enemies in a 
world, where envy and prejudice blended
the judgment, or tame mediocrity ridi-
culed the excellence it was incapable of
appreciating.

14           EARL OSRIC.

                      CHAP. II.
                      ---------

  "I do not know, 
What kind of my obedience I should tender
More than my all is nothing: nor my prayers
Are not word duly hallowed, nor my wishes
More worth than empty vanities; yet prayers and wishes
Are all I can return. Beseech your Lordship,
Vouchsafe to speak my thanks, and my obedience,
As from a blushing handmaid, to Highness,
Whose health and royalty I pray for."

                                 SHAKSPEARE.

                    ------------

 In a superb mansion, adjoining the 
palace, at Westminster, situated on the
banks of the Thames, Almina was receiv-
ed by Lady de Mowbray, with renewed
kindness.

  The lively Bertha was enchanted, and
enjoyed her emancipation from cloistral
seclusion, with all the glowing eagerness
of youth.  Almina, more rational, though
scarcely less delighted, with the novelty
of all she saw, was preparing for her pre-
sentation to their Majesties.  The titles of
her family was restored to her, and a a part
of the confiscated estates of her unhappy
father, were granted her by the King.
Earl Osric was busied in the arrangement
of her affairs, and the day for her intro-
duction at Court, was named.  The Eng-
lish Court was then graced by a numerous
assemblage of the gay, the witty, and the 
beautiful.  The Queen, famed for her con-
jugal virtues, and fondly attached to her con-
sort and her children, was perhaps, a cha-
racter better suited to appear to advantage
in the calm of private life, than in the ar-
duous situations to which her exalted sta-
tiion exposed her.  She was gentle and
amiable, but possessed strong sense and
undaunted fortitude.  Five lovely daugh-
ters graced her train, but the youngest, 
the interesting Mary, had already resign-
ed every wish for the splendour of royalty,16     EARL OSRIC.

and was preparing for a conventual life.
The abbey of Ambresbury, was destined
to receive the royal Nun, But her three
sisters, Joan, now on the eve of marriage
with the noble Duke of Gloucester, Ben-
trice, Margaret, and Elizabeth, were the
brightest ornaments of the court.

The fame Sir Orlando de Mowbray, had
acquired by his bravery, and known inti-
macy with Earl Osric, had early won his 
sovereign's favour, and Constance had been
long honoured by the particular friendship
and partiality of the Queen.  Admitted,
on terms of intimacy, to the Princesses,
Lady de Mowbray was seldom long absent
from Court.  The gaiety of her temper,
and uniform cheerfulness of her manners,
fitted her for public life, and only the pre-
parations for the near approaching marriage
of her early and beloved friend, Lady Elea-
nora Fitz Oswald, would have possessed
power sufficient to withdraw her from her
attendance on the Queen, even for a time.

Disengaging her mind from every sub-               EARL OSRIC.            17

ject, that could tend to weaken or depress
it, Almina devoted her hours to prepare
for her introduction to their Majesties.
Bertha was to be presented at the same
time, but she had not, like Almina, the
recollection of her parent's sufferings, to
abate her pleasure, and diminish the grati-
fication which the royal favour would con-
fer.  The splendour of the court dress,
the rich mantle and graceful veil, peculiar-
ly became the fine form of Almina, and
led by Lady de Mowbray, she entered 
the royal presence, with every eye of a
numerous and brilliant crowd fixed on her.
The singular story of her birth and con-
cealment, the well remembered tale of
Rosalinda, of Rosamond, and the Chief
Fitz Oscar, the renown of the latter in
war, and the disastrous termination of his
career, still fresh in the recollection of
many of the old Courtiers, all combined
with the striking form of the young heiress,
to excite general curiosity and interest.
The glowing beauty of Almina, never ap-18           EARL OSRIC.

peared more attractive, than at the mo-
ment when led forward by Lady de Mow-
bray, she bent her knee, gracefully, to the
royal Eleanora.

   "Rise, Lady Almina Fitz Oscar," said
the gracious Queen, "and receive our
promise of favour and protection, and be-
lieve we are happy to make an addition so
amiable to our Court."

   Almina arose, and her hitherto down-
cast eye, rested on the Sovereign himself,
who was intently gazing at her. At the
back of his chair, stood a form, whose
anxious looks were arrested by the same
object, for there superbly habited in con-
versation with the King, was stationed
Earl Osric himself. Never before had he
appeared to his ward in his character of
Courtier, but instantly, she recognized the
fine manly countenance of her guardian,
illuminated by hope and gratified affect-
tion, as he beheld her rise from the feet of
the Queen. And now advancing, he took
her hand from Lady de Mowbray, and
presented her to the King.
                  EAL OSRIC.                19

   The gratitude that swelled her bosom
to the King, for the gracious pardon of
her parent, and the restoration of his
daughter to fortune and rank, beamed
from her eyes, and glowed in her cheek,
but her tongue was powerless to express
the emotion of her soul, and to the Earl
had she delegated the task of giving words
to the grateful feelings of her mind, to-
wards her august Patrons.

   "In truth, Earl Osric, said the
Monarch, smiling, "I know not whether
to thank thee, for thus adding to the
number of our court beauties, lest so fair
an addition should captivate our train of
Knights, and enchain them to the inglo-
rious arts of peace, when their country
claims their services.  Rise Lady, though
scarcely dare I bid thee welcome to our
Court, lest thy beauty prove too danger-
ous an enemy for our Knights to cope 
withall."

   The eyes of Osric, fixed with ardent
gaze on Almina, seemed to await her an-20               EARL OSRIC.

swer, and with a modest firmness, while a
deep bluch mantled on her cheek, she said,
"The favour of your Majesty and our
gracious Queen, will suffice to gratify my
highest ambition. I seek no other con-
quest."

   "Fair maid, be assured it is thine,"
said the monarch, smiling, while the
gratified Osric delighted at the presence of
mind she had shewn, led her back to the
Queen, who placed her near herself, and
often addressed her in conversation, kindly
encouraging her to overcome her timidity
by the gracious condescension, so fasci-
nating to a young and inexperienced mind.
Various were the sensations created by the
public appearance of this young and lovely
candidate for courtly fame. Amongst the
Knights, admiration was the prevailing
sentiment, while wonder, envy, and curi-
osity, were raised among her own sex.

   Presented to the world under the auspi-
ces of the gay and lovely Lady de Mow-
bray, the professed favourite of the Queen,EARL OSRIC.       21

Almina was ushered into life with
every advantage, such an introduction
could give her.  Her fine form, animated
countenance, and naivetè of manners,
attracted general admiration, while the
originality of her character, and the supe-
rior knowledge she possessed, from an
education seldom given to females in those
days, rendered her an object of wonder
and curiosity.  Osric was charmed to see
with what indifference she listened to the
voice of adulation, and how little impres-
sion the seductions of a Court, made on a
mind he had formed with such care and 
attention.  To see Almina happy and re-
spected, to behold her merit the splendid
fortune and high rank which the favour of
the King had restored to her, was his first
wish.  "One ray of felicity," thought he,
"must then brighten my wayward fate:
since never can Osric be miserable, if hap-
piness sheds its blessings around Almina."
Absorbed by its attendance on the King,
and the duties of the Court, he now sel-22                  EARL OSRIC.

dom had an opportunity of seeing his
ward, except in a crowd of company.  At
the masques and tournaments, held by the
Court, she attended in the train of the
Queen.

  The amiable Eleanora, was proud of
exhibiting the beauty and elegance of her
courtly circle, and collecting the youthful
females most conspicuously lovely for her
immediate attendants in public.  Almina,
from her first introduction, was honoured
with her particular notice and favour, and
passed much of her time in the royal
apartments.  Her skill in music, not then
become a science, but rather an effort of
taste, highly recommended her to the
Princesses, who, charmed by her execu-
tion, entreated her to become their pre-
ceptress in that delightful study.  A
knowledge of the world, was all that had
been requisite to render Almina the high
character for which nature had designed
her.  This, in the regions of a Court, she
rapidly acquired, but her principles had                  EARL OSRIC.                 23

been immutably fixed, by that hand to
which she owed every thing, though, with
them she had imbibed the origin of a pen-
sive cast, which in her gayest moments,
never forsook her countenance: yet was
its cause deeply hidden from the eye of
every human being.  In the secret re-
cesses of her own strong well regulated
mind, she concealed this one source of
regret.  Her understanding, of masculine
strength, taught her the fallacy of weak
repining, or vain confidence, and she
mixed in society with a wish to partake its
delights, and a desire to enjoy its innocent
pleasures, though a decided taste for re-
tirement, would sometimes draw from her
bosom, an involuntary sigh, when she
recollected the present impossibility of en-
joying it.  The most famous Knights
sighed at her feet, and amongst the num-
ber, Sir Henry M'Donald was a conspicu-
ous candidate for her favour.  He had
exonerated himself from every suspicion,
which the mysterious seizure of Almina,24              EARL OSRIC.

at Castle St. Albert, had excited against
him, in the minds of those interested for
her, and Earl Osric had assured her, that
St. Albert was equally acquitted in his
opinion.  From whom then could the
outrage have originated?  Mystery still
cast an impervious veil over the transac-
tion, which it seemed vain to attempt to
penetrate.

  Having secured to his ward, the friend-
ship and protection of the Queen, Earl
Osric had disappeared from the circles of
the Court, and it was understood that he
would no more appear in them till he pre-
sented his bride.  Almina had soon an 
opportunity of beholding once more, her
dearest friends.  Lady Douglas was pre-
sented at Court on her marriage, and her
unfortunate mother, emerged from the re-
tirement to which she had so long de-
voted herself, on an event so interesting.
With revived pleasure, she again pressed
Almina to her heart, and solicited all she
could spare of her society, from her royal                EARL OSRIC.                 25

patrons.  Still was incurable woe, deeply
engraven on the countenance of Lady St.
Albert, and it was evident that grief, for
Adeliza's fate, lay heavy at her heart.  Of
Lady Douglas, Almina ventured an in-
quiry after her sister, and heard that a
still deeper melancholy had taken posses-
sion of her, but that she had ceased to de-
plore her destination, and now avoided, as
much as possible, seeing and conversing
with her family.  Lady Douglas was
charmed with the contrast her entrance
into the world presented, to the solitary
grandeur in which she had been reared,
or the chilly gloom of a monastic life;
scarcely a sigh for her hapless sister, was
suffered to damp the hilarity of her spirits.
Her favourite Isabel, was still her com-
panion.  Easy and indolent in her temper,
Elfrida scarcely thought for herself, and
her Lord and Isabel, seemed wholly to
influence her conduct.  Though she could
not, to her own mind, assign any efficient
reason, Sir Elthelred Douglas had never

   VOL. II.           C26               EARL OSRIC.

stood high in the estimation of Almina.
Gay, elegant, and courtly in his address,
he appeared to advantage, amidst the cir-
cles where she now met him, and to her
his attentions were respectful, though dis-
tant.  The general distance of his manner
towards her, she fancied, when she thought
at all of one who so little interested her,
proceeded from a recollection of their first
singular interview, a circumstance, which
since she knew more of the world, she had
learned to think, was a mere youthful
frolic and wondered Sir Ethelred had
never jestingly alluded to it.  In conver-
sation, one day with Lady Douglas, it so
forcibly occurred to her, with the possi-
bility that she might have been deceived
by a strong personal resemblance, that she
inquired, as if accidentally, whether Sir
Ethelred had a brother.  He happened,
at the moment, to have his face turned
in a different direction, but suddenly
starting round, with a look of singular
meaning, he said, ” A brother! no, I have                 EARL OSRIC          27

no brother; but why does Lady Almina
make such a question?" "Mere curiosi-
ty, Sir Knight," she answered," I fancied
a strong resemblance in you to a person I
once saw, and was tempted to make the 
inquiry."

"Had you ever been in Scotland, Lady,
said Sir Ethelred,"I should not wonder.
I have a foster brother near Douglas Cas-
tle, who is said so greatly to resemble me,
that he has been often greeted by my
name."

The mystery was now unravelled and
Almina concluded it was the presumptu-
ous foster brother,who had scaled the
walls of Osric Castle,for she knew tha
of Douglas was only a few miles distant
from it; but she was also aware, that in
relating the tale of her birth, Earl Osric
had forborne to declare where she had
been reared, and that she had ever been
there resident of his paternal scat, remained
known only to himself and Lady St.
Albert. The prejudices and suspicions
28                EARL OSRIC.

betrayed by the Baroness Fitz Oswald,
perhaps, was the motive for the conceal-
ment, together with his insurmountable
repugnance to enter further on the sub-
ject, than was absolutely necessary. Al-
mina, therefore, changed the conversa-
tion, and having no further doubt on the
subject, it was alluded to no more.

  Every day, Almina seemed to become
dearer to Lady St.Albert, who, with gra-
tified tenderness, beheld the admiration
and wonder she created in a world where
so few resembled her. The singular edu-
cation she had received, and her rare at-
tainments, rendered her a peculiar object
of animadversion. At a period, when the
literature of the age, was almost wholly
confined to the monks, it was extraordi-
nary to find in a female, any knowledge
beyond the use of the needle and the dis-
taff. Few Ladies of the Court could read,
and fewer still could transmit their senti-
ments by writing. Even a conventual
education, extended not to any mental ac-        EARL OSRIC.   29

quirements, except those enjoined by the
religious, and the boundless resources of a
more enlightened age, were unknown
even by name. Few, among the women
with whom she now associated, could ap-
preciate Almina. Learning, they had
been taught to believe, belonged exclu-
sively to Ecclesiastics, and that needle-
work, and domestic avocations, were all
to which females should aspire. Bigoted
and superstitious, they possessed none of
that liberality of mind which Earl Osric
had so carefully instilled into his ward,
and soon, except immediately in the royal
circle, she found herself alone in a multi-
tude. There indeed, she was more fortu-
nate.
    
    The amiable Princess Mary, had a
mind of great natural powers, and her
resolution to embrace a monastic life, was
the effect of bigotry and superstition on a
young and enthusiastic imagination, heat-
ed by the encouragement she had received
from the religious with whom she had
                 c330               EARL OSRIC.

chiefly associated, since her election had
been made; but soon her good un-
derstanding taught her the superiority of
Almina's character.  In her she beheld
strong, ardent, unaffected piety, untinc-
tured by enthusiasm, and she sought her
society and conversation, in preference to
those of any Lady of the Court.  In the
society of the Princess Mary, Almina
always felt more at ease, than in that of
her royal sisters.  In the destined Nun,
there was a holy meekness, a touching
softness of character more fascinating than
the most splendid talents.  Her heart
seemed already in heaven, and she gazed
on the pomps and vanities she was soon to
renounce for ever, without one regret,
save that of bidding adieu to her nearest
friends.  "Another," said she, one day in
conversation with Almina,  "is now added
to the number, and an additional tie to
the world is given me to burst.  Why
Almina, were you presented to me so late? 
or why was I destined to know only to
             EARL OSRIC.   31

lament you? Ah! doubtless you were
sent to prove, amidst other trials, the sin-
cerity of my vocation, since not even you,
dearly as I am tempted to love you, can
for an instant enchain my wishes, or draw
them from the alter of my God."
    
    Often did Almina contrive to avoid the
ceremonies of the Court, or hurry them
over, to fly to the oratory of the interest-
ing Mary, whose pious converse seemed to
sooth her mind to peace. There, discard-
ing the world and its forms from her me-
mory, she listened with delighted atten-
tion to the royal novice, or sometimes
would they quit the close apartment, on a
warm evening, after Almina had shared in
the devout exercises of the Princess, and
adjourn to a beautiful balcony, which
opened on the river. There, were the
mild glories of night contemplated with
the eye of piety and faith, which while it
viewed the
       "Unnumbered Worlds around,"
penctrated beyond them to their divine
                 c 432              EARL OSRIC.

author, and humbly adored his wisdom,
his goodness, and his power. The perfect
peace and serenity which reigned in the
mind of her illustrious friend, suggested to
the imagination of Almina, a half formed
wish that she had rather accompanied the
Dame Maddelina to her convent, than
ventured on the untried world, and there
were moments, when she would gladly
have resigned every brilliant prospect, that
might await her, to be permitted to attend
the Princess Mary, to Ambresbury, but
she was aware such a wish would be dis-
approved by Earl Osric; for Lady de
Mowbray, had more than once hinted to
her his hopes, of yet being enabled to ob-
tain from the proud Earl Rosamond, the
pardon of his hapless daughter, through the
medium of her child, from the Christian
wish of administering, to the last years
of that unhappy nobleman, the peace
his unforgiving temper, and domestic
calamities had long estranged.
          EARL OSRIC.                            33





           CHAP. III.

" This late dissention, grown between the Peers,
Burns under feigned ashes of forged love,
And will at least break out into a flame."
                                       SHAKESPEARE.

It is not that, that hath incensed the Duke:
It is, because no one should sway but he;
No one, but he, should be about the King;
And this engenders thunder in his breast,
And makes him roar these accusations forth."
                                       IBID.

            --------------------

     THE state of public affairs, at this period, was such as to create general interest. The subjugation of the Scotch, which had long employed the active and enterprising spirit of Edward, was yet incomplete. The claims of Bruce and Baliol to the throne of that kingdom, had still firm supporters in the hearts of their 
                     C 5 
34             EARL OSIC.

countrymen, and though Edward had pub-
licly received the homage and submission 
of the kingdom, he well knew that much 
yet remained to be done. Earl Osric, his
faithful friend and counsellor, had a diffi-
cult part to act. Though born and reared 
in England, he was of Scotch descent, and 
the sentiments of integrity and patriotism
which he derived from a long line of ances-
tors, and had been carefully inculcated by
a tender father, convinced him, that great 
as would be the acquisition of Scotland,
to the English Monarch, and vast as was
the temptation, a mind of less ambition
and impressed with a deeper sense of right,
would have hesitated in seizing what only
violence and iniquity could obtain. Ad-
mitted to the secret counsels of the King, 
and privy to all his proceedings, his mode-
ration and wisdom, often restrained the
ardour and impetuosity of Edward; but
ambition and an insatiate thurst for un-
limited power, were inherent in his na-
ture,and the temperate reasoning of Osric,
                 EARL OSRIC.           35

would often have roused him to anger, had
he not feared to alarm the firm integrity of
his lofty mind.  With great comissera-
tion and regret, Osric beheld the suffer-
ings of those, in whose cause his ances-
tors had bled.  He knew the Scotch to be 
a hardy, intrepid race, unaccustomed to sou-
thern refinement, and inured to hardships,
by their general mode of life.  He felt as-
sured that their brave and national spirit,
would not so easily bend beneath a foreign
yoke, and he had no doubt of the conflicts,
that must yet ensue, ere Edward would 
reduce them to submission.  Sir Ethelred
Douglas was among the number of those
Scottish Nobles, who allowed the claims
of Edward to the Crown of Scotland, he
was one of the first to vow allegiance to
him, and to secure his own safety and pro-
perty, would have sacrificed far more than
his country.  He believed, that eventually
the immense armies of Edward would suc-
ceed in overcoming the Scots, and he liked
the luxury of the English Court, better

than the simple hardy life of a Scottish
Chieftain. He knew that the family of 
Earl Osric, was originally Scotch, but he
himself, was the descendant of a collateral
branch, which, led by family connexions,
had settled in the South, and not till the
death of his father, a private gentleman of
small fortune, had the present Earl, by
the rapid deaths of several intermediate
claimants, come into possession, most un-
expectedly, of the family titles and estates.
Previous to this accession, with the name
of Osric, his only inheritance was his
sword, and with it he had earned immor-
tal renown, which was increased by the 
rank and fortune that awaited him on his
return to his native land, from Palestine.

   Sir Ethelred Douglas was also one of
the followers of Prince Edward, in his
journey to the Holy Land, and one of
those most ambitious for the favour of his
Sovereign. With eyes of the bitterest
envy, he marked the rapid progress of 
Osric, in acquiring the friendship of the             EARL OSRIC.             37

Prince. The deadliest hatred took pos-
session of his heart, towards his uncon-
scious rival, but with the duplicity that
marked his character, he concealed it
within the recesses of his own breast, till
time and opportunity allowed him to
gratify its baneful dictation. The true
character of Sir Etherlred Douglas, was
known to very few. The deep dissimula-
tion, which formed the principal trait in 
it, so effectually concealed his real dispo-
sition from the generality of the world,
that it required length of time, and inti-
mate connexion to become acquainted
with it. Crafty, designing, and unprin-
cipled, he lived for the gratification of his
passions. Devoted to luxury and licenti-
ousness, he spared no profusion in his
pleasures; but when misery solicited his
compassion, or poverty applied to his
humanity, he was selfish, obdurate, and
narrow minded. To compass any favourite
design, neither art, assiduity, or wealth,
were spared, and so subservient were his38          EARL OSRIC.

principles to his vices, that he hesitated at 
no guilt to accomplish his purposes,pro-
vided he was secure from detection. Such
was Sir Ethelred Douglas, early the insi-
dious concealed enemy of he noble Osric, 
and now waiting only for a long sought
opportunity to become his professed and 
daring foe. It seemed to his enterprising 
mind, to occur in the present critical situ-
ation of affairs. Subtle and keen, he was 
an accurate observer of the dispositions of 
those, in whose sentiments he was in-
terested, and the noble candour of Osric
soon allowed him to discover that he
favoured not the violent intentions of the
King, towards the Scottish Nation. Yet
so mild and temperate was the Earl, so 
firmly fixed was his character for loyalty
and integrity, that the crafty Sir Ethelred
was assured no open opposition would 
avail to effect his purpose. Art and in-
sinuation were at once most consonant to
his own disposition, and appeared most
likely to effect the ends in views, which
               EARL OSRIC.                  39

were no less than to blast the public cha-
racier, and private happiness of the man
he hated for his superiority, and envied
because he knew he possessed the most
enviable of all distinctions; "That peace
which the world cannot give."  To ac-
complish the first it was necessary to ruin
him in the estimation of Edward, and for
the latter, his deep duplicity, he thought,
had furnished him with the means.

   The absence of Osric from Court, on
his marriage, afforded him more frequent
opportunities of gaining the private ear
of his sovereign, and with all the sub-
tlety of his nature, he assailed the King,
where most vulnerable, yet was his flat-
tery so delicately and skilfully adminis-
tered, as neither to create suspicion or
awaken caution.  Believing Sir Ethelred,
from having served under him, attached
to his person, Edward lent a willing ear
to his insinuations, and won by his seem-
ing devotion to his cause, he intrusted him
with a secret mission, which the wily40           EARL OSRIC.

Knight was to execute in person, under
pretence of visiting his paternal mansion,
the Castle of Douglas, in Scotland. In
vain his Lady deplored leaving the Court
and its allurements so soon; in vain Lady
St. Alban remonstrated, and would have
persuaded him to leave her daughter.--
Reasons he chose not to explain, swayed
Sir Etherland, and he even insisted on his
Lady, relinquishing the masques, ball,
and tournaments, given in honour of her
marriage, and attending him to Scotland.

  To the surprise of Lady Douglas, Isa-
bel was passive, and even assited in
persuading her to obey her husband; but
Elfrida loved pleasure, and most unwil-
lingly complied, though promised every
indulgence Sir Ethelred's wealth could
procure for her.

  In the enforced absence of her daugh-
ter, Almina found herself called on to
devote as much of her time as possible to
Lady St. Albert, but her attendance at
Court could not be dispensed with, and              EARL OBRIC.              41

it was in an hour of retirement after a
splendid tournament, given on the recent
marriage of the Duke of Gloucester
to the Princess Jane, which was to be
succeeded by a masque in th evening,
that as she sat, indulging in a reverie,
that had for its subject the insufficiency
of wealth, of rank, of popularity, of all
the idols the world worships to ease the
throbbing heart, or confer permanent feli-
city, that Bertha de Wilton rushed into
the apartment, to announce to her, what
she had just heard, the long expected
marriage of Earl Osric to the Lady Elea-
nora Fitz Oswald.

  Long had the mind of Almina been
prepared for the communication, and
whatever was the effect, remained known
only to herself.  In the seclusion of her
oratory she continued alone, till compelled
to emerge from it, to attend the evening's
entertainment with Bertha, who, in the
absence of Lady de Mowbray, now gone
to witness the nuptials of her friend, was
42             EARL OSRIC.

almost constantly the companion of Al-
mina, who, that had on that eventful
night, beheld the Lady Almina Fitz Os-
car, sumptuously habited, glide with
sylph-like step, through the splendid
apartments of the Palace, courted, ad-
mired, and followed by all who beheld her,
would have conceived she harboured,
one bosom care.  Never loquatious, but
always cheerful, elegant, and delightful,
when she wished to give pleasure; she
appeared on this evening more than usu-
ally brilliant.  Perhaps an accurate obser-
ver might have traced the rich glow on
her cheek, the quick drawn breath, and
the dazzling effulgence that beamed from
her eyes, to other causes than the mirth
and gaiety around her, but fortunately no
such observers were at hand, and Almina,
with all her talents, her beauty, and her
genius, was as usual alone in a crowd.

  The exertion of perhaps unnatural vi-
vacity, and forced resolution, could not
wholly subdue those internal feelings,               EARL OSRIC.            43

which led her to wish ardently for the
hour of retirement.  It was in a moment
of overwhelming fatigue and exhaustion,
that gliding from the company, and the
masquers, she sought an apartment less
crowded, and in the recess of a lage Go-
thic window, she rested her wearied frame,
excluding by her hand, which pressed her
burning forehead; the rays of the lamps,
that hung on a row of pillars which ran
along one side of the hall.  Suddenly a 
figure appeared, slowly emerging from
behind one of the remote columns, but
Almina no longer beheld surrounding ob-
jects, and till it stood immediately before
her, she discerned it not.  Vexed to have
been observed, in thus seeking retire-
ment, she rallied her spirits to leave the
retreat she had chosen, without casting a
second glance on the intruder, but she
was not suffered to pass.

  A voice, deep, low and evidently fear-
ful of being overheard, bade her stop.--
She darted a look at the speaker, but the

 44          KARL OSRIC.

 outline of the figure only was visible, all
 was mystery. An indefinable alarm
 seized her, and again she was proceeding,
 but the stranger sprang forward to inter
 cept her, and the voice again reached
 her-"Almina," it said, "beware of
 treachery."
    "By whom am I thus mysteriously 
 warned ?" said the trembling Almina.
    "No matter," said the voice, "suffice
 it, that much of evil lurks in thy destiny,
 which can only be averted by a timely warning."
    "Be candid in that warning," said Al-
 mina-"tell me where this evil lurks,
 from whom it may proceed, and by
 whom it is foretold."
    "It lurks where thou cannot never
 discover it, weak girl-It proceeds from
 a source polluted by crimes-It is foretold
 by one, whose last warning was disre-
 garded.-Beware of the voice of flattery,
 the words of friendship.-Beware of the
 treachery of thine own heart, but more   than all, beware of confiding thine inmost thoughts, to ought that wears the form of man."
  
  A sound of approach was heard, the figure rushed past her, but not before the hood and veil which enveloped the head, had been momentarily displaced, and discovered to the wondering eyes of Al-mina, the almost forgotten countenance and spectral form of the recluse Nun.-Scarcely knowing what she did, she passed on.  The Nun had disappeared, and she was met by Bertha.

  "Dear Lady," said the affectionate girl, "thou art, I am sure miserably fatigued.  Thy looks are pallid and thy steps trembling,.  Lean on me, and let us seek a seat."

  "Let us rather return home, my kind. Bertha," said Almina.

  "Yet, why should I take thee from this scene of gaiety."

  "I do not wish to remain here," said Bertha, sighing.46          EARL OSRIC.

  "And why dost thou sigh Bertha?"
said Almina, "art thou too, tired of crowds."

  "Oh, no Lady," said she, innocently,
"I am not tired, but in truth, I am not
very happy to night."

  "Indeed!" aid her friend recollecting
as she spoke, that in the tournament of
the morning, the colours of Bertha had
been displayed on the shield of a young
Knight, whose valour and grace had been
generally acknowledged, and she men-
tioned the circumstance, adding with a
forced smile, "Thou hast not already
quarrelled with they Knight, surely
Bertha?"

  "No, Lady," she answered, but I wish
to do so, for this evening he has singles
out the Lady Janet de Monthermer, and
not once has he noticed me, and in truth,
he may in future, wear other colours.
From hence forward he shall none of
mine."

  "He is, indeed, a recreant," said Al-
mina, though as she surveyed the beauti-
ful form of the Lady Janet, who was
gaily dancing with the Knight in ques-
tion, she was forced to acknowledge the
strength of the temptation. But the
Lady Janet, was the daughter of that
Lady de Monthermer, who had seduced
Sir Egbert from his allegiance to the good
Dame Maddelina, and Almina had such a 
dislike to the family, that she had avoided
all connexion with them. The Lady 
Janet, with the beauty, seemed to inherit
the insidious coquetry of her mother, and
poor Bertha's recreant Knight had been
led away by her studied attractions.

   "We will go home, Lady,"said Ber-
tha," and that false Knight shall no more
be regretted, and if I were as learned as
you are Lady, I would write and tell him
so, but, alas! I can only shew him the
contempt I feel by my looks, and they
shall speak my sentiments as plainly as
possible."

"Rather, my dear Bertha," said Al-
mina, "let them support your own conse-48              EARL OSRIC.

quence, and the dignity of the female
character, by shewing that it is not in the
power of weakness or caprice, to affect
your heart. Let the Lady Janet enjoy
her triumph. Rely on it, no gratification
can be permanent, if purchased by
treachery or duplicity."

      Bertha was grateful for the admonition,
and promised to observe it. Her inno-
cent and affectionate disposition, had
greatly endeared her to Almina. Though
she possessed neither the beauty or talents
of the latter, her person was superior to
many of her sex, and her understanding
was naturally good, but it was wholly un-
cultivated. She had been reared in all
the ignorance of the age, in which she 
lived, and looked on Almina as a prodigy
of wisdom, and learning, because she
could read the sentiments of others, and
transmit her own by another vehicle than
speech. The recreant Knight of Bertha,
was no other than Sir Henry M'Donald,
who, in despair at the coldness of Almina,             EARL OSRIC.          49

and mortified by the repugnance with
which she had listened to his address, had
directed his attention to Bertha, who be-
trayed no disapprobation of his suit, and
thus had her condescension been requited.
Almina retired on this evening to her
chamber, with many subjects for reflec-
tion, but with an effort worthy her cha-
racter she resolved to dismiss from her
memory every source of disquiet, and in-
voking the blessing of heaven on her early
protector, she sunk to repose.












  VOL. II.              D  50          EARL OSRIC.






                CHAP.IV.
                 
                "and,oft,my jealonsy
shapes faults that are nut,-I entreat you then,
from one that to imperfectly eonjects,
you'd take no notice:nor build yourself a tronble
out of his seattering and unsure observance:
It were not for your quiet,nor your good.
   .  .   .  .  . 
                               orucllo.

THE sacrifice of earl osric was corn-
plete.the triumpb over his own beart
was accomplished,and in the repository of
his own bosom was buried deeply the
secret of his soul.In his outward deport-
ment,calm,dignified,and cheerful,it was
impossible to trace any appearance of dis-
quietude.his marriage had been con-
cluded under auspices the most apparently
       EARL OSRIC.    51

happy, and after a few days residence at
Fitz Oswald, they commenced their jour-
ney to Scotland. They were escorted a
considerable part of their way by a train of
the Baron's vassals, who was anxious to do
honour to the noble son in-law he had
chosen: and he himself, with his lady,
and several relations of their respective 
families, accompanied them, The mag-
nificence with which they travelled, and
the grandeur and liberality shown on the
way, necessarily rendered their procedure
slow; but the hilarity produced by the
joyful occasion, and the happiness and
vivacity of the fair bribe, influenced the
whole party, and shortened the distance to 
all.

   Far different were the sensations, with
which the Earl and his youthful Countess
entered Osric Castle. The secret soul of
the former was filled with contending
emotions, but the high sense of honour
which had led him scrupulously to fulfil
his engagements, and the inward satisfac-
                 D 252             EARL OSRIC.

tion which the performance of his duty
diffused through his mind, combined to
shed over his countenance and manner, an
appearance of tranquility, which might
have deceived a more accurate observer
than the fair and amiable creature to whom
his vows were paid. Wholly unsuspicious
that his heart was not devoted to her
alone, the gay and happy Eleanora seemed
only to look forward to a long series of
felicitous years; and she engaged in her
domestic duties, accompanied her Lord to
the chase, or pursued with her women the
amusements of the needle, with equal
cheerfulness and assiduity. Charmed by
her sweetness of disposition, and every
hour more convinced of her worth, the 
Earl forced himself to dwell on her nu-
merous attractions, and redoubled his
attentions to her, as his mind became
daily more alive to her winning and amia-
ble qualities.

   The arrival of Sir Ethelred Douglas and
Elfrida at the Scottish estate of the former,            EARL OSRIC.        53

situated only a few miles from Osric Castle, was an event highly agreeable to
the Countess of Osric, because she conceived it would be so to her Lord. She
knew that the St. Albert family were the friends of his youth, and though
hitherto unknown to her, she was desirous of ensuring their esteem. Sir
Ethelred, she only knew, as a knight, whose valour and courtesy were well spoken
of : and, when, with unfeigned joy, she hospitably hailed their arrival in
Scotland, and solicited the friendship, Elfrida, as well as Sir Ethelred, seemed
well disposed to grant, how little did she suspect that at that eventful moment,
the foundation of future suffering was laid, or that beneath the fine person and
courtly graces of the Knight, was hidden a heart, capable of the blackest
treachery, panting to undermine the goodly fabric of happiness, which she, in
the innocence of her own soft bosom, had erected, and with fiend-like malignity,
seeking an opportunity to destroy the peace he en-

                    D 3
54                 EARL OSRIC.

vied.  In possession of a secret, which he
had obtained a knowledge of by means he
dared not disclose, he waited only for the
absence of Osric to commence the plans
he meditated.

It has been before said, that the young
Countess had never been made acquainted
with Almina's residence at Osric Castle.
The Earl's vow to Fitz-Oscar, to conceal
her from the whole world, till she reached
years of maturity, and to preserve the same
secresy as to her history, in order to keep
both from the knowledge of the Rosamond
family, had been kept inviolably; but
since the discovery of her origin, it had
been his intention to relate every particu-
lar respecting her to his Lady.  His dislike
to entering on the subject in the presence
of the Baroness, had induced him to defer
the explanation till after his marriage, and
since their arrival at the Castle, no suitable
opportunity had occurred.  Perhaps the
secret repugnance he felt to the task, led
to the self-delusion of believing it a matter                   EARL OSRIC.              55

of little moment; since the removal of old 
Maud, and the new establishment of ser-
vants, rendered it very improbable that
such a circumstance should ever reach his
Lady's ear from any person except himself.
The Castle had undergone considerable
alterations and improvements, for the re-
ception of his Lady, but it still wore a
gloomy appearance, and the ancient and
decayed hangings presented only the most
frightufl figures. To decorate some of the
apartments with tapestry of her own work,
was now become a favourite amusement
with the Countess, and she was indefatiga-
ble with her maidens in accomplishing her
task.

  The Lady Douglas whose indolence of
temper ill accorded with the activity and
domestic qualities of Eleanora, laughed at
her persevering industry, and declared
that the goblins and monsters pourtrayed
on the walls of Douglas Castle, should
frighten all her household away, ere she
would labour to replace them by more
   
                   D456 EARL OSRIC.
pleasing objects.Sir,Ethelred,who was present,reproved her for the observation,complimenting Lady Oaric on the taste she displayed ,by thus ornamenting the seat of her Lord's ancestors.
              "Though my Lord of Osric has hither-to resided here so little,"said he,he is doubtless attached to the ancient Castle of his ancestors,and must,therefore,be gratified at once by the taste displayed and the wish to please him."
   "In truth,"answered the Countess,"I do not think my Lord has much partiality for this place.Scotland has no native claime on his affections,and I believe he rather comes hither as a duty incumbent on him to perform,than to gratify his own inclination.He has never resided here,nor I am persuaded,does he wish to do it,but in this actions he is so accustomed to consider what is right ,rather than what is agreeable to himself ,that in him the performance of a duty can scarcely be termed                  EARL OSRIC.                 57

a sacrifice."  While she pronounced this
just tribute to the known worth of her
consort, the mild eyes of Eleanora beamed
with conscious triumph and gratified love;
but how soon was their brilliancy dimmed
by the unexpected answer of Sir Ethelred.

  "Most true, lady," said he, "I well re-
member now, that doubtless Earl Osric's
frequent journies hither heretofore, were
on account of his ward, rather than from
attachment to the place."

  "His ward!" she cried, "who mean
you, Sir Knight?"

"Pardon me if I err," he returned,
"but I allude to the young person now
known as Lady Almina Fitz Oscar; who
was reared from infancy by the Earl in this
castle."

  "You surely mistake," she said, and
turning to Lady Douglas, "I have always
understood that Almina was under the
care of your father, Lady, till accident
brought her to De Mowbray."

"Oh no," said Lady Douglas, "she

                     D 5           Earl Osric.      58

resided a very short time with us, but where she came from heaven knows. My Lord of Osric brought her from some dismal retirement or other, where she had been educated.  I supposed it to be some remote convent, but, as I never heard, I cannot decide."

"It is strange, said the Countess, musing-----

"It is probably some mistake of mine," said Sir Ethelred, with an air of chagrin, as if conscious, too late, of having committed an error, "but as part of the western wing yonder, I understood was dedicated to her use, and the Earl and his own confessor said to be her preceptors, I fancied the report was authentic, but doubtless, I have been misinformed.  The Lord Osric would not conceal a circumstance, which must reflect honour on his friendship and benevolence, from your knowledge, Lady, but from motives of import, and it is improbable any such should exist.  If therefore, I have been indiscreet, or incorrect,              EARL OSRIC.       59

pardon me, I entreat you, and banish my
indiscretion from your memory."

   "There can be no apology requisite,
Sir Knight," said Eleanora, who had now
collected her thoughts and recovered her
momentary discomposure, "your observa-
tions were natural. The actions of my
Lord can never need an excuse in my 
eyes, nor shall I seek to investigate any
secret he may choose to withhold; assured
as I am, that wisdom and integrity ever
guide his conduct."

   But though the natural good sense of
Eleanora, directed her reply, the artful
insinuations of Sir Ethelred were not
wholly ineffectual, and soon after her visi-
tors had left her, she directed her steps
to a long gallery, from the high arched
casement of which, she could discern the
western wing of the Castle: it was more
detached from the main body of the edifice
than any other part, and when she rejoin-
ed her damsels in the tapestry room, she
inquired, as if by accident, "why the

              D 660             EARL OSRIC.

western apartments were generally kept
shut up?

  The maiden only knew that their Lord
had not included those rooms in his gene-
ral order for the Castle, to be prepared for
his family.

  "It is strange," said the Countess, "for
methinks they must command a good view
from the window."

  "No - the view was excluded by the
rocky ascent on that side, and they looked
only into a high walled square garden,"
was the answer.

 "I shall examine them myself," said
she, "I like not to have any of the apart-
ments rendered uninhabitable by disuse."

  The baroness, her mother, had been
present during the conversation of Sir
Ethelred, but had forborn to take any
part in it, though all her own suspicions
being revived by the information he
had imparted, she resolved on investi-
gating the whole affair.  She was, there-
fore glad to hear her daughter's declara-              ERAL OSRIC                 61

tion; and, assuming an air of indifference,
said, she would accompany her to the wes-
tern apartments. Earl Osric was absent,
and the opportunity seemed favourable.
The keys were immediately procured, and
the Baroness attended her daughter to the
western wing.

   Nothing in the apartments themselves,
appeared either to confirm or confute their
suspicions. The furniture was old and
plain, but the rooms wore a more habita-
ble appearance than the generality in the
Castle.

   The walled garden which had been the 
boundary of Almina's infantine excursions,
appeared from the window; but beyond,
the eye could not penetrate; and the place
seemed peculiarly adapted for the purpose
of seclusion. An ancient cabinet of curious
workmanship, stood in one corner of the
chamber, and the Baroness with curiosity,
drew forth many concealed drawers, but
they were all empty except one, in the
corner of which, a torn piece of vellum
62             EARL OSRIC.

attracted their eyes.  It had written cha-
racters on it, but as the Baroness was un-
equal to decypher them, she delivered it
to Eleanora, and the latter knew not
whether to rejoice in, or regret the ambi-
tion to excel in every art, which Earl Osric
approved, that had rendered her emulous
to obtain the knowledge, which enabled
her to read the following lines:

-

  I wish I was a bird to fly,
And freely range the air,
I'd soar to yonder azure sky,
As gay, as free from care,
As thou sweet Bird.

  These walls should not restrain my flight,
I'd view the world around,
And gratify my longing sight,
And listen to each sound,
Like thee sweet Bird.

  Yet, would I not forsake the nest,
Within my peaceful home,
At night I'd seek my quiet rest,
Beneath the Castle's dome,
Like thee dear Bird.            EARL OSRIC.                63

And when the sweet return of morn,
  Proclaim'd approaching day,
I'd spread my wings at early dawn,
  And gaily fly away.
                 Like thee sweet Bird.

One favoured spot, yet undesired,
  I'd gladly hover o'er;
Thou,pretty bird should'st be my guide,
  To some far distant shore;
                  Lead then sweet Bird.

To that far clime unseen, unknown,
  I'd bend my lonely way;
And hovering o'er one form alone,
  My devious flight would Stay;
                  Stop then sweet Bird.

With sweetest songs I'd greet his ear,
  And hover o'er his rest,
The hour of care I'd gladly cheer,
  And feel my heart most blest,
      Though but a Bird.

A grateful mind should guide my strain,
  To sweetest notes of peace.
To lull each woe, to banish pain,
  And bid all sorrow cease.
      Like thine sweet Birds
64           EARL OSRIC.

   Small characters, which though almost
illegible, evidently formed the word
Almina, were discernible at the edge of
the vellum.

   "This is confirmation doubtless of
what Sir Ethelred this morning imparted,"
"said the Baroness, and ill methinks it
became the Earl to conceal the circum-
stance."

   "He probably thought it too trivial to
mention," said the Countess, "Of these
lines he is doubtless ignorant, and an un-
prejudiced mind, can only see in them an
expression of artless gratitude."

   "An impartial judge," said her mother,
"might perhaps, put another construction
on them. This cherished ward was then
instructed in those rare arts which he re-
commended you to study, and the time
of Osric was devoted during his visits here,
to assisting her progress. In truth, a
seemly occupation for a noble Knight."

   The harsh observations of her mo-
ther, sunk deeply on the heart of Elea-

                 EARL OSRIC.                   65


   nora, for bred in the lap of indulgence,
   she had never yet felt the sting of dis-
   appointment, or the pang of mortified
   pride, and she retired to her apartment
   to consider on her future deportment
   towards her Lord. Her sense of her
   affection for him, alike dictated a decision,
   unbiased by the prejudices of the BaroBess,
   and through on his return from the chase,
   she met him not with her wonted vivacity,
   no traces of depression, were visible on
   her countenance. Calm, but unusually
   grave, the same attention to her Lord, and
   his guests, (for he had brought some of
   his companions in the day's sport, to
   share his hospitable board,) marked her
   conduct. The evident want of her accus-
   tomed cheerfulness, soon attracted the
   Earl's observations, and when she quitted
   the hall, he followed her to her apartment,
   and tenderly inquiring the cause of her
   gravity, added-" fear me much, our
   Highland modes, and the more uncouth
   manners of our Scottish guests, than those66 EARL OSRIC.

of our Southern Lords, accord not with
the gentle spirits of my Eleanora, else
why this unwonted seriousness?"
Eleanora was by nature ingenuous, she
could not endure the idea of distrusting
Osric, he saw the ready tear start into
her eye, and his curiosity increased. She
could not resist his entreaties, and with
candour related all that had occurred.
Osric was taken by surprise, he had never
conceived it possible, that the circum-
stances related to Almina's residence
there, should reach her from any mouth;
but his own, for to no other person did he
believe it to be known, and his counte-
nance, for a moment, betrayed an agita-
tion which Eleanora could not fail perceiv-
ing. Her heart sunk, and for an instant,
she fancied her worst suspicions confirm-
ed, but the fear was momentary. The
Earl's presence of mind, was immediately
restored, he treated it as a trifle, not
worth discussion, but as it tended to cause
her uneasiness, and immediately related            EARL OSRIC.       67

every particular which had before
omitted in Almina's story. His narrative
satisfied Eleanora, as to the truth of the
tale, but her faith in the affection of
Osric was shaken, though her confidence
in his integrity, was firm as ever ; and
she secretly lamented that the information
of Sir Ethelred Douglas had ever reached
her ear. To her mother, whose suspi-
cions she was anxious to refute, she eager-
ly related the exculpation of the Earl,
but the Baroness was not so easily con-
vinced, she had conceived an implacable
hatred for Almina, and she narrowly
watched the conduct of the Earl. She
had more than one conversation with Sir
Elthelred, in which she artfully led to the
subject, and, obtained from him, all she
thought he knew, but the Knight had sud-
denly quitted Scotland, affirming that un-
expected business called him away, leav-
ing his Lady at Douglas Castle.68 EARL OSRIC.

CHAP. V.

"You are too absolute;
Tho' therein you can never be too noble,
But when extremities speak. I have heard you say,
Honour and Policy, like unsever'd friends,
I'th' war do grow together: Grant that, and tell me
In Peace, what each of them by th' other lose,
That they combine not there."
CORIOLANUS

"I have assail'd her with music, but she
Vouchsafes no notice."
CYMBELINE

FROM
EARL OSRIC
TO THE
LADY ALMINA FITZ OSCAR.

LONG is it since the hand of Osric
greeted his ward, for such, though eman-
cipated from all restraint, save such as her                    EARL OSRIC.              69

own prudence imposes, he must ever con-
sider her.  The welfare of Almina, must
still be one of those subjects most inti-
mately connected with his own happiness,
and ever shall the child of his friend share
the first affections of his heart.

The recent change in my situation has
been made known to thee, dearest Almina,
by the Lady de Mowbray and I am com-
missioned by the Countess of Osric to
assure thee of her regards.  Hereafter she
may be better known to thee, and in gen-
tleness and virtue thou wilt find the coun-
ter-part of thine own mind.  I am gratified
by all that reaches my ear, relating to the
heart and the manners I have been so anx-
ious to model, it has been left for thee,
Lady, to show the world, that a female
may possess knowledge without vanity,
and learning unattended by conceit.  The
example will, I trust, lead others to rescue
the minds of the future race of women
from the deplorable ignorance of the pre-
sent age.  I rejoice fervently in the dis-70             EARL OSRIC.

cretion, the gentleness, the proofs of sound understanding, which have endeared thee to the Royal Eleanora, that model of female excellence.  Preserve her favour, my sweet friend, by every means which truth and virtue permits, and believe that no human heart is so deeply interested in thy welfare, and thy prosperity, as that of thine early friend,

                             EDGAR, EARL OSRIC.

   A short congratulatory epistle was all the answer of Almina. Sir Ethelred had brought her good tidings of the health of the Earl and his Lady.  Elfrida, remained in Scotland, and the Knight was more gay and courteous than ever. His favour and influence with the Sovereign, seemed to increase daily, and it was whispered that he had superceded Earl Osric, whose journey to Scotland seemed for some reason or other, not to have accorded with the wishes of the King.  Having heard these rumours, Almina mentioned                      EARL OSRIC.     71

them to Lady de Mowbray, who, with a
countenance of ill concealed uneasiness,
answered, that one she believed, indeed, good
policy would have led the Earl rather to 
celebrate his nuptials in London, than to
have journied at his period to his Scottish
estate. "The court," said she, "will
probably remove shortly to York, the
King mediates the tour of the Northern
Counties, and in that case I hope we
shall persuade Osric to meet him in that
city." After a pause of a few minutes, she
added, "Alumina, I have studied your
character-well, and I think I may venture
to entrust you with my sentiments on
this subject. It is a present and eventful
crisis, God grant it prove not so to Osric,
but I like not the increasing favour of Sir
Ethelred Douglas, with the King. Per-
haps, my fears overrun the truth, but I
have lived in a court long, and have too
much cause to distrust appearances. The
open unsuspection nature of Osric, ex-
poses him to hidden dangers, his opinion
72              EARL OSRIC.

is decidedly in opposition to the late pro-
ceedings of the King in the affairs of Scot-
land, and I fear he has made it too mani-
fest.  An intimation I have just received
that Sir Orlando is appointed on an em-
bassy to aforeign Court,has determined me
to speak to you, of my apprehensions. Sir
Orlando has been accustomed to advise
with Osric on affairs of import, and has
never scrupled to counsel him to repress 
that noble candour, which distinguishes
him, when the policy, so necessary in the 
world, imperiously compels it.  I lament
the inevitable separation that must now
take place, and Ah! my dear Almina, be
guarded, I conjure you, and watch over
the interests of your benefactor. Rely on
it,Sir Ethelred Douglas,is not the charac-
ter he would seem, there is deep dissimu-
lation concealed beneath the insinuating
smiles, that grace his handsome counte-
nanace, and much I fear, the exterior
polish of his manners, conceals a treacher-
ous and an envious heart.  When I am            EARL OSRIC.            73

far away, my Almina, note his conduct.
You will be much with the Queen, and
you will not be a disinterested observer,
for is not Earl Osric's cause your own?
The words of the Lady de Mowbray,
awakened alarms in the mind of Almina,
of which she had never harboured the 
most remote idea, she had believed the 
King's favour for Osric, founded on the
firm basis of early friendship. Her 
knowledge of the world, was too limited,
to enable her to judge accurately of the
dangers that threatened him. She knew
not that pinnacle of human greatness
which Osric had attained was a dangerous
precipice, from which a breath might
hurl him, and she shuddered to discover,
that integrity was insufficient, unassisted
by worldly wisdom, to preserve him form
the abyss that menaced him.

   The appointment of Sir Orlando, to his
foreign mission, speedily succeeded this
conversation, and Almina parted with her
valued friends with deep regret, and secret
   VOL. II.            E
74            EARL OSRIC.

forebodings of ill. In losing the maternal
guidance of Lady de Mowbray, she seem,
cd again thrown on the world. Lady
Douglas remained in Scotland, and her
mother, tired of the great world, had re-
turned to Castle St.Albert.  Thither Al-
mina would gladly have attended her, but
Lady de Mowbray had cautioned her to be
observant of the Queen's wishes, which
were evidently to retain her at Court.

   The partiality of Arthur St. Albert,
towards her, was unabated, and during
her attendance on his motherm continual
opportunities offered, for displaying his
character in the most advantageous point
of view. His unceasing attention to his
excellent parent, and his domestic virtues
were as admirable as his tried bravery as a
Knight. Imbibing all his father's princi-
ples, he was a devoted adherent to the
King, and was promoted to an high com-
mand in the army. Though evidently
attached with fervour to his fair relation,
she made no open declaration, but the ten-

          EARL OSRIC.                     75


der assiduities he continually lavished on
her, the pride and pleasure he manifested
when he witnessed the admiration she
attracted, and the retiring delicacy with
which she received the homage paid to her
charms, spoke a language sufficiently in-
telligible. An enthusiastic admire of
Edward, and thirsting for glory, he had
eagerly looked forward to another crusade,
but the taking of Acre and the complete
conquest of the Holy Land, by the Sara-
cens, had for the present terminated his
prospects, and the affairs of Scotland now
wholly engrossed the King and his friends.
Lord St. Albert had attended the King
to Norham Castle, when he received the
submission of the competitors for the
crown of that unhappy kingdom, and
Arthur, from his father, had learned to
support the cause of Edward, with all the
martial ardour of his character.  The
known difference of opinion between Earl
Osric and his friends on this subject, had
prevented any discussion, and the insinua-

                       E 2
76         EARL OSRIC.

tions of Sir Ethelred Douglas, now en-
deared to Lord St. Albert by his marriage 
with his daughter, had not failed in their
effect on the mind of that nobleman.  He
strongly reprobated Osric's visit to Scot-
land, and forming any connexions there,
nor could the reiterated declarations of his
Lady, made of her perfect conviction that
Earl Osric would never act in opposition
to Edward, but would remain neutral in
a cause he could not approve, suffice to
reconcile the Earl to the coolness he had
shewn in promoting the King's measures.

Almina heard, and deeply deplored the
fatal differences of her dearest friends, and
to Arthur alone dared she speak, on what 
occupied such a large portion of her
thoughts.  Well aware of the inflexible
integrity of Osric, she felt convinced he
would never act against his conscience and
his judgment, even, were the loss of the
King's favour the alternative; and not
daring to hint at her suspicions of Sir
Ethelred Douglas, she could only conjure
              ERAL OSRIC.      77

Arthur, to mediate with his father, and so
use his utmost exertions, to place the mo-
tives of Osric in a just light.

   The heightened glow of her complexion,
the animation of her features when dis-
missing her usual timidity, she pleaded the
cause of her first benefactor, made Arthur
forgetful of all but herself; and he pro-
mised, for her sake, to go to in person to
Osric, and, if possible to prevail on him to 
meet the King at York, that his pre-
sence might hush the suspicions, aris-
ing in the mind of his Majesty, of a secret
connexion between Osric and some of the 
Scotch Nobles. In consideration of the
affinity he bore her, and his well known
goodness of heart, she scrupled not to en-
trust him, and thus by giving him an inti-
mate knowledge of her own excellence,
she was encouraging in his breast, the
passion which she had unconsciously in-
spired, Almia had been appointed to 
succeed Lady de Mowbray in her personal
attendance about the Queen, whose health78     EARL OSRIC.

seemed fast declining. Her duty now,
therefore, kept her constantly at the
Palace, and Bertha, who at her aunt's in-
tercession, had been retained about the
Princesses, (Lady de Mowbray's fervent
wish, being that she might not lose the
example and society of Almina) was her
most constant companion. The simple kind
hearted girl had been at first much hurt by
the desertion of Sir Henry Macdonald,
who was still held captive by the trium-
phant Lady Janet, and so enslaved was 
the susceptible Knight by her charms,
that he had offered to maintain her pre-
eminence in beauty, over all other compe-
titors, by force of arms, and a grand tour-
nament was to be held in consequence, on 
the anniversary of the Lady Janet's birth.
Sir Egbert de Monthermer, had long 
been a cypher in his domestic circle, his
Lady and daughter held the reigns of em-
pire, and maintained despotic sway over 
the pliable temper of the Knight. Ever
since the arrival of Almina at Court, the                  EARL OSRIC                     79
Lady de monthermer had viewed her with
eyes of envy, as a powerful rival to the
Lady janct, and felt no small degree of
exultation, when Sir Henry macdonald
so publicly declared in favour of the latter.
The projected tournament was loudly
talked of, and all the beauty and rank of
the Court was expected to be present.
The Lady Almina Fitz Oscar, amongst
the rest, was solicited to appear, and fain
would she have declined the distinction,
but she feared it would expose her to the
censure of envy, and displeasure towards
the Lady janet, from the hero of the day,
having been once devoted to herself. She
prepared therefore to attend the princesses,
and Bertha, who by the precepts and
counsel of almina, had succeeded in ap-
pearing to have conquered her indigna-
tion of the faithless Knight's desertion,
magnanimously resolved on being present.

  "I wish him no ill." said she, "but
methinks it would give me no great pain
were his presumption punished, and the
                 
                  E 4

    80              EARL OSRIC.

Lady Janet's pride to be mortified by an
overthrow from some brave Knight, and
surely some one will be found, who has as
fair a mistress to celebrate.  I like not
such overweening conceit, and wish it
may be humbled.“

  The show was brilliant, all of English
valour, and English beauty, seemed as-
sembled, and the Lady Janet and her
mother, glittering in jewels, made a con-
spicuous figure.  Not so, Almina, she re-
treated behind the Princesses, and was
only desirous to pass unnoticed, while
Bertha, who thought her friend excelled,
not only the Lady Janet, but every other
female, loudly remonstrated at her indif-
ference.  Many Knights entered the lists,
to contend with Sir Henry, but the de-
termined valour, skill, and activity, with
which be maintained his claims, distanced
all competitors, till the eyes of the spec-
tators were attracted by a Knight, who
rode unattended into the lists.  His figure
was graceful, but his armour was perfectly              EARL OSRIC.           81

plain, and a black plumage waved in his
helmet. His vizor was down, and over
his shield, depended from a gold chain, the
portrait of a Lady, which was instantly
recognized as that of the Lady Almina
Fitz Oscar, whose claims to superior
beauty and merit, he declared he would
support, not only above those of the Lady
Janet, but of every other Lady. A
murmur of surprise and admiration ran
through the field, for the appearance of the
stranger was singularly prepossessing, and
Alimna, in vain, endeavoured to discover 
who had thus unexpectedly and unwished
for, stood forth as her champion. Arthur
it could not be, for he was on his road to
Scotland, in pursuance of his promise,
besides that, having no motives for con-
cealment, he would have appeared openly
as befitted his rank.
  
   " Bertha was charmed by the suddon
appearance of the Knight. " The virgin
be praised," said she, "that there is some
sense left in the world still. Heaven
                        E 582         EARL OSRIC.

speed him, good Knight,-Oh, what a
gracious figure.-Methinks, Lady,this
stranger is infinitely more agreeable in
person, than even Sir Henry, and he has
my hearty good wishes for his success."

   It was impossible for Almina not to fcel
interested for her unknown defender,
though she would have been glad if he
had not engaged as such.

   The combat held not the spectators
long in suspense.  The stranger Knight
unhorsed Sir Henry, and obtained a com-
plete victory, himself unhurt; and no
sooner was it concluded, than approaching
the balcony where Almina, the Princesses,
and Bertha sate, he bowed gracefully, and
then ascending one step, he delivered into
the hand of the latter a billet, saying:-

   " As the friend of the Lady Almina
Fitz Oscar, permit me, Lady, to solicit
thy good offices, in delivering her that,
the only excuse I have to offer; and par-
don, I entreat thee, a liberty which the                  EARL OSRIC.           83

known kindness of the Lady Bertha's
heart has emboldened me to take.“

  So saying, he again bowed, and with 
the speed of lightning sprurg on his
steed, and disappeared.

  The Princess urged Almina to examine
the scroll, which contained these words :--

  ” A stranger Knight, unknown to fame,
thus dares to implore forgiveness of her
who first awakened a thirst for glory.
The Lady Almina Fitz Oscar his inspira-
tion, he may yet attain the laurel wreath,
which shall entitle him to her pardon, and
enroll his name amongst those who, hope
less, yet devoted, seek in renown a claim
to her pity.“

  While the field rang with applauses of
the conqueror, and vain attempts were
made to detain the discomfited Sir Henry,
the mortified Lady Janet, with her mother
and their train, retired; while Almina,
blushing and confused, received the con-
gratulations of the surrounders.  Bertha
was in extasies.84           EARL OSRIC.

   "I'm glad I love you too well to envy
you, Lady," said she; "for certainly such
a Knight as that throws all the rest into
the shade, and poor Sir Henry, may now
pay his devotions to whomsoever he may
please to honour with them."

   "Why dearest Bertha, thou art as 
changeable as he is," said Almina, smiling;
"but if it will be any satisfaction to thee,
I am ready to resign the stranger Knight to
thee; and truly could he behold thy af-
fectionate heart, I have no doubt thou
would'st secure the conquest."

   "As, Lady!" she answered, "what
signifies my heart, the Knights of this age
look no farther than the surface."

   It signifies every thing to yourself,
Bertha," said Almina, "because it insures
your own self esteem, with which you may
be happy, even if no stranger Knight starts
up to celebrate your personal charms.

   After their return to the Palace, Ber-
tha could talk of nothing but the unknown
Knight; and Almina, wearied by her in-               EARL OSRIC.            85

cessant conjectures, was glad to retire,
though even she could not help feeling
some curiosity on the subject.

The apartments of Almina looked to
the Thames, and a light closet, which she
had made her oratory, opened into a bal-
cony that overhung the river. After a day
passed in crowd and bustle, hither would
she retire to solitude and devotion; here
would she reject the world, its solicitudes
and its vanities, and offer God the sa-
crifice of the heart: here would her
thoughts turned inward, meditate on the
little eventful history of her own mind.
Here would she trace it from the earliest
dawn of recollection to the happy period
when "elate and gay" she quitted the
abode of her childhood, and emerged into
the yet untried world.

Her residence at Castle St. albert had
commenced her course of experience;
but she was still a novice, when so for-
cibly restored to her early protector, and
made an inmate of De Mowbray. There
86                 EARL OSRIC.

the veil of ignorance was drawn aside, and
her secret thoughts laid open to her view;
but till a farther knowledge of the world
enabled her to investigate the source of all,
and to trace her hopes, her wishes, her
motives, to their origin, she had deluded
herself with vain conjectures, and fruitless
efforts at self concealment.

Her short residence in a court had given
her more insight into human nature than
all the years she had passed in retirement:
her strong understanding and great mental
powers had enabled her to make it useful,
by applying the knowledge thus acquired
to the regulation of her own mind.  The
smile of cheerfulness, if not the jocund
look of happiness, beamed on her expres-
sive countenance, her genius and talents
were properly appreciated by her royal
patroness, and enlivened the exalted circle
in which she moved; nor had the whisper
of malignity, or the scowl of envy, power
to disturb her tranquility.  Conscious su-
periority enabled her to repel the shafts of              EARL OSRIC.            87

malice; with cool contempt, and through
the ordeal of a court, she passed unhurt by
the numerous temptations that assailed

  It was on the evening succeeding that
on which the tournament was held, that
she retired later than was her general cus-
tom from the apartments of the Queen,
where a private party had been held, and
where she had exerted herself to join in
the hilarity that prevailed, that she
sought her oratory ad passed an hour n
devout exercises.  The night was warm,
calm, and light, and the gentle undulations
of the river reflected the tremulous beams
of a waning moon.  Suddenly the deep
silence was interrupted by the distant
dashing of oars, and a small boat appeared
in view.

  Unwilling to be seen, she removed from
the balcony, and returned to the oratory
where again she took the book she had
been perusing, but her reading was dis-88          EARL OSRIC.

turbed by a faint strain of music, which
like that the bard of after times describes,

  "Came o'er the ear, like the sweet South,
  That breathes upon a bank of violets,
  Stealing and giving odour."

She listened attentively; it seemed be-
neath the balcony, from whence she recol-
lected the reflection of the light in her
oratory might be seen. She removed it to
a greater distance, and immediately after-
wards these words, in a voice of peculiar
melody, met her ear.

  The moon lent her light, and the stars gilt the
    sky,
    And they beam'd o'er the silvery wave;
  'Twas a beautiful scene to the lover's eye,
    And he gaz'd on the mighty concave.
  Then glane'd at the watery world below,
  But the sigh that he breath'd was not of woe.

  For it is not woe that heaves his breast,
  As he views yon waving stream of light;
  Nor moon, nor stars, his eye can arrest,
  Like the glad beam that darts on his sight,
  The beacon on high from the time worn tower,
  'Tis the lamp that gleams from the Lady's bower-
                 EARL OSRIC.                    89

Then changing to a slower measure, the
finest strains breathed on her ear, and in
the same melodious tone the following 
lines were added:-

As softly flows the murmuring stream,
As the rays of Luna mildly gleam,
Silent and calm on the bosom of night,
And reflect on the wave their silv'ry light.
So soft my lyre thy strains ascend,
And on the ear of beauty steal,
While gloomy night, the lover's friend,
Shall shroud him 'neath her sable veil,
             While he bids a long Adieu!

Hid from the eye by the dark'ning shades,
Ere yonder ling'ring moon-beam fades,
Ere the dawn shall chase the shadows of night,
Ere the glorious sun diffuse its light,
To distant climes, far, far away,
Unlov'd, unmourn'd, shall the rover stray.
Yet his heart shall hover around this wall,
Where'er his rambling footsteps fall;
And the breeze of night on its bosom shall bear
The wand'rer's, strains to the Lady's ear,
               As he sighs a long Adieu!

The music and the voice ceased; the
dashing of oars was again heard; and
90               EARL OSRIC.

when Almina approached the balcony, the
boat was swiftly receding from view. The
voice was quite unknown to her, and the
stranger Knight glanced across her me-
mory. Bertha, half undressed, rushed into
her apartment.

   "What heavenly strains, Lady," said
she. "They must be those of the stran-
ger Knight. Ah, Lady! how happy you
are."

   "My susceptible Bertha," said Almina,
smiling, "would that thou wert much
happier. As happy thou certainly mayest
be. The pure bliss of a conscience at
peace may always be ours. Let us seek
to secure it; and leave all errant Knights
to please the Lady Janets of the world.
Our aims shall be for higher and more
permanent felicity."

   "Ah Lady! you are so good, so pious,
that if you were in my convent (to which
pray Heaven I may never return), they
would certainly make a saint of you."

   "I fear me thou art a sad flatterer, Ber-               EARL OSRIC.       91 

tha," said Almina; "but thou shalt join
in my orisons, and then on thy peaceful
pillow strive to forget this stranger Knight
who has so wonderously fascinated thy
imagination."
 92             EARL OSRIC.

                 CHAP. VI.

                 --------

  "How much methinks, I could despise this man,
But that I am bound in charity against it."
                         Henry Eighth

                         "So much fairer,
And spotless, shall mine innocence arise,
When the King knows my truth."
                          Ibid

                         "I feel within me,
A Peace above all earthly dignities,
A still and quiet conscience."
                          Ibid

                  --------

  So far success seemed to have crowned
the plans of the wily Sir Ethelred. De-
ceived by his specious manners, Earl Osric
had been led to speak unguardedly on the 
Scotch affairs, and scrupled not to express
his disapprobation of the measures pur-
sued for their subjugation.  But he had                     EARL OSRIC.              93

few connexions in Scotland. England
was his native country, and all his large
possessions were there; but still he com-
miserated the fate of the Scottish nobles,
who could not resign their country with-
out a struggle, and yet foresaw that strug-
gle was hopeless. He pitied the noble
Bruce, and bewailed the pusillanimity of
Baliol, which had so irretrievably involved
his countrymen, and given to a foreigner
the throne of Scotland, only perhaps to be
recovered by bloodshed and violence. But
pity was all he could yield them; his nu-
merous obligations to Edward, and their
early friendship, bound him to his ser-
vice, though not even such reasons could
induce him to wield the sword in a wrong
cause. He believed that the King was
well acquainted with his sentiments, and
that he should be permitted to remain
neutral, and on his own estate, except
when his counsel or his personal aid was
required by his sovereign. Little did he 
94   EARL OSRIC.

suspect the arts that were even than rising
to undermine him at once in the favour of
his King, and the bosom of his wife, but
the latter was too faithfully attached to
him, hastily to admit distrust, and in her
own breast she concealed all her fears and
and feelings.  She had shewn to Osric the
lines she had found in the old cabinet, and
he observed, on reading them, that "he
recollected Almina had been fond of birds,
and that probably it was to one who visit-
ed her daily, to be fed, that she had ad-
dressed the wild visions of her imagina-
tion." From this time, the subject had
been no more renewed.

The promise of Arthur St. Albert was
sacredly kept, he travelled with as much
speed as might be, to Osric Castle, and
though he made it appear that his visit
there was accidental, he contrived to give
the Earl intimation of the reports of the
Kings displeasure, which though they by
no means conveyed to Osirc the alarm he
might with reason have felt, still led him
                  Earl Ostric.           96

to acquiesce in the proposal of the Baron
Fitz Oswald, to adjourn southward sooner
than they intended. Eleanora wished not
for the bustle of the great world, but she
had no objection to quit Osric Castle.
With her Lord, all places were alike, and
though at times, an uneasy sensation àrose
in her breast, when the recollection of his
secresy respecting Almina occurred to her,
she tried not to think on the subject, an
devoted her mind to the duties of her new
situation.

     Almina, mean time, ignorant of the
anxiety she had created, was eagerly ex-
pecting the return of Arthur, his absence
at Court was noticed, but as his destination
was unknown, even to his father, it was
concluded that he was gone to visit the
Countess, his mother, to whom his atten-
ions were unremitting. The Queen re-
gretted that Lady St. Albert's health com-
pelled a retired residence.

     "Your friends have all forsaken us, fair
Lady," said the King, "Earl Osric seems96            EARL OSRIC.

to have relinquished his guardianship,
methinks he should not wholly resign early
connexions for recent claims."

   Almina well understood his meaning,
and that under an apparent application of
his words to herself, and his late marriage,
the King concealed from all but Sir Ethel-
red and her, and allusion to his suspected
partiality for the Scotch, and his neglect
of the royal favour. Summoning all her 
courage and resolution, she calmly an-
swered.

   "The absence of Earl Osric, my graci-
ous liege, can be merely temporary. His
duty and attachment to your majesty, will
doubtless alike dictate his return shortly.
The Countess is partial to retirement, and
the Earl is not accustomed to consult his
own inclinations when the happiness of
friends require the sacrifice."

   "I wish it may prove so, Lady, " said
the King, and he assumed, a porten-
tous frown while he added, "grievous
would it be to meet an ill return for im-                 EARL OSRIC.               97

plicit confidence."  So saying his majesty
retired, and left Almina overwhelmed with 
grief and dismay,

   The Queen whose maternal kindness and
partiality was alarmed by the visible agita-
tion of her protégée, whispered to her,
"fear not, sweet lady, the Earl has friends
who will maintain his cause, and all will
yet be well."

   Almina was comforted by the friendly
condescension of the Queen, but she was
doubly confused by the steady gaze, with
which Sir Ethelred Douglas had marked
her varying countenance; and she retired
with feelings cruelly depressed; nor were
her spirits raised by the intelligence that
awaited her.  The Princess Mary was on
the eve of departing for Amesbury, to
commence, her noviciate and the friendship
which had yielded her such pleasure, must
in future be confined to hearing of her
welfare.  Deeply she deplored the separa-
tion; but the Princess, whose thoughts
were devoted to her future destination,

  VOL. II.            F
  




98                EARL OSRIC.

resolutely repressed all appearance of grief,
and only conversed on indifferent subjects,
during the hours of Almina's attendance,
which intervened before her departure.
From a state of deep and anxious regret,
Almina was aroused by the intelligence of
Earl Osric's arrival; it was announced by
Arthur himself, and heard with real satis-
faction by his fair relation; but, alas! far
different was the reception the Earl was
destined to experience, from any he had
before known. Under an assumed cor-
diality there was an unbending stiffness in
Edward's demeanour, which must have
struck a person of mush less discernment
than Osric; but, conscious of having given 
no real cause of offence, he disdained all
attempts to conciliate.

    The base suggestions of the artful Sir
Ethelred, had gradually alienated the mind
of Edward from his early friend : The 
moderation of Osric, his entire exemption
from party spirit, and the lofty disdain of
petty intrigues, which had kept him at an
               EARL OSRIC.              99

immeasureable distance from all cabals,
were now construed into a secret partiality
for the Scots, and latent treachery to the
English King.  That cool and rational ad-
vice which had once influenced the mind
of Edward, and the dispassionate reasoning
of the ever-temperate Osric, were now only
remembered as proofs of his concealed 
resolution, to promote the Scottish interest,
if not by open daring, by refined artifice.
As free from suspicion as design, Osric saw
not the altered demeanour of the King,
till it became too glaring to be longer un-
noticed.

  It was the evening succeeding the depar-
ture of the Princess, that Almina, more than
usually depressed by the recollection of the
hour at which she had been accustomed to
attend the interesting Mary, walked alone
in the gardens of the palace which ran
along the river.  Vespers were over, it
was ”the calm, the silent hour“ of evening,
an evening so mild, so serene, that it seem-
ed to tranquillize even the turbulent pas-100       ERAL OSRIC.


sions of the human heart, ane make it taste
the soft serenity of nature.

   "Sweetest Mary," signed she to herself,
"how would'st thou have enjoyed this
blissful scene! Never more will thy heart
vibrate to the sweet notes of the bird of
night-never more wilt thou view with the
eye of freedom, the natural glories of this
lovely world.  Confined to the gloomy aus-
terities of a cloister, henceforth the glowing
beauties of thy mind and person will be
equally concealed beneath the veil which
enshrouds thy form, and that which monas-
astic rigour casts over thy thoughts andac-
tions." Her eyes, streaming with, were
cast on the balcony, where so often she had
enjoyed the friendship and conversation of
the royal novice; and, in losingher, she
seemed to be deprived of the only being who
could understand and assimilate with her;
for the other Princesses, though amiable
and affectionate, were far behind Mary in
mental endowments, and, reared for the
world, they possessed not that refinement                 EARL OSRIC.                    101

of feeling which distinguished the young
recluse, and so well accorded with the sen-
sative disposition of Almina. It was not
till the calmners of the air, and the general
tranquility of nature had soothed the grief
that struggled in her breast, that she could
persuade herself to return to the palace,
but she could not seek society, she felt
that it would be impossible to find any
that would not awaken the remembrance
of that, which had charmed her mind to
peace and piety at this hour for many
months past. Music alone, seemed to
offer some relief to the renewed anguish
of her bosom, on re-entering her apart-
ment, and she seized the lyre with trem-
bling hands. The first strains of an
evening hymn to the Virgin, had issued
from her lips, responsive to the instru-
ment, when something was darted in at
the open casement, before which she was
seated. It fell at her feet, and she dis-
cerned it to be a small scroll of vellum
affixed to the point of an arrow, it must

                    F 3102           EARL OSRIC.

come from the water. She flew to the
window, and reached it in time, to see a
small bark rowed swiftly away, just dis-
appear from sight. Hastily she examined
the vellum, and with a palpitating heart,
read these words:-

  " Dark designs are meditating against
the liberty, perhaps the life of Earl O-.
No common danger, no common interest,
should persuade the writer, to risque this
information ; but let not the fate of the
great and good be accelerated by false
timidity. Neither hour nor season must
be regarded, instantly must Earl O--be
made acquainted with peril, that
menaces him: another day, perhaps ano-
ther night, may be too late. The very
next hour may convene a council, fraught
with powers, to work his destruction. Let
him but be aware that he is suspected of a
secret communication with S----, and
conscious integrity, will point out his best
defence."

  Almina was petrified, the hour was late,
yet the fate of Osric seemed in her hands,              EARL OSRIC.             103

-from whom could this warning come?
Trembling and terrified, a few moments
were devoted to calm the violent throbbing
of her heart, but they were but few. Her
wonted resolution returned, and she
rallied all the powers of her great mind
to aid her in executing the task assigned
her. Alone, in person, it must be per-
formed, for to whom could she entrust it.
She recollected that the Earl had men-
tioned the place of his residence, when in
attendance on the King, to be situated
near the Monastery of the Black Friars.
One of the Monks from thence was his
confessor, a venerable man, who during
the absence of her own spiritual director,
had attended the Lady de Mowbray. To
him she resolved to apply. She knew not
the Earl's own dwelling, but she was sure
she could find her way to the Monastery.
Alone, she dared not venture, and Bertha
was the only one in whom she could con-
fide, but though faithful and affectionate,
she was young and indiscreet. The
                   F 4
104             EARL OSRIC.

hazard of delny, was however, too great for
trifling difficulties to deter, and she de-
termined to sally forth, accompanied by
Bertha, and concealing her person as
much as possible, to take her way to the
Monastery, and interest the Confessor to
get the mystic information she had receiv-
ed, conveyed to him that very night. "Oh,
let him not," she cried in the anguish of
her soul, "incur one danger that my
weak power can avert, gratitude forbid
it." Hastily summoning Bertha, she told
her that business of import demanded her
attendance at the Monastery of Black
Friars, that night. "And I must venture
to walk thither alone," she added, "un-
less thou, my dear Bertha, hast courage to
be my companion."

   "Courage, Lady'?' said Bertha, "yes,
that I have to do any thing you desire, be-
cause I am sure if you order me, I cannot
do wrong."

   Covered with large mantles, they set
forth, and proceeded a considerable dis-
         EARL OSRIC.     105

tance in the right direction, when a figure,
indistinctly seen, crossed their path. Ber-
tha, naturally timid, clung to Almina, but
they hastened on, and soon they discover-
ed the same person following them closely.
The dark towers of the monastery, at
length appeared in view.

  "Thank heaven, we are arrived," ex-
claimed Almina, as she hastily knocked
at the gate, and demanding admittance,
solicited to speak to Father Jerome.
"He is at his devotions in the chapel,"
was the answer, but permission was ac-
corded them to wait in the cloisters till
the Father was disengaged, it was a fearful
interval, and she shrunk from the glances
of the Monks, who passed and respassed
as if in their way to or from their Orisons.
At length, Father Jerome appeared, slow-
ly advancing from the chapel, but not
alone, he was accompanied by a person
wrapt in a long cloack, whose countenance
was too closely muffled up to be discover-
able, and Almina, not very well pleased to

                         F5106               EARL OSRIC.

be obliged to speak before a stranger,
hastily advanced, and in a low voice, en-
treated Father Jerome to grant her a few
minutes private conversation.  The dis-
guised figure evidently started, and re-
peated her name in an accent that at once
betrayed Earl Osric.  Here then the
anxiety of Almina, as to the delivery of
her notice terminated.  In a few words
she explained the motives that had brought
her thither, delivered into the Earl's hand,
the mysterious warning she had received,
and hastened to depart.  Doubtless, Osric
concluded that her own attendants awaited
her, but few words escaped him, and
taking the arm of Bertha, Almina quickly
set forward on her return.  The night
was grown uncommonly dark, and now
that her mission was performed she had
leisure for alarm on her own account.  She
looked fearfully around, but no object ap-
peared.  The streets were silent and de-
serted, and the echo of their own steps
with the distant chime of a convent bell,                 EARL OSRIC.           107

tolling for prayers, were all the sounds
that interrupted the dead silence of night.
The retired part of the city, through
which they made their way, gave them
little reason to fear being recognized, but
an expedition so unusual, conjured up
terrors, she had never felt before, Bertha
was silent, because she was literally afraid
to speak, and her quick breathing com-
municated alarms to Almina's mind, which
she would probably not have felt for her-
self.  Suddenly they heard a door unclose,
and loud sounds of dissonant mirth issue
from a house in the direction they were
pursuing, and in a moment after, a party
of Knights, in grotesque habits, as if from
revelling, burst on them.  Almina had
only time to say, ” Let us be cautious not
to discover ourselves,“  Ere they overtook
and surveyed them with scrutinizing eyes.
Without appearing to observe them, Al-
mina still holding Bertha's arm, continu-
ed as fast as she could proceed, till Bertha
whose terrors every moment increased,108          EARL OSRIC.

perceiving that one of the Knights as
come close to them, and walked by her
side, gave an involuntary start, and strik-
ing her foot against a stone, stumbled and
fell.  Immediately they were surrounded, 
but happily Almina, whose presence of
mind did not forsake her, had fastened her
own veil and mantle so securely, that it
was impossible to discern a glimpse of
her countenance.  Poor Bertha, with less
caution, had arranged her disguise with a
more unsteady hand, so that the Knight
who raised her from the groud, exclaim-
ed, in the too well known voice of Sir
Elthelred Douglas, "Is it possible that
the fair Bertha should be wandering alone
at this unseasonable hour.  Then glancing
at Almina, he added, "Pardon me Lady,
I did not observe that thou hadst an
attendant damsel, but allow me to add that
a Page at this unseemly time of night, 
would have been a more proper escort for
the neice of the correct Lady de Mowbray,
the friend of the immaculate Lady Almina              ERAL OSRIC.        109

Fitz Oscar. Bertha, had by this time
recovered herself, and Almina was de-
lighted to find that she seized on the idea
he either had, or pretended to have im-
bibed, that she was only an attendant,
and hoping that he would consider it a
some girlish frolic, she pressed Bretha's
arm, who understanding her, answered
with some spirit.

   " It cannot concern thee, Sir Knight,
I should imagine, if I had no escort at all,
and when I say I would rather be left to
pursue my way home, as my own inclina-
tion dictates, I trust thou observations."

   " I have no doubt, Lady." answered Sir
Ethelred, " of thy wish for my absence,
but I hesitate to obey thy imperious order,
first, because as a Knight, I am bound to
protect innocence and beauty, and next,
because as the friend of the Lady Almina
Fitz Oscar, I should hold myself deficient
in respect for her, to suffer thee to traverse
the city alone, or with only a female
guard."110                 EARL OSRIC.

"The Lady Almina will not thank
thee, Sir Knight,"said she, "for forcing
on me a protection I stand not in need of."

"Thou art grown severe, fair Bertha,"
said he, "and I marvel greatly, where
thou hast attained such severity of retort,
not surely from thy lovely model, she who
shines first in modesty and gentleness, as
in beauty."

" I wish, Sir Knight," she said, with
asperity,"thou hadst a little more of that 
quality, it would teach thee not to intrude
thy company where it is not wished for."

The Knights, who accompanied Sir
Ethelred, and were evidently young, gay,
and in part incbriated, all with one accord, 
laughed aloud, and one of them offered to
conduct Almina, and would have taken 
her arm from that of Bertha, but this she
resolutely resisted, though she dared not
trust her voice, lest it should betray her.

 "Let us hasten good Annetta," said
Bertha, addressing her by the name of one of Almina's damsels, " soon shall we             EARL OSRIC.             111

reach home, and in our visit to yon
holy shrine, let us hope we shall meet less
annoyance."

   "Rather say, sweet Bertha," said Sir
Ethelred, "Let us act with more prudence,
or be thankful to any Knight who will
have the courtesy to protect us from
insult."

   The feelings of Almina were cruelly
wounded during the conversation of Sir
Ethelred with Bertha. From more than 
any other human being, there seemed a
necessity the most imperious for conceal-
ing herself. That he was the foe of Earl
Osric, she could not doubt, and terror, lest
he should discover her, at last, almost
robbed her of the courage to persevere in
the disguise she had assumed. Her anxiety
was not destined to be of much longer con-
tinuance. The contest between Bertha 
and Sir Ethelred, was just renewed, when
a person approached, in whom Almina
with mixed feelings of surprise and regret
recognized by his habits (for the imper-112             EARL OSRIC.

fect light of a very early moon, would not
permit her to examine the countenanace)
one of her own domestics.  Though
sorry that she should have been traced
by one of her own establishment, she
could not lament the fidelity and attach-
ment, which had doubtless led Den-
nis to wonder and feel alarmed at her
absence at this late hour.  Under the pro-
tection of Dennis, they were soon safely
escorted home.  Sir Ethelred resigning
them to the servant's care, and saying in a 
tone of satire, "That he trusted the 
lovely Bertha would insure her own safety,
by selecting the day instead of the night
for her pious pilgrimages, adding with
mock gravity, that he congratulated her on
the happy termination of her perilous en-
terprise, and entreated her to commend
him to the Lady Almina, whose amiable
anxiety for the success of her friend's holy
expedition, he could well conceive."

   With deep sarcastic emphasis, he uttered
the last words, and Alminal instantly felt
convinced that she was discovered, but Sir                    EARL OSRIC.             113

Ethelred and his companions had disap-
peared. They were in the act of entering
the mansion, when he, whom they sup-
posed to be Dennis, advanced, and in a 
strange voice said, "Pardon me, Lady, a
disguisc assumed to protect you from
insult, my purpose is accomplished, and I
depart. Your own dornestics are, for 
aught I know, Ignorant of your absence,
your entrance, therefore, may be private as
you pleae,-farewell, Lady," And ere 
Almina could detin him, he darted from
them, and disappeared. Bencath the dis-
guise of a servant, Bertha had distinguish-
ed a glimpse of armour, and she exclaim-
ed in extacy, "'Tis the stranger Knight!
Oh, 'tis the stranger Kinght." Almina
did not wait to bear her, but having gain-
ed admittance, hastened to her apartment.
The voice of the diguised protector, had
certainly sturck her, the moment he
spoke, as that of the unkonwn Knight,
but strange as the subject was, it could not
long occupy her mind, which clung to one
yet more interesting, the fate of her early114              EARL OSRIC.

friend, and a sleepless night was spent in
rumination. The morning found her
fatigued and spiritless, and scarcely had
she arisen, when she was informed Earl 
Osric was waiting to see her. Strong
emotion was visible in his countenance,
when he beheld her. He took her hand, 
and said, "How highly, Almina, ought
I to prize the friendship which promoted
you to incur danger, to give me the extra-
ordinary warning, which last night reach-
ed my hands.
 " Ah, my Lord," said she, "mention 
not my part in it. Limited, indeed, is
my power, to return the countless obliga-
tions of my life to you, rather let us speak
of yourself, and hope the evils that warn-
ing predicts may be averted by the timely
knowledge of the perils that menace you."
 "Thy kind fears, dearest Almina," he 
cried, "I trust, out run the reality, that I
have secret enemies, is too probable. Who
that has so long enjoyed the favour of
royalty is exempt, but the King, though
               EARL OSRIC           115

tenacious, and alas, too ambitious of
power and dominion, is just and generous.
He knows me, for my heart has been
always open to his inspection.  Proudly
conscious of my own undeviating integ-
rity, I shun no investigation, but never
will I disown my principles, not even if
the forfeit of Edward's friendship be the
alternative.  I see he suspects me of
favouring the Scottish interest, and if to
abate oppression and usurpation be to 
favour that unhappy nation, he is right.
I am prepared for his accusations, and
happy in the certainty that they are un-
merited, shall meet them with calmness.
Permission I hope will be accorded me to
retire from court.  A life of privacy is now
my wish.  I was early introduced to
scenes of war and tumult, and the quiet of
domestic life will be repose to me.  My
loss of favour and distinction, will not, I
flatter myself, affect you.  The Queen's
friendship will be your security.  She is
one of those who may be relied on.  Firm116         EARL OSRIC

and consistent, the excellent Eleanora
allows no party influence to guide her
actions. She is all that is noble and dig-
nified in the female character. She alone 
is capable of appreciating Almina."

   Such praise from the lips of Osric, was
too gratifying to his ward to be indulged,
and she changed the topic to his own 
affairs.

   "Fear not for me, dearest Almina," he
said, "fear rather for Edward, who will
hereafter regret the absence of a friend, 
who could with joy have sacrificed his life
to serve him."

   There was a solemnity in the manner of 
Osric that Almina had never before observ-
ed. She saw he was deeply affected by the 
King's behaviour, and when he took leave
of her, it was with emotion greater than 
usual. The Countess, he said, was prob-
ably with her mother at Fitz Oswald,
there awaiting the result of the conference,
which he intended immediately to solicit 
with his majesty, though he added, he had             
                 EARL OSRIC.

no doubt himself, that it would be the signal of 
his exile from court. In grief unutterable, Almina
retired to her oratory after his departure, to weep,
to meditate, and finally to refer, as was her rule,
to the source of all good, the termination of her 
anxieties.
118                         Earl Osric.



                              CHAP. VI.


               "You are not to be taught
       That you have many enemies, that know not
       Why they are so, but, like to village curs,
       Bark when their fellows do."
                                                     Shakspeare.


               "Oh, how wretched
   Is that poor man, that hangs on Princes' favours."
                                                                Ibid.


     THE increasing malady of the Queen,
was a subject of real uneasiness to Al-
mina, she venerated the character of Elea-
nora, her piety, her benevolence, and her
humility, were alike admirable; but more
fitted in reality for a private, than a public
station, she often sought retirement, and
in the King's projected tour through the
northern counties, it was by no means her                 EARL OSRIC.    119

wish to accompany him; but she was ac-
customed to submit to her consort, and
only stipulated that she should travel
slowly. She was therefore, to precede his
majesty by some days, and Almina of
course was first in her train. With a
strange foreboding of ill she prepared for
the expedition, and the event too well jus-
tified her presentiment.

    The indisposition of the Queen rapidly
increased, but they had reached Grantham,
in Lincolnshire, before it assumed a dan-
gerous appearance. At the monastery
where they rested, her Majesty seemed at 
first to be reviving, and declared her inten-
tion of her awaiting the King, but the
Monk, who was her constant physician,
gave it as his opinion, that she was con-
siderably worse, and the night saw all his
fears realized. Almina dared not retire to
rest, and towards midnight, an alarming
change took place. Messengers were dis-
patched to hasten the King, who only
arrived in time to receive her parting bene-
120           EARL OSRIC.

diction; just ére the early dawn illu-
minated the horizon the summons had
reached him, and scarcely had the light
of day receded, when he beheld her pure
spirit released from its earthly sufferings.
Most severely were the acute feelings of
Almina wounded, deep and sincere was
her grief. She felt that she had lost a 
friend, more than a patroness, and only
in the soothing offices of religion, could 
she find nay mitigation of her anguish.
The affliction of the King was unbounded,
he had been devotedly attached to his
faithful consort, and every respect and
honour was paid to her memory, that the
fondest affection could suggest. The sight
of Almina, to whom Eleanora had mani-
fested such regard, seemed to revive his
sorrow, and he shut himself up, excluding
all society.

    In the mourning train, who attended 
the remains of their excellent Queen, to
the last awful receptacle, when those me-
morials of conjugal attachment, which still          EARL OSRIC                            121

exist, were erected, wherever the royal
corse rested in its way; Almina returned
to the metropolis, which she had so in-
auspiciously quitted, and was received by 
Bertha, with tearful delight; but the
court no longer appeared the same, and
rumours every day reached her through
Bertha, of the increasing coldness of the
King to Earl Osrie, and the high honours
to which Sir Ethelred Douglas was rapidly
rising.

   Depressed and forlorn, the apartments
of the palace seemed now one vast soli-
tude, she fancied there was a studied 
coldness in the manners of the Princesses
towards her, since the Queen's death, and
she mentioned it to Bertha.

   "It becomes not me, perhaps, Lady,"
said the affectionate girl, "to speak on
the subject, but alas, I love you too well
to be silent. The ears of the High-
nesses have been poisoned with some ma-
licious reports. It was only yesterday, 
they were talking of you, and gave strange                 EARL OSRIC.

hints, which I do not understand.  Earl
Osric too was mentioned. and that Sir
Etherlred Douglas, I fear me, has been
busy with both.  Oh, Lady ! I dare not
say what I think, but time, I hope, will
discover him to the King and to the world.
Ever since that unfortunate night of our
expedition to the Monastery, he has seem-
ed to bear an inveterate enmity to me-
perhaps my pertness offended him, but I
hate impertinence."

         Bertha's intelligence confirmed Almina's
suspicion of the altered behaviour of the
Princesses, and her resolution was soon
formed. The world now presented no
charms for her, she had tried its pleasures
and found them vain, and insufficient to
satisfy her mind and heart. The Queen
no more, the Princess Mary lost to her,
the Lady de Mowbray absent, and Earl
Osric no longer in possession of the King's
confidence and regard, she must be inces-
santly exposed to encounter pain and mor-
tification.  Retirement and rational em-                EARL OSRIC. 123

ployment would restore the serenity which
late events had so cruelly interrupted.
The good Dame Maddelina, and the
peaceful seclusion of her detetmined to
ask permission to retire there, at least for
the period of her mourning for the Queen.
Through the Princesses her petition ws
preferred to the King, as soon as properiety
admitted, after his late loss, and though
Earl Osric had resigned his guardianship,
she yet thought him entitled to the same
mark of respect, and she addressed him
by letter to the same purport.  She would 
not have hesitated in returning to the pro-
tection of Lady St. Albert, but Elfrida,
tired of the seclusion of Douglas Castle, 
had returned to her mother, and Sir
Ethelred (who in spite of his promised
indulgence, seemed to seclude his Lady as
much as possible from the world) was
occasionally an inmate there, she knew
him to be the insidious foe of osric, and
she could not meet him with that cordi-
 
                 G2124              EARL OSRIC.

ality, nor treat him with that respect,
which the son-in-law of the Earl St.
Albert demanded from her, while she felt
assured that he was seeking the destruc-
tion of her first friend. She therefore
pleaded the present ill state of her health
and spirits, to her aunt,.for preferring the
Priory of St. Margeret, during the period
of her mourning, and awaited the answer
to her petition from the King. It was
given her in person. His Majesty, in
somewhat of a sarcastic tone, wondered
that she should renounce the pleasures of
the world, but graciously left it to her
own option.

  The Lady Janet de Monthermer, who
was that day at Court, seemed to lend a
ready ear to all that passed, and with a
satirical smile said, "Methinks, Lady,
you will find a cloister dull after your late
mode of life. Serenades and midnight
walks are rather incompatible with monas-
tic rules."

   "As neither of those amusements are                    EARL OSRIC.            125

to my taste," said Almina, "they will at
least, not be included in the advantages I
shall miss in retirement."

A glance of intelligence passed between
Lady Janet and Sir Ethelred Douglas,
who at this moment approached them, and
turning to Almina.  "Can it be true,"
said he, "that the Court is to be deprived
of one of its brightest ornaments, in the
Lady Almina Fitz Oscar?  Is she resolved
on sharing in retirement the domestic
felicity of the noble Earl Osric and his
beauteous bride?"

Resolutely repressing her indignation,
she quietly answered--"My present des-
tination, Sir Knight, leads me to the
Priory of St. Margeret, on the borders of
Cumberland."  But she deeply felt the in-
sinuation, and though she appeared to be
looking another way, the malicious smiles
of Lady Janet and Sir Ethelred, were
no unobserved.  With a feeling of wound-
ed pride, and undeserved mortification, 
she soon sought her own apartment; she

                    G 3126               EARL OSRIC.

saw that Sir Ethelred had at least suspect-
ed her under her disguise, on the night
she visited the Monastery, and on his own
conjectures had built the ingenious reports
at which Bertha had hinted, and to which
Lady Janet had evidently alluded; but 
she wished not to investigate them, her
blameless conduct; and uprightness would
in the end, disprove every false aspersion,
and to her own heart only, was she ac-
countable.  With anxiety she awaited the
answer of Osric, who, it was known, had
had more than one private conference with
the King, but nothing had transpired, and
though, from the words of Sir Ethelred
Douglas, she judged that he was about to
quit the Court, she was, as yet, ignorant
of his intentions.  He now seldom ap-
peared in attendance on his majesty, as
formerly, and his place seemed supplied
by the insinuating Sir Ethelred, whose wit
and courtesy were constant themes of ad-
miration with the younger Princesses.
The determination of Almina, was con-                EARL OSRIC.         127

firmed by the following letter from Osric,
and all that remained was to apprize
Dame Maddelina of her approaching ar-
rival at the Priory.

   To the Lady Almina Fitz Oscar.

   Why does Almina ask my approbation
of any plan, that will conduce to her own
happiness? Yet, if it will satisfy her
mind to know, that she amply possesses it,
be that satisfaction hers. The pious Dame
Maddelina is a protectress every way eligi-
ble, and the retreats of religion are salu-
tary to the wounds which a commerce
with the world inflicts. I can understand
the delicacy of feeling, which, after a loss
of such magnitude, must render the Court
distasteful to thee Almina, but let not thy
rare and noble qualities be dedicated to
seclusion. Let thy retirement be tem-
porary, for much I hope, thy example
may benefit thousands. A hasty messen-
ger yesterday, summoned me to St.
Albert. Some inexplicable mystery has

            G 4128        EARL OSRIC

occurred, respecting the youthful Adeliza.
I go to learn its extent, and to offer my
services, and the consolations of friendship
to the Countess. --Farewell, Almina, alike
in the tumult of Courts, or the sacred
retreats of piety, ever wilt thou possess
the undeviating regard of 

                            OSRIC.

This intimation was decisive, the Earl
certainly disapproved not her intentions,
and she no longer hesitated -- but his own
situation with the King, was still a mys-
tery to her, he had evidently avoided
naming it; and she knew his noble nature
too well, not to fear that the ingratitude of
Edward had sunk deeply into his heart.
Adeliza too, what could have befallen her.
Too well she remembered the wild mys-
terious conversation, she had held with 
her, and the secret attachment she had
acknowledged, and she longed, yet dread-
ed to learn further intelligence, concerning
her.
                EARL OSRIC.          129

  A messenger was dispatched to St. Mar-
geret's, and brought back the kind hopes
and wishes of the Dame and her commu-
nity, for the Lady Almina's speedy arrival.
Very little of regret mingled with the
numerous other feelings in the bosom of
the latter, as she prepared to bid a long
farewell to the metropolis.  The death of
the Queen, the seclusion of the Princess
Mary, the high ambitious spirit of the 
King, which could sacrifice even the
valued friendship of the man he loved, to
its gratification, had all combined to ren-
der it a scene of disgust instead of satisfac-
tion, and she hailed with real delight, the
anticipated peace and sober pleasures of
the priory.  Piety, real, genuine piety,
was a prevailing feature in Almina's mind.

  She had no religious fervours, no super-
stition, no bigotry, or fanaticism, and she
felt, that though, in retirement, the heart
would be best examined, in the world it
must be proved.  in the tumult of a
Court, she had possessed little leisure for
130               EARL OSRIC.

those devotional exercises, which gave
strength to good resolutions, but if she
had at first been dazzled, by the marked
admiration she had evidently excited, it
was a short lived sensation. Soon she saw
that so variable, so fluctuating were the
opinions of the world, so guidedf by cir-
cumstances, so dependant on favour and
fortune, that Lady Jane de Monthermer,
with none of her conscious pretensions to
excellence, with even fewer than the few
accomplishments the age generally per-
mitted to women, would supercede her
in fame and popularity, and be equally
the idol of the day. It was a lesson
to repress vanity, and she felt how
far more valuable the resources which
Osric's liberal mode of education had
secured to her, would be found in retire-
ment, than in a society where they were
not sufficiently understood, to be properly
appreciated.

   To part from Bertha, was to her feeling
              EARL OSRIC.         131

mind the worst task which awaited her,
and most readily would she have avialed
herself of the offer the attached girl made,
to accompany her to the Convent, had not
an opportunity of fixing her more eligibly
seemed to offer itself.

   The Princess Beatrice, whose vivacity
of manners well accorded with the cheer-
ful disposition of Bertha, had adopted the
latter for her peculiar favourite, and on her
marriage with John Duke of Brabant,
would fain have persuaded her to accom-
pany her abroad, but Bertha, unwilling
to quit her native kingdom, while it con-
tained Lady de Mowbray and Almina, had
withstood her entreaties. Now, however,
when an earnest invitation from Beatrice
had reached Bertha, just as Almina had
announced her intention of retirement,
the latter strongly advised her to comply
with the wishes of her royal friend.
Bertha's want of fortune, Almina knew,
rendered Lady de Mowbray anxious for
her advancement, and the patronage of the
              G 6132              EARL OSRIC.

great more necessary.  She was also aware
that her young friend, though of good dis-
position, and not despicable talents, pos-
sessed none of those rare resources which
would enable her to find not merely peace,
but happiness in a life of seclusion, and with
disinterested kindness she advised Bertha
to accept the Princess's offered friendship
and protection.  With many tears, Bertha
acceded at length to the proposal.  The
train of the Ambassador, offered an eligi-
ble convoy, and with glowing cheeks, pal-
pitating heart, and eyes sparkling with de-
light, Bertha sought her friend's apart-
ment, to tell her, that amongst the Knights
who attended the train of the envoy, she
had, she felt assured, recognized the
graceful form of the stranger Knight.
Bertha would not allow that this circum-
stance had influenced her, to feel less re-
pugnance, to the thought of quitting her
native land; but Almina had obtained too
much insight into the human heart,
wholly to credit her assertions.  The part-               EARL OSRIC.                    133

ing was painful and affectionate, and Al-
mina bore to her retreat, a lively and
gratful recollection of the kind hearted 
young friend, who had, for so many 
months,contributed, by those attentions so
gratifying, to a mind endued with strong
feelings, to soothe the cares of greatness,
and cheer the hours of languor and de-
pression.134            EARL OBRIC.


              CHAP. VII.


         " Music! Hark!
  
  Nen. It is the unusic, Madam, of your house.
  Pox. Nothig is good, I see, without respect;
Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.
  NER, Silence bestows the virtue on it madam."
                                MERCHANT OF VENICE.

          " Haply this life is best,
    If quiet life is best; sweeter to you,
    That have a sharper known."
                                        CYMBBLINE.


  THE Priory of St.Margeret, an ancient
Gothic building, of vast extent, stood on
a gentle declivity, almost surrounded by
a rich and extensive wood, and nearly em-
bosomed amidst its tall trees. The high
barred gates were thrown open to admit
its fair and noble visitor, and the good
Dame Maddelina, was ready to receive
her.
    "Dearest Almina," she said, "what
pleasure once more to behold thee, to          EARL OSRIC.                         135


know that the attraction of friendship has
power to draw thee from the great world
to these retreats."
   "Ah, dear revered friend," said Al-
mina, "it is the lessons of that world,
which have taught me the comfort of 
retirement, which have bade me seek,this
quiet asylym, and by the loss of dear con-
nexions, have taught me to fly for conso-
lation to thee, and to your holy altar."
     "Mayest thou find here, the peace thou
seekest," answered the pious Dame, "the
society of the simple votaries of religion,
the secluded inmates of this ancient pile,
would be tasteless and uninteresting to the
mere worldlings, but thon, I trust, my
child, wilt find in it, the solid comfort to
be derived from piety and female friend-
ship. To-morrow, thou shalt be introdu-
ced to our community. To night thou
shalt partake some refreshment and retire
to rest."
     Almina gladly availed herself of this136               EARL OSRIC.

permission, and was shown by the Prioress
herself, to the neat apartment prepared
for her; but sleep was not a visitor so
ready to obey her summons, as she had
once found him at Osric Castle, when the
world, its pains, and pleasures, its advan-
tages, and distresses, were alike unknown
to her; when the early carol of the birds
awakened her to happiness, as she was
lulled by their evening song, to innocent
repose.  The contrast in her situation,
raised a long train of reflections, nor could
she, for some hours, close her eyelids to
rest.  She was at last sunk into a gentle
slumber, when she was awakened by the 
sounds of music, which floated on the air
to her chamber.  The strain was so melo-
dious, that in the first confusion of awak-
ing suddenly, she almost fancied herself
an inhabitant of another sphere, and that
she heard the celestial tones of beings in a
better world.  A few minutes recollection
brought to her memory a caution, the
Prioress had given her in the evening, not                  EARL OSRIC.          137

to be alarmed at the bell which roused the
Nuns to midnight prayer, and she con-
cluded the music, by which she had been
awakened, was that of the holy choir at
their nightly orisons.  She lent a more
attentive ear, and was soon convinced of
the truth of this suspicion; the holy strain
now swelled into melody the most enchant-
ing, and now died away, in soft cadences on
the enraptured ear of Almina, till at length,
a profound silence ensued, and the steps
of females were shortly heard in the pas-
sages adjoining her apartment, which made
her conclude the Nuns were returning to
their cells.  Towards morning, she again
sunk into a refreshing sleep, and arose
much revived.  Her casement command-
ed a fine and extensive prospect, and she
had contemplated it for some time, before
she was summoned to the morning repast.

  Dame Maddelina rejoiced to see her so
much better than she had expected.  There
were several other boarders in the Convent,
from whom she soon heard the praises of138            EARL OSRIC

the pious Prioress resounded, with that
heartfelt sincerity and affection Almina
was so well convinced she merited.  Very 
soon, she became perfectly reconciled to
her new mode of life, and the rules of a
Monastery.

  To all its inhabitants, the uncommon
sweetness of her manners, and very in-
teresting appearance, had endeared her
from her first arrival and she was soon
almost idolized by them.  One of the
Nuns, whose fervour in devotion, and un-
common piety, made her name very
famous in the Convent, was particularly
admired by Almina; but it was long before
she became more intimately acquainted
with her, than by seeing her with the rest
of the sisterhood, at their devotions in the
chapel, where by her superior fervency of
prayer, and rigid adherence to her duty,
she was ever particularly distinguished.

  Sister Alicia, was a finely formed figure;
her large dark eyes seemed as if they had
once sparkled with hope and vicacity, and               EARL OSRIC.    139

the elegance of her manners showed her to
be of noble birth. The close dress of her
order cold not conceal her superior beauty,
nor could the reserve, it became the Nuns
to maintain towards the laity, disguise the
elegant sweetness of her manners. This
interesting Nun, had long engaged the
attention of Almina, before she mention-
ed her admiration of her to any one, till
at length, happening to speak of her to
Dame Maddelina, that excellent woman,
with a deep sigh, replied, "I do not won-
der at your particularly noticing our pious
sister Alicia.-She is considered by us as
an ornament to out sacred order, and to
the holy vocation she professes. Never
since her first entrance into the Convent,
has she, in any degree, relaxed for a mo-
ment, from the religious fervour which ani-
mates her devotion, nor do her thoughts
ever seem to wander in any other direction.
Her whole soul is given up to the delights
of religion, and by her example, are the
young Nuns exhorted to the practice of140   EARL OSRIC.

piety, more forcibly than by any lectures
of mine-in the life of our saint-like
Alicia, they perceive its happy effects, she
is of a good family and fortune, but sor-
rows of a peculiar nature, have led her to
adopt a cloistered life, which, when it is
embraced from proper motives, is well
adapted to heal the wounds inflicted by
misfortune."

  Almina felt the Prioress was right, in
thinking that a religious retreat was well
calculated to soothe the mind, lacerated by
affliction; but her more unbiassed judge-
ment suggested, whether under other cir-
cumstanced, a Monastic life was more ac-
ceptable to god, tan a perseverance in
virtue, in a situation where daily  tempta
-tions tried the strength of the Christian
faith.

  Almina should have lived in a more
enlightened period, for in spite of the
bigotry of the age, she dared to think for
herself; and to believe, that even Dame
Maddelina, with all her natural acuteness


            EARL OSRIC.          141

of intellect, her warm benevolence of
heart, and kindness of manners, would
have been more extensively useful; a cha-
racter more meritorious in the sight of the
Creator, in a life of activity, where the
constantly recurring trials exercise the
virtues of Christianity, and prove the
heart, than acting in a narrow sphere,
where, though her excellence was felt and
acknowledged, it was passive, and ex-
posed to none of those struggles which are
the tests of religion.

   The Nuns, imitating their superior,
were in general mild, pious, humble, and
unassuming; and the boarders lively, good
natured, and obliging; but human im-
perfection is every where to be found,
though in the Priory of St. Margeret, such
influence had the good example of the
head of the community, that, considering
it was a society of females, there was less
tattling, envy, and malignity, than might
be expected. It was true, the merry sister
Agatha, would sometimes whisper that142          EARL OSRIC.

old sister Mary was seen nodding over her
beads, and did not awaken till mass was
over, that the indisposition of sister Agnes,
which so often detained her from midnight
prayer, and in cold weather, confined her
to her pallet, was rather love of indul-
gence, tha serious idleness, and on festi-
vals, when old sister Beatrice told stories
to amuse them, and related former adven-
tures, when she was reckoned one of the
benuties of Henry's Court, the laughing
Agatha would ridicule, by her sly looks,
and ironical compliments, the little shriv-
elled deformed figure, who was boasting
of her conquests, and relating the triumphs
achieved by her beauty : but Agatha was
so good natured, her faults were tolerated
by the community, for the sake of that
kindness of heart, which, in the longest
and coldest winter night, would lead her
to sit by the couch of the sick, or the
penitent, whether Nuns, Novice, or Board-
ers if they required her attetion. Blessed
with strong health, and never failing                       Earl Osric.           143

spirits, she often took the turns of the
other Nuns, in their nightly offices of
watching by the dead, &c. never shrinking
from the performance of her own duty,
and thus obtaining general good will, and
ridicule, which she would indulge in, in
spite of the exhortation of the superior.

     Agatha, became a great favourite with
Almina, who, in her turn, was strongly
loved and admired by the Nun. "They
tell us, Lady," would she say, "that when
we enter here, we ought to renounce all
worldly attachments, but I find it impos-
sible to help loving my fellow creatures, as
well as laughing at them, and whether it
be a sin or not, I must remember you,
even when you quit us, with respect and
regard."

     Glad to find the mind of one of the
votaries of religion, at least rise superior
to the narrow sophistry of conventual
bigotry, Almina applauded the liberality of144        EARL OSRIC.
the sentiment,adding,"Be sure,Agathe,
that a gold of mercy and kindness,re-
quires not that abstract devotion,which is
to divest us of natural affection,that
sweetest of all sensations,which warms
the heart of man towards his spices,and
renders him more like the Creator."
  Insensibly,the regular life she now led,
restored the bloom of Almina,and much
of the tranquillity ,which a court resi-
dence had interrupted,Formed to enjoy
in their highest degree,the gelights of
friendship,she ceastd to which for a more
extense sphere of action.even here,
the splendour of her abilities was acknow-
ledged ,and the superiority of her talents
and attainments reversed and admired:
yet a sigh would sometimes intrude ,when
she felt consciuos to the world.and to diffuse
their influence to the world,and to open
the regions of science,yet ,but partially
explored by females.
   she longed to know the fate of the Earl,
and became daily more anxiuos to learn

   














the nature of those events, which had so suddenly called him to St. Albert, but no intelligence reached her, and at the Priory of St. Margeret, the minds of its inhabitants, were little occupied with ought beyond its walls. 

    "The world forgetting, by the world forgot," they "held the even tenor of their way," nor ever mentioned public affairs, save when rumours of any great change reached them, through the Monks, and then the topic was confined to the Superior and the Boarders. The former, knowing Almina's anxiety for her early friend, tried ineffectually to procure some information, and still she was destined to remain in suspense, on a subject that so nearly interested her. 146              EARL OSRIC.

                 CHAP. VIII.

"Sweet tomb, that in thy circuit dost contain,
The perfect model of eternity;
Fair Juliet, that with the angels dost remain,
Accept this latest favour at my hands;
That living honour'd thee, and being dead,
With funeral praises do adorn thy tomb!"
                             ROMEO AND JULIET.

"Feeling so the loss,
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend."
                                         IBID.

THREE months had nearly elapsed,
since Almina, bidding the world adieu,
had been the peaceful resident of St. Mar-
geret's Priory.  In the course of that
time, the only intelligence she heard of
any former friend, was that imparted to
her by Dame Maddelina of the strange
disappearance of her younger brother, the            EARL OSRIC.      147

romantic Edwin, who had quitted his
favoured cottage, and no traces were left
of his destination. His enthusiasm and
singular turn of mind, raised a host of
feats for him, in the breast of the good 
Dame; but to Almina alone, she confided
them, and the latter, aware that she her-
self had probably contributed to render
solitude tasteless to the eccentric Edwin,
shared all his sister's inquietude. Musing on
this subject, she had strayed into the chapel
soon after Vespers, as was frequently her
custom; she loved the solemnity of the 
twilight hour, and to idulge reflection in
a sport so calculated for sober thought.
The gloomy ailes, the high altars, faintly
illuminated by the lase beams of receding
day, that penetrated  through the stained
and lofty windows, communicated a pleas-
ing awe to her mind, and seemed to throw
at an immeasurable distance, every
trifling and worldly wish."Here,"
thought she as she paused before the
steps of the altar, "in this very spot, how
                  H2

148              EARL OSRIC.

many souls have discarded every baneful
passion, and bid the world, its vanities,
and its allurements, adieu for ever. Here,
resisting the ordinations of nature, have
they torn from their hearts, every relative
affection, to devote themselves, in the
height of youth and health, to a living
tomb. Ah, could that be consistent with
the will of that Being, who commands
us to love one another? Oh, no! Poor
victims of enthusiasm! ye were misled by
the thousands who have gone before you,
nor sought in their own reason for a guide,
that would have directed you that the path
of truth and nature, is the path of peace."
Her meditations were here interrupted,
by a convulsive sigh, which echoed from a 
renote part of the chapel. In the pro-
found silence that surrounded her, it
struck with peculiar awe on the ear of
Almina, and softly gliding towards the
spot from whence it appeared to proceed,
she discerned a figure in deep and earnest
prayer, near a small tomb of plain black              EARL OSRIC             149

marble, in an arched recess, at some dis-
tance.  A second glance, confirmed her
suspicion, that it was one of the Nuns,
and she paused to observe her, certain that
where she stood, she herself must be un-
noticed.  The sister was on her knees, 
her uplifted hands were clasped, as if in
ardent supplication, and deep sobs of
anguish burst from her bosom.  Petrified,
yet not daring to move, Almina remained
an anxious unseen spectator of his extra-
ordinary scene, till the Nun, rising from
her knees, paused a moment, and then
raised her veil, stooped down, and three
times kissing the marble, that covered the
grave, she exclaimed in tremulous and
broken tones, "Farewell, blessed saint,
beatified friend of my woe fraught heart,
adieu," and turning with slow and linger-
ing steps, was quitting the chapel--Con-
fused and engrossed, by what she had un-
intentionally witnessed, Almina had un-
consciously advanced towards her.  The
veil of the Nun was still disordered, she
                    H 3150              EARL OSRIC.

was wholly unsuspicious of being observ-
ed, and the trickling tear was still dis-
cernable on her pallid cheek. With sur-
prise, Almina, on a nearer view, discover-
ed the elegant form of her favourite sister
Alicia. The Nun started at perceiving her,
and as Almina stood by, to let her pass,
the sister, in a low voice, said, "Hast
thou not mistaken the hour of prayer,
Lady?"

    "No," answered Almina, "I am aware
that this is not a time for regular devotion,
but I have accustomed myself to indulge
meditation in this holy spot, when ves-
pers are over, nor knew that I intruded
on the pious retirement of the sisters.
Being once aware of it, be assured, sister,
that I will be more guarded in future."

    "There can be no intrusion, Lady,"
said Alicia, with a deep drawn sigh,
"since this holy sanctuary is open to all,
whom motives of piety may attract hither.
I, too, generally resort hither after vespers.
It is an hour set apart by myself, after the                  EARL OSRIC.        151
duties and penances of the day, for an
offering of affection at you holy shrine.
This awful hour, methinks, is peculiarly
adapted for a purpose so heart-soothing,
yet so sacred. When the glorious light of
day is just gone to revisit another hemis-
phere, and the faint glimmer of pensive
twilight diffuses its dusky hue over every
external object, while to the mind, it gives
that devout melancholy, that pious sadness
that disposes it for prayer and medi-
tation."

  These words were uttered in that sweet
tone of voice, with that genuine piety of
countenance and manner, which distin-
guished the beautiful Nun; and as Almina
contemplated the seraphic calmness of her
still lovely features, and listened to the
penetrating, but melodious sound of her
voice, she could have fancied her more
than human.

  "Unaccustomed," said she, "as I have
been, to consider the cloistered life as de-
sirable, yet your discourse and apparent

                     H 4



152               EARL OSRIC.

happiness in your religious duties, pious
sister, inspire me with reverence for the
holy vocation, and raise an involuntary
wish to emulate your fervour."
   "Ah, beware fair Lady," cried Alicia,
doscarding suddenly her usual reserve,
"beware of mistaking a transient emo-
tion, arising from momentary enthusiasm,
for that total abstraction from all worldly
objects, which must precede a dedication
of thine heart to God. From experience,
a I enable to warn thee, approach with
me'" she added, while her eyes flashed
with a wildness of expression that al-
most alarmed her companion as she
seized the half-resisting hand of Almina,
"Approach with me, yon awful recepta-
cle-beneath this marble," she continued,
returning hastily towards the small tomb,
where Almina had first seen her, "recline
the pale remains of one, who like thee,
Lady, was young, happy, lovely, and be-
long ere its noon, dark clouds overcast the

                EARL OSRIC.                    153

prospect, and she became the victim of
the desolating tempest. In her person,
not in my own, can I warn there, for she
too, fancied, she had torn from a heart,
rich in feeling, overflowing with love to
mankind, at once every worldly afection,
and sacrified all at the altar of her God:
but she was deceived. The voice of nature
would be heard, and deep consuming
grief destroyed the loveliest work of the
Creator. But still she lives," she added,
"she lives here. In visions I still behold
her, and the same tomb will one day con-
tain us both."

  She ceased, the temporary brilliancy of
her eyes was extinguished, and slowly the
tears dropped from them. Again taking
Almina's hand, she said,--"I have not, I
hope, alarmed you.--In this spot, we may
meet again, for oft is it visited by me.
The pale dawn, the midnight bell, are
often witnesses of my grief, o'er this
loved, this hollowed spot."

  "And may I sometimes, be permitted
               H 5154                EARL OSRIC.

to meet you here, after vespers?" said Al-
mina, "Much would it gratify me, and
most salutary would be your pious con-
verse to one, who deeply feels her own
insufficiency."

"Be it so," said the Nun, then meekly
added, "Many revolving suns have now
witnessed my seclusion from the world.
From motives, which humbly I hope, the
God I worship, has approved, did I pay
my vows at yon altar.  With vigilance
have I observed the duties they imposed,
and tranquil have been my last years.  All
worldly regrets are now subdued, and one
deep, one silent source of anguish, alone
reposes beneath this cold marble, for here
lies interred, the friend of my soul.  Here-
after, thou mayest know the little tale of
her woes, for not unobserved, Lady, hast
thou been; deeply interested by thy ap-
pearance, often has the wish to address
thee arisen: it is now gratified, and here-
after, the same indulgence may be mine.
For to-night, Lady, farewell, I go to my            EARL OSRIC            155

duty, and in my cell, the fair Almina
shall be remembered in my orisons."
  So saying, she drew her veil over her
face, and hastily glided from the chapel.
Alone in her chamber, the image of the
fair Nun was still present to Almina, and
she felt much interested in the promised
communication, relating to the tomb of
her friend.  In the air and person of sister
Alicia, there was something familiar to
her, but memory could not retain the re-
semblance, which she felt sure existed, to
some form, well known to her.
  She mentioned her meetings with the
Nun, to the Superior, who answered,
"Highly indeed, are you favoured by
Alicia, my dear Almina, for so sacred is
the remembrance of her friend, that never
since her lamented death, has her name
been heard to pass her lips.--Sister
Helena, was a severe loss to our commu-
nity.  She was truly a saint on earth, and
the holy friendship that subsisted between
her, and your favourite Nun, may well
authorize the grief of the latter."
                  H 6156           EARL OSRIC.

   Every thing Almina heard, rendered
her more anxious for the promised narra-
tive, but it was deferred for some days.
Though several times she again met
Alicia, in the chapel, but the Nun always
appeared absorbed by prayer, or private
meditation, and seemed not to notice her.
It was on the eve of a festival, when the
Nuns, busied in preparations, were dis-
persed in different occupations; that Al-
mina, as she returned through the Cloisters
from a walk, in the grounds adjoining the
Convent, saw the black robe of one of the
sisters, entering the folding doors of the
chapel, and as she turned towards the
staircase leading to her own apartment, she
heard her own name uttered in the soft
voice of sister Alicia.

   "Art thou engaged, Lady?" said she,
"or wilt thou devote an hour to a retro-
spect of the past?"

   "Willingly," said Almina, and she fol-
lowed her down a passage, which led, by
a private door, to that remote spot in the               EARL OSRIC.     571

chapel, where the unadorned tomb of
Helena, was situated. Here, the Nun
paused-deep and heavy sighs burst from
her bosom, and prostrating herself on the
tomb, she seemed for some minutes to
pray fervently; then rising and seating
herself on the pedestal of an ancient
monument, she motioned to Almina to do
the same, and after a short silence, she
addressed her.

   "Though a stranger to me, Lady, you
are become an object of interest greater
than I ought to acknowledge, for you re-
call the days of my youth, the sunny era
of life's early day, when, glowing in juve-
nile beauty, I beheld your mother, the
Lady Rosalinda, of Rosamond, at a tour-
nament held by the Earl, her father.
Many years my senior, she honoured me
with her peculiar notice, and her form is
still present to my imagination. In you,
indeed, she still lives, and for her sake, as
well as your own, would I give the lession
to be extracted from the fate of my friend.

   158                EARL OSRIC.



   Left at a very carly period of life, an
   orphan, I was reared in a Monastery,
   where first I learned to love Emma, the
   sister of my soul. She too, was placed
   there for her education, and never were
   we separated, till we attained year of
   maturity. Beautiful, gay, and innocent,
   she was a modle of all that was lovely in
   woman. When she quitted the Convert,
   I accompanied her to her father's Castle.
   A sister, two years her elder, and herents,
   ewre the only children of their parents,
   but Edith was proud and lofty in her de-
   meanour, and widely different in manners
   as in disposition from my loved Emma.

      Here, after a separation of years, I be-
   held my only brother, of whose care I had
   been consigned, on the death of my father.
   Sacred trust ! Ah, how did he fulfil it."

     Alicia paused, the wonted pallid hue of
   her complexion, became more deadly pale,
   and she paused for composure, to continue
   her narrative.

      " My brother saw, and as I hoped, ad-                EARL OSRIC.           159

mired my friend--I knew that his educa-
tion had been faulty, but I trusted the
virtues of Emma, were destined to reform
aught that might be erroneous in a mind
early left to its own guidance, but I was
deceived; the haughty Edith superceded
her gentle sister, and the peace of my
friend was the sacrifice; but the Baron
had higher views for his elder daughter,
and my brother was forbidden the Castle.
I returned to the Convent, with a heart
deeply wounded, for the fate of my friend,
and trembling for my own. A young
Knight of rank, but small inheritance,
had sought my hand, and engaged my
affections, but my brother had treated him
with coldness, and declared me too young
to enter into any engagement, though he
might have recollected that I was several
years his own senior. Let me draw a veil
over the cruelty of a brother. Suffice it,
that I was condemned to a cloistered life,
that I might not claim any portion of the
wealth, which was found inadequate to the160           EARL OSRIC

purposes of inordinate dissipation, but I
resolutely refused to take the veil, till I
felt assured, my mind was prepared for
the sacred office.
   The Crusade, was at this period, the
prevailing topic, and amongst the first of
those who enrolled themselves under the
banner of Prince Edward, was he to whom
I was still fervently attached.  All com-
munication with Emma was cut off, and a
long interval of silent misery succeeded.
  I was aroused from a state of torpor,
from which no exhortations could awaken
me, by the intelligence that the object of
my first attachment had fallen in Palestine,
and I no longer sought to resist the com-
mands of my brother.  I removed to this
Convent, and here too the vows.
  What a scene awaited me!  It was on
the eve of my patron saint, that, having
knelt long before the holy altar, imploring
for grace to enable me to discard all
worldly recollection, I was returning to
my cell, when an unusual bustle in the                 EARL OSRIC.                    161

cloistors, attracted my attention, and I
learned from one of the lay sisters, that it
was caused by the arrival of a young
female, who was to be professed in three
days. I saw her not, till the heart-moving
ceremony, at which, according to the
rules, I assisted ; but, Ah! judge of my
feelings, when decorated in those splendid
habiliments, so soon to be discarded for
the monastic dress--pale with contending
emotions, but still lovely as ever, I beheld
my faithful, my almost idolized Emma. I
dared not approach her, but I gazed with
anxious eyes, with beating heart, on her
well-known features, and I heard her hailed
by her conventual appellation of sister
Helena, ere I recovered from the stupor,
that overwhelmed me. When at leghth
we were allowed to meet; in those inter-
vals of relaxation, which our monastic
duties permitted, what a tale had I to
hear !

   The author of my sorrows, was also the
cause of her's. Edith, the lofty Edith,
162              EARL OSRIC.

had fled with my brother, it was supposed
she had attended him to Palestine, for no
news of her fate had ever reached her
friends, and the wounded heart of my
Emma, sough the shelter of a Convent,
in the hope that a religious life would re-
store her peace. Her mother was no
more, grief at her daughter's degradation
had brought her to the grave.

   The feelings of Emma were keen and
susceptible. An unconquerable passion
for my brother, mortification and disap-
pointment, combined to render the world
odious to her, and she rashly devoted her-
self to the Cloister, but too late, she dis-
covered that passions unsubdued, affections
still glowing, and sorrows still deplored,
distanced every attempt to devote herself
wholly to the duties of her new station,
and in my bosom she reposed all her con-
flicts. Very dreadful they were, often
has the long live night witnessed her self-
inflicted penances, and the morning's
dawn found her yet prostrate on the cold                 EARL OSRIC.               163

pavement of the chapel, till her constitu-
tion, unable to sustain bodily hardships,
and mental struggles, yielded to disease
and death, in the form of a gradual and
lingering consumption, which finally tore
from my arms, the friend, whom a brother's
perfidy condemned to an early grave. Se-
dulously had he sought her affections, and
then left her to pine in hopeless despon-
dence.

   The tale of Edith is wrapt in obscurity,
and dead to the world, and its ever chang-
ing events, I have long ceased to hear
aught of the only relation I ever knew.
I have performed my promise," added
Alicia, rising, "Beware of the destiny of
Emma, and devote not yourself to a
religious life, while yet one lingering
spark of attachment to worldly concerns,
glows in your breast, lest you incur like
her, the tortures of remorse, rather than
secure the consolations of piety."

   Ere Almina could thank the sister for
her recital, she had disappeared and left164               EARL OSRIC.

her auditor to reflect on the singular nar-
rative she had just heard. She almost
envied the calm piety of sister Alicin, and
she regarded Emma as a fair enghusiast,
who, led by imagination rather than rea-
son, had inflicted on herself corporeal
penances, and personal inflictions, when
she required mental discipline, and rational
admonition, to subdue the passions which
had assumed the empire of her mind, and
teach her the hard lesson of fortitude and
self-command.

   "How weak," thought she, "is human
reason! How humiliating the reflection,
that while the strait path of religion is
open to the view of all, such is the weak-
ness of human nature, that the intricate
ways of superstition and enthusiasm, are
preferred. May I be enabled to avoid
such dangerous extremes."                EARL OSRIC    165

                    CHAP. IX.

"When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
But in battalions."                          HAMLET.

"I hold the world, but as the world, Gratiano,
A stage, where every man must play his part;
And mine a sad one."             MERCHANT OF VENICE.


   FROM the calmness and monotony of
a cloistered life, Almina was at length
aroused, by the arrival of a messenger from
her aunt, Lady St. Albert. He brought
dispatches from thence, which demanded
immediate attention; but Almina looked
in vain for the writing of Earl Osric.

   One packet, with the signature of the
good Lady de Mornay, was all that met
her eye. It was as follows:-166 EARL OSRIC.
TO THE LADY ALMINA FITZ OSCAR.

"Long is the space of time, my dear
young friend, since you received intelli-
gence of this family. I grieve that I am
compelled to intrude on your retirement,
with only tidings of sorrow to impart.
The hand of misfortune, dearest Almina,
has fallen heavily on the house of St. Al-
bert, and the health and spiritis of the
long-suffering Countess have nearly sunk
beneath the pressure. Of Adeliza, the
lost, misguided Adeliza, let me first speak.
"It is now some months, since informa-
tion was one morning at early dawn brought
to the Castle, that she had disappeared
from the monastery. That she had fled is
certain; but the cause and the means by
which she effected it, are still concealed
beneath an impenetrable veil of mystery.
"Every search, every inquiry has hi-
therto proved unavailing. Not the fainest
trace is discoverable, and so terrible is the
vengeance of the offended church on her             EARL OSRIC.                167

crime, that sad as is the alternative, we
are obliged to wish she may remain in the
mysterious concealment she has sought.
But the sorrows of Eloisa have not termi-
nated here.

   "The good Earl, who, by his respect-
ful and affectionate treatment, had won
her fond and grateful regard, was a month
since suddenly seized with the stroke of
death, and Eloisa, in the space of a mo-
ment, was separated from the man whose
attentive kindness had merited her warmest
affection.  I, alone, have the melancholy
task of assuaging her griefs.

  The house of mourning has few attrac-
tions to Lady Douglas, who has attended
Sir Ethelred to court.  I fear me much,
Almina, that all is not well.  Elfrida
wears not the joyous looks of happiness,
and Isabel seems to guide her conduct.
These combined sources of affliction have
produced a frightful desolation at St.
Albert.  The young Earl is engaged in
the duties of his station, and his unhappy168           EARL OSRIC.

mother, sinking beneath her griefs, is me-
naced with the return of that most dire
of human calamities, the extinction of 
reason.

"several times has she entertained a
wish to behold thee, dearest Almina. The
Earl fancies thy presence will restore peace
and comfort to his suffering parent, and he
implores thy compliance without joint 
request. He sends two of his confidential 
domestics to guard thee, and no doubt will 
himself meet thee on thy way.

"Hasten, then, and bring a restoration 
to tranquility with thee, sweet Almina, for
calamitous is the change here, and ardently  
is thy arrival wished for, by

                                 "Thy Friend,
                              "MATILDA DE MORNAY."

Amina could not hesitate, after reading 
the foregoing epistle. She was imperi-
ously called on by duty and gratitude to
 attend the summons, and she sought Dame               EARL OSRIC.          169

Maddelina, to impart her intentions and
its motives.

  ” I must, then, submit to part from thee,
dear Lady;“ said the kind-hearted dame.
” The claims of affection and friendship
are sacred, and may the Saints protect
thee till we meet again.“

  All the Nuns united in deploring her
departure; the merry Agatha supplicated
her to return, and cheer St. Margeret's
with her presence; and the elder sisters
lamented that they could not hope to add
her to their community.

  She visited the pious Alicia in her cell,
and found her, as usual, occupied in 
prayer.  Waiting till she was at liberty to
listen to her, she imparted her proposed 
departure, and asked to be remembered in
her orisons.

  ” Doubt not that thou wilt,“ said the
Nun; ” and if it be a crime to avow the
interest I feel in thy welfare, may it be
pardoned.  Nightly even at the tomb of
Helena, the spot on which I first beheld170              EARL OSRIC.

thee, will I pray for thy eterual happi-
ness; and if the world be thy allotted
sphere of action, may its daily trials pre-
pare thee for a better life, where we may 
be re-united."

  The big tear fell on the pals cheek of
the Recluse, but, unwilling to betray her
emotion, she concealed her face with her
veil, and wave her hand, as if to ask her
to depart.

Almina felt more than she dared ex-
press; but she had studied to conquer her
feelings, and had at least learned to com-
mand them.

  The conductors sent by the young Lord
St. Albert awaited her, and mounting the
steed sent to convey her, she was soon on
her way to the Castle, followed by the
prayers and blessings of the sisterhood of
St. Margeret's

  It was impossible for a mind so reflect-
ing as that of almina, to avoid, reverting,
during her journey, to the only one she
had before travelled to St. Albert. EarlEARL OSRIC. 171
Osric was then her companion. Unknow-
ing and unknown, all then was peace and
delight in her bosom. Visions of pleasure
swam before her sight, and ignorant of
any cause for fear, she had no apprehen-
sion for the future.
Where now was Osric? she longed, yet
dreaded to inquire. At once to satisfy the
anxiety she felt, and to beguile the length
of the way, she inquired of her atten-
dants, if they knew the probably destina-
tion of some detached parties of the mi-
litary, which they observed occasionally at
a distance.
From Edric, the confidential servant of
her cousin, Lord St. Albert, she learned
that the King had been on the point of
embarking for the Continent, with his
army, in consequence of the perfidious
conduct of the French King, when his
departure was prevented by an unsuspected
insurrection in Wales, whither Edward
was now marching in person; and doubt-
12172            EARL OSRIC.
less the troops they beheld were proceed-
ing in the same direction.
  the name of earl  Osric trembled on
the lips of Almina, but she could only at-
tain courage to ask if it were known who
commanded the army in waste,the
earls of Lancaster and LincoJn were men-
tioned. sir Ethelred Douglas had also a
high post assigned him.she could no 
longer refrain.
"Earl Osric,"she just articulated,"is
not he too-"
  "Earl Osric has retried from public
life ,and resides on his own estate,"was
the answer.
  Deep sunk in silence ,Almina proceeded 
without further converse.the predictions
of osric were the verified ,and his lumi-
nous talents were condemned to the nar-
row sphere of private life Scarcely could
the beauty f the country through which
she passed draw her attention,till by one
of those efiorts which mark great minds,EARL OSRIC.        173

she sought in external objects a rufuge from
thought. It was the middle of September, 
the rich tints of early autumn tinged the 
foilage of the trees that waved over the road,
from the declivity of a steep ascent to the 
right, and to the left the rich corn-fields,
not yet quite despoiled of their store, pre-
sented a scene of industry and cultivation.
The first night was passed on the road,
and just as the shadow of the following
evening began to chase day-light, they
arrived within the precincts of Castle St.
Albert, and passed near the gates of the
Monastery, which had once containted
Adeliza. Almina recollected the last time
she had ever seen her there, and the dis-
clousre she then made of the secret attach-
ment she harboured. Little did she imagine
the disastrous consequences that would 
ensue; the subject engrossed her wholly
till she was aroused from it by her arrival
at the eastern bridge, which admitted her
to the Castle. In the great hall the anxious
Lady de Mowbray was expecting her.
        
                   13174                 EARL OSRIC

  "You have outstripped even our expec-
tations, my kind Almina," said she, "and
your appearance is, I trust, an omen of
good to my poor friend."
  Eagerly Almina inquired after the
Countess.
  "Alas!" she answered, "her state is
pitiable.  Conscious only of exquisite mi-
sery, her mind is at times so darkened,
that the constant aid of friendship is ne-
cessary, to support her against desponden-
cy.  Your arrival has been the only topic
on which she has shown any interest.  Oh 
may it prove salutary!  I hasten to prepare
her for the intelligence."
  Leaving Almina in one of the lower
rooms, she attended the Countess.  The
former gazed around her in wonder.
  "Can this" thought she, "be the late
gay Castle St. Albert, crowded with throng-
ing Knights, and gay with the busy hum
of company?--Now all seems lone and sad,
and even the domestics glide softly along
with faces full of woe."       ERAL OSRIC     175

   Lady de Mowbray soon returned to
conduct her to the Countess.

   Extended on a couch, emaciated by
sickness, her eyes wild, and her flushed
feverish cheeks betraying an unsettled
mind, she found the once lovely Eloisa.
Fondly she pressed Almina to her heart,
then gazing on her, called her Rosalinda,
and her ideas seemed to wander to scenes
and occurrences long past. The loss of 
her excellent Lord, the mysterious fate of
Adeliza, and the neglect of Elfrida, seemed
to combine with the circumstances of her
early life, in her disordered imagination,
and too plainly Almina discovered that her
intellects were seriously injured.

   In the hope of being enabled by sleep
to undertake the melancholy task assigned 
her she retired early to her apartment.
The Earl had been compelled to quit the 
Castle, before her arrival, by an order to
head some of the troops marching into
Wales, to quell the insurrection which
had arisen there; and she was not sorry
                  14176         EARL OSRIC.

that his absence left her leisure to try to re-
gain the fortitude necessary for the calamit-
ous office she was called on to perform.
Zealously she commenced on the following
day her exertions, and had the satisfaction
to observe that Lady St.Albert seemed more
tranquil in her presence, and would listen
with more attention to her voice, than that
of any other person. Heavily the fate of
Adeliza seemed to weigh on her heart, and
even in sleep, the name of her lost child
was breathed with sighs of the bitterest
anguish. Sometimes she was sufficiently
composed to converse in a low and faint
voice, and at these intervals Almina related
all that had befallen her, since she was so
forcibly conveyed from St.Albert. The
name of Earl Osric was seldom mention-
ed; the family, of which he was become a
member, was disliked by the Countess.
She detested the arrogant Baroness, Fitz
Oswald, and she commiserated her noble
friend; who, she felt assured, had sacri-




              EARL OSRIC.                 177

ficed his inclinations to a point of honour.
Gradually the Countess's mind became
more composed, by the never-ceasing at-
tentions of her niece.

 Cheerfully resigning every selfish grati-
fication, and even the solace of occasional
retirement, Almina devoted her time to
healing those wounds, which, with un-
speakable bitterness she reflected, the con-
duct of her parents had originally inflicted.

 News soon reached them of the success
of the King's arms, in once more reducing
the Welch to subjection. He had com-
pelled them to retire to their fortresses in
the almost inaccessible mountains of
Snowdown; whither with desperate valour,
he had pursued them-penetrated into its
rugged wilds-driven their great Chief, 
Madoc, from his strong holds, and com-
pelled him to submission.

 An unexpected visit from Sir Ethelred
Douglas brought all the particulars to the
Recluses of St. Albert. He either was,
or pretended to be surprised to behold
               15
178     EARL OSRIC.

Almina, and resumed his wonted insinuat-
ing manners towards her; but she could not
forget the suspicions suggested by Lady
de Mowbray, that he was the secret enemy
of Earl Osric; and, insensibly she adapted
a reserve in her deportment, which, if the
wily Knight observed, he forbore to no-
tice. With the most refined duplicity he
affected to lament in Earl Osric, that defi-
ciency of necessary policy, which had es-
tranged him from the King, adding that he
yet hopes to see him restored to the royal
favour.

  Scarcely could Almina listen with
patience to his conversation on this sub-
ject; and was always either resolutely
silent, or contrived to leave the apartment.
His natural penetration easily discovered
the lofty contempt of his dissimulation,
implied by her manner; and in the depths
of his heart, he nourished the most bitter
remembrance of it. Plans of vast magni-
tude and import wavered in his fertile
imagination, which only required leisure               EARL OSRIC.             179

and opportunity to be atured; and even
his visit to St. Albert, under pretence of
inquiring after the health of the Countess,
had its secret motives.

  Elfrida had become the bosom friend of
the Lady Janet de Morthermer, and im-
mersed in revelry, left the Knight to pur-
sue his own pleasures, and scarcely thought
of her suffering parent.

  Sir Ethelred pretended to disapprove her
excessive gaiety, and even hinted at the
misfortune of finding in a wife, no taste for domestic comfort.

  To escape hearing his discourse, which,
whether it treated of his Lady or Earl
Osric, was equally distasteful to her, (and
she felt assured that he felt a malicious
pleasure in introducing the latter topic,)
Almina, for the first time, quitted Lady
St. Albert, and directed her steps towards
the Convent, where she had been to wont to
visit Adeliza.  The Abbess received her
with kindness, and from the Nuns she
learned all the particulars of poor Adeliza's

                   16180            EARL OSRIC. .

mysterious disappearance. She had for
some time before, been more than ordinari-
ly engrossed by devotion, and her health 
was evidently impaired. On her return
from vespers, she was observed by one of
the sisters to pause: and, reclining against
a niche in which stood an image of the 
Virgin, the Nun saw that tears streamed 
from her eyes, and she appeared greatly 
agitated. Thinking she was prevented 
proceeding by indisposition, the sister ad- 
vanced to offer her assistance, but it was 
declined in a very faint voice, and she 
slowly tottered towards her cell. From 
that hour she had been seen no more. 
Her illness prevented her attendance at 
midnight prayer, and her absence was 
therefore undiscovered, till the following 
day, when her cell was found unoccupied; 
but not a trace remained, as a clue that 
would lead to her discovery. It struck 
Almina with surprise, that not the slight- 
est suspicion seemed to be entertained of 
her having any companion in her flight.                EARL OSRIC.                  181

it was universally attributed solely to her
dislike of a conventual life; and, aware of
the dreadful consequences to the poor vic-
tim herself, with care she concealed within
her own bosom, her reasons for believing
that she must have been aided and assisted
by the object of her secret attachment.182          EARL OSRIC.

               CHAP.X.

   " In terms of choice I am not solely led
By nice direction of a maiden's eyes :
Besides, the lottery of my destiny
Bars me the right of voluntary choosing."
                          MERCHANT OF VENICE.

   " I never did repent for doing good,
Nor shall not now; for in companions
That do converse and waste the time together,
Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love,
There must he needs a like proportion
Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit."
                                       131D.

   THE gloomy months of winter were
passed by Almina in unceasing attendance
on the windowed Countess, whose mind 
was still unsettled, though less dicom-
posed than before the arrival of her niece.

   The return of spring brought intelli-
gence of the complete conquest of rebel                 EARL OSRIC.               183

Welsh by the troops of Edward. Madoc
was a prisoner in the Tower of London,
and the insurgent Barons were most of
them confined in different castles in Wales,
and the rest pardoned. The young Earl
was now soon expected at St. Albert ;
and even the depressed spirits of his mo-
ther were cheered by the intelligence. Of
late the Countess had changed from wild
and restless melancholy into a more set-
tled gloom : she was often shut up for a
long time together with her confessor, and
even hinted more than once a wish to se-
clude herself for life in bome religious
house.--Fearing that she should yiedl
herself a willing victim to all the supersti-
tious terrors of fanaticism, and dreading
the extremes into which a wandering ima-
gination might betray her, Almina had
imparted her fears to Lady de Mornay,
and that faithful friend had joined her in
opposing the scheme.

  Ruminating on the fatal consequences
of indulging in secret the grief of an early184        EARL OSRIC.

disappointment,and deploring the want
of that mental strength,which would have
repelled the incursions of fancy,and
taught self-controul, Almina would some-
times,as the spring advanced,venture out
alone,at those hours when the private
conferences of the countess and her sPiri-
tual director exclused her from the apart-
ments of the former,and in rambling over
the extensive domains od St,Albert,seek-
ing,by rational reflection,to fortify her 
mind agninst the weakness she deprecated,
  On a rocky eminence at the extermity
of the grounds,'was erected a romantic
grotto,once a favourite resort of Eloisa.
During the first years of her marriage,she
had been accustomed often to retire here;
for here,unseen,she could breathe the an-
guish that preyed on her heart.Here the
loved name of Fitz Oscar had been in teras 
and sighs lamented-this had the un-
forunate mourner cherished a grief





                 EARL OSRIC.                185

which her duty and her reason ought to
have taught her at once the sin and the
weakness of nourishing.

   From Lady de Mornay Almina had
learnt all that remained for her to know
of St. Albert's early history; and with the
sense and integrity that marked her cha-
racter, she had mourned over the imbeci-
lity of the mind that could suffer itself to
lose its native energies in unavailing mur-
murs and impious discontent.

   Tender and delicate, indulged by her
Lord in every wish, Lady St. Albert had
resigned herself to the indulgence of her
feelings, without an effort to counteract
their influence; and the powers of her
understanding had yielded to the over-
whelming effects of despondency.

   It was after witnessing an instance of
the despair which at times seemed to re-
duce her unhappy relation to even infan-
tine debility, that Almina, having seen
her secluded as usual in her oratory, with
only her confessor, repaired to the grotto186              EARL OSRIC.

in the hope of regaining her wonted com-
posure, by contemplating the beautiful
scenes of renovated nature.

   The blossoms of spring were now burst-
ing forth' the trees and shrubs wore the
pale tints of returning verdure, and the
balmy fragrance of the scented air brought
conviction of the restoration of that season
so grateful to the human mind, as pro-
claiming the bounty of Omnipotence, in
thus restoring to man the beauties of crea-
tion, and awakening them from temporary
death to light and life.  The overflowing
heart of Almina, alive to all the finer feel-
ings of taste and sentiment, with pious
gratitude viewed the lovely scene around
her.  "Ah," thought she, "how debased
must that mind be that can need the aus-
terities of a cloister to enforce devotion--
that can behold the stupendous works of
God, and not adore and love the author 
of them."

   With elastic steps, feeling as if in-
vigorated by every breath she inhaled, like              EARL OSRIC        187

a fabled wood nymph, she gaily traversed
the winding path leading to the cliff on
which the grotto was erected.  It com-
manded a wide and extensive view.  The
woods and lawns of St. Albert, the beauty-
ful rivulet that would its way through the
groves, and the far distant mountains were
alike tinged with the bright beams of a re-
splendant sun.

   Almina felt somewhat of that joyous 
spirit of happiness, which had possessed
her when first liberated from her early
seclusion at Osric Castle, as she contem-
plated the glories now open to her view, 
and the frolic smile that dimple her 
cheek, was such as bad embellished her
countenance in those happy days of peace
and delight.  Her hands, clasped in a 
transport of admiration, and her glisten-
ing eyes fixed on the lovely prosper be-
fore her, she stood in the unstudied at-
titude of silent rapture, so occupied by her
own thoughts, that no sound of footsteps warned her of approach, nor till an in-188            EARL OSRIC

creasing shadow darkened the entrance of
the grotto, was she aware of an observer.
She started and beheld the Earl of St.
Albert.  Pleasure, almost amounting to
exstacy, beamed from the features of the
transported Arthur, as he sprang towards
her and claimed her welcome, "What a
truant have I been," said he "and how
hard has my fate appeared, to be com-
pelled to be absent from the Castle when
it contained all the world holds most dear
to my heart."  "Say not so," said Almina,
your sisters are not here."--"No," cried
he, "but one voluntarily absents herself,
and Adeliza--Ah Almina! that alas is a
subject I dare not venture on, nor can
hope for an elucidation of the horrible
mystery that enshrouds it.--My suffering 
mother too!  how should I have endured
the idea of her hopeless state, had not
thy sweet form, like an angel of mercy,
been present to my imagination, consoling
her for the enforced absence of her son."
"I wish," said Almina, "that I could              EARL OSRIC. 189

flatter myself my presence had been of
permanent or essential benefit, but I fear
the malady is too deeply rooted. Now
however, we may hope that your return,
for which she has so ardently wished,
may be productive of good." " I earnestly
pray, and ah! Almina suffer me to add, I
trust it will have the happiest effects on all,
and that the peace which in war and 
camps has been long estranged from my
bosom, may be restored by her, whose
image has been never a moment from my
memory."

   Almina could not affect to misunder-
stand him, but rising she proposed return-
ing to the Castle.--" Lady St. Albert,"
said she, "when she knows your arrival
will be impatient for your attendance."
" She is already acquainted with it ;" he
answered, "and she knows too the force of
the magnet that attracts me. She bade
me seek you, she spoke in terms of rapture
of your duteous attention, your unremit-
ing kindness; and she added, that in ac-190 EARL OSRIC.


complishing my own! fondest Wishes, I
should ensure to her all of peace the world
now has to offer her." "Oh I oease,"
said Almina, "I will not deceive you with
false hope, but you must allow me time
for consideration, and be assured that you
shall not endure an hour of suspense, from
which I can relieve you; but this surely
is no time for such subjects. The Countess
demands all our attention, and every mo-
ment you are detained from her. is a re-
proach to me." St. Albert in vain tried
to detain her, and her agitation and con-
fusion raised innumerable fears lest some
rival should have engaged the affections he
was eager to obtain. The time long se-
cretly dreaded by Alumina, was arrived ;
she had foreseen the consequence of the
Earl's return, but unwilling to reflect on
the subject, had dismissed it as much as
possible from her thoughts. It now be-
came necessary to give it due reflection,
and with that firmness of principle which
guided her conduct, she entered on the
                   EARL OSRIC.           191

arduous task.  Too plainly her own feel-
ings told her, that to be suffered to remain
unfeitered by connubial ties, and at liberty
to enjoy the pursuits most accordant to
her taste, unallied and uncontrolled, would
have been her decided choice; but she
knew that her rank in life imposed duties
which ought to be fulfilled, and that so-
ciety had claims on her, which it became
her not to reject lightly.  St. Albert him-
self was unobjectionable, that he was
fondly, tenderly attached to her she had
long known.  Their tastes and opinions
were congenial, and his domestic character
was all she could wish for.  That this
marriage was an event ardently, anxiously
desired by the Countess, she was well as-
sured, and to shed one gleam of felicity
over the latest years of Lady St. Albert;
what of self and selfish gratification would
she not sacrifice.--Yet was it impossible
to conceal from herself, the infinite reluc-
tance she felt to enter into the engagement,
and it required the strongest efforts of her192                EARL OSRIC.

well regulated mind, to repress and dis-
courage the conflicting emotions, which
almost disabled her from the self examina-
tion, she had prescribed to her heart.
Absorbed by her own feelings, Lady St.
Albert noticed not the conflict that agitated
her, but roused to exertion by discovering
that what she had so long and ardently
desired, was also the fondest wish of her
son; she promoted the cause with more
resolution, and urged it with greater zeal,
than Almina had ever supposed it possible
she could display again.  Greatly affected
by such a proof of her anxiety, on the
subject, she could only entreat to be al-
lowed time for consideration.

  "Alas my Almina," said the Countess,
"wonder not at my urgency.--Look at
this woe-worn frame, and see if there be
not ample reason for it.  Fain would I,
e're I quit the world, behold one of my
race happy, in domestic comfort; fain
would I be convinced, that the early errors
of Eloisa, have not entailed misery on all                   EARL OSRIC.               193

her children.  Arthur, my beloved Arthur,
adores you.  His fate rests with you; his
worth is known to you, and even Osric
himself, I think, will not disapprove your
choice."  It was decidedly the wish of Al-
mina that no reference should be made to
Earl Osric, till her own decision was
formed.

The acceptance or rejection of her cousin,
was a question to be determined by her
own feelings and inclinations, and she re-
solved to give it a candid deliberation, and
then at once conclude the affair.  While
it remained suspended, the delicacy and
consideration of Arthur, tended not a little
to set her free from embarrassment, and
to recommend him to her favour.  Having
succeeded to some of the high offices of
state, which his father had held; he was
often necessarily absent and obliged to
visit the Court.--On his return to the
Castle, after having been for some days in
attendance on the King; he one evening
entered into conversation on public topics,

   VOL. II.          K194             EARL OSRIC.

and in confidence acknowledged, that he
feared the Scotch affairs again wore a
threatening aspect.  "It is evident," said
he, "that Edward misses his first friend
and counsellor, and much do I err, if he
be not even now balancing on the possi-
bility of recalling Osric to the Court.
He has lately made particular enquiries as
to his present mode of life and general oc-
cupations.  I mentioned this opinion to
Ethelred Douglas, who is doubtless far
more in the confidence of his majesty than
I am, but he assured me I was mistaken;
said, that the King was secretly more de-
termined against Osric than even, and that
he was so convinced of his correspondence,
with some of the disaffected Scotch Chief-
tains, that it has required all his own elo-
quence and caution, to prevent Edward
from issuing an order for his arrest."
"Believe it not," said Almina, turning
deadly pale, "the King is not so unjust,
and oh! Arthur if he were, would the elo-
quence of Sir Ethelred Douglas be exerted                 EARL OSRIC.        195

to convince him of Ostric's integrity?
"Why should you doubt it?" asked Arthur.
"On Sit Ethelred's honour, I would stake
my life." Almina could not feel so con-
fident in it, but regard to the feelings of a 
family, to which the Knight was so nearly
allied, confines her suspicions to her own
breast.-The noble candid Arthur judging 
others by himself, could have no distrust.
His own admiration and reverence of Earl 
Osric induced him to believe, that all
must feel the same respect for his virtues.
The character of St. Albert daily rose in
her estimation; he was no longer the gay
impetuous youth she had first beheld him.
A further knowledge of the world had 
ripened every great and good quality, and 
constant intercourse convinced her, that
to the bravery of the hero, he joined every
trait of excellence, which even Osric him-
self possessed. Her repugnance seemed
hourly to yield to her conviction of the
propriety of uniting her fate with his, and
she was willing to believe that the disin-
         
                   K 2196       EARL OSRIC.

clination she had felt, proceeded from a
deficiency of native warmth and suscepti-
bility, rather than from personal indiffe-
rence. "No," thought she, "I am cer-
tainly not formed to know that ardour of
attachment, which creates the happiness
or misery of those who indulge it." But
what latent undivulged feeling was it that
coloured her cheek with a blush of deepest
dye as the thought passed through her
guileless mind? Whatever it was, virtue
was triumphant, and consigned it to in-
stant oblivion.
                       EARL OSRIC.   197

                     CHAP. XI.
                     ---------

  "Why I can smile, and murder while I smile;
And cry content to that which grieves my heart;
And wet my cheeks with artificial tears;
And frame my face to all occasions.
. . . . . .
I can add colours even to the camelion,
Change shopes with Proteus, for advantages."
                                   SHAKESPEARE. 
                 -------------

  THE decisions of Almina once formed,
she allowed herself neither time or leisure
for regret. The declining health of Lady
St. Albert was a powerful motive for con-
firming at once, the happiness of her son,
and the affection and patient forbearance
Arthur had shown, had their due effect on
a mind so emulous to excel in virute; and
   
                     K3198               EARL OSRIC.
if the grateful transports of the now happy
Earl, the delight and renovated cheerful-
ness of his Mother would reward her for 
her acquiescence, she was amply recom-
pensed.  But Almina had a higher source
of comfort, for she felt that she had acted
right, and the consciousness of self satis-
faction diffused a sweet tranquillity over
her countenance and manner, which was
mistaken for the Placidity of real felicity.
She wished it to be so, and no word or
action of hers contradicted the idea.  Such
perfect confidence had Arthur in her worth,
that her consent to give him her hand was
to him sufficient convictin of her prefc-
rence.  All now was once more compara-
tive peace and comfort at the Castle, and
it became neoessary to inform Earl Osric
of the state of affairs there.  A short billet 
from Almina, in which she reffered to
Arthur for an explanation, and solicited
his approbation of the approaching event,
was conveyed by St. Albert himself to the 
Earl.-With eyes that involuntarily, and
          EARL OSRIC                            199

unconsciously filled with tears, she stood at one of the windows of the gallery, and observed him ride forth from the Castle gates. -Elate with love and hope, he looked up, and noticing her, gaily waved his hand to bid her adieu. The action recalled all her self possession, and she rejoiced that the distance had prevented his discovering her emotion on his return, she had promised to ask for no longer delay, he would probably be absent only a few days. In another week therefore her fate would be decided, and the irrevocable vow have passed her lips. -Under pretence of necessary preparation, she was more retired than usual, and passed more of her time in her own apartments, but she was compelled to quit it on the second day after Arthur's departure, by the unexpected arrival of Sir Ethelred and Lady Douglas. They had heard of the approaching nuptials, and the former said were eager to offer their congratulations. - Almina did not think Elfrida improved by a resi-
                     K 4200              EARL OSRIC.

dence at Court, a degree of proud indiffe-
rence of manner was added to her wonted
indolence of temper, and a kind of dis-
content hung on her brow which appeared
more conspicuous, when addressed by her
Husband. She was accompanied by her
favourite Isabel, who, to the surprise of
Almina, seemed to have obtained unlimited
influence over her. This damsel had al-
ways been the object of her dislike, and it
was encreased by observing the servile
adulation of her deportment towards Lady
Douglas, while in reality the favourite
seemed to guide her in every thing. El-
frida's conversation now wholly consisted
of the delights of a town life, the splendour
of the Court, the magnificence of the tour-
naments, the beauty of her bosom friend
Lady Janet de Monthermer, and finally
her detestation of the country, and her
hopes, that Sir Ethelred would never again
compel her to reside there. "Pardon me,
Lady," said the Knight," and believe that
I regret the necessity of opposing your in-            EARL OSRIC.       201

clinations; but it is too probably, that I
shall be called to join the army, in which
case thou must be content to sojourn with
thy damsels far from the metropolis."
Elfrida declared it would be inhuman to
bury her alive, now that she had once
tasted the pleasures of the world; and Al-
mina was glad to escape hearing the con-
stant dissensions that ensued on this sub-
ject. The behaviour of Sir Ethelred to-
wards herself was cordial and friendly, he
took an opportunity of privately convers-
ing with her, respecting Osric's alienation
from the king, and though in general it
was a subject she wished to avoid, she
could not help feeling some curiosity to
hear what Sir Ethelred chose to impart.--
He told her that a vast army was now rais-
ing, with the undoubted intention of in-
vading Scotland, and that at a time, when
all, who had ever borne arms, were anxious
to testify their loyalty and aflection to the
king, the silence and neutrality observed
by Earl Osric had given his enemies am-

              K 5
202                  EARL OSRIC.

ple cause for censure, adding that it was
much to be lamented, that he would not
be persuaded at least to temporize, and
bend his lofty spirit to concessions which
might yet restore him to favor. The
candour and openness with which he spoke
made their due impression on Almina and
she felt too truly the force of some of his
opinions, not to wish that Osric, for his
own sake, would have adopted them. Sir
Ethelred had never appeared to her in a
point of view so advantageous, he was
sensible and animated, and she easily per-
ceived that the beauty of Elfrida had been
her sole recommendation, and could al-
most pity him for his choice of a wife so
deficient in natural sensibility, and so
given up to an indulgence of her own in-
dolent propensities. Little did Almina
suspect the deep designs of him, who, thus
by an affection of sincerity and friendship,
threw her off her guard. She no longer
felt that sense of painful constraint in his
presence, and began to think that Lady            EARL OSRIC.           203

de Mowbray must have been mistaken in
her suspicions of his treachery and dis-
similation.  St. Albert returned, and
brought with him the expected billet from
Earl Osric, which contained only these
words:

    TO THE LADY ALMINA FITZ OSCAR.

  In an affair of so much moment to the
Lady Almina, she has only her own ap-
probation to seek, not that of others. -
Earl Osric laments, that business of im-
portance demands his presence in Scotland,
and prevents him from offering his per-
sonal congratulations.  In every change of
situation, to hear of her happiness will
yield real satisfaction to

                       EDGAR EARL OSRIC.

  Almina thought the style cold, and un-
like that of the epistles she had formerly
received from the Earl, but no comment
passed her lips.  St. Albert was too happy

                    K 6                 Earl Osric.

to think of aught but her, but Sir Ethel-
red  remarked that it appeared singular,
Earl Osric should not be anxious to be-
stow the hand of his ward, on the son of
his friend. It was a subject all seemed
unwilling to speak upon, and now prepa-
rations being hastened, three days more
were to decide the fate of Almina. She
had retired for the night to her apartment,
and was engaged in the sacred offices of
religion, when she heard a light tapping
at the door of her chamber. she de-
manded who was there, and was answered
by the voice of Isabel, requesting admit-
tance. Wondering at such a request from
her, Almina unclosed the door. "Pardon
me, lady for this intrusion;" said Isabel,
"but I have this evening been to visit the
nuns at the Convent and was desired by
the Lady Abbeas to deliver this billet to
you, but with an injunction not to give it
in the presence of others. I have waited
till your retirement afforded an opportu-
nity;" so saying she hastily wished her
            EARL OSRIG.       205

good repose and retreated. Almina mar-
velling what the Superior could have to
address to her; drew near the light and
unfolding the curiously folded vellum,
read these words:

The Dame St. Maria, Abbess of the Con-
  vent of the Benedictine Sisters, to the
  Lady Almina of Fitz Oscar.

   Some tidings which have privately come
to mine ear, dear Lady, I am desirous to
impart to thee. They relate to the un-
happy Adeliza, once a sister of this Con-
vent. To thee, in preference to her nearer
friends, would I reveal first what I know.
I enjoin thee to secrecy and adjure thee to
repair to-morrow evening, to our Chapel
to Vespers; after which a brother of this
order will be in the Western aisle, and
will conduct thee to a spot, where I may
privately impart to thee a communication
sacred and awful.

   Alumina could scarcely credit the evi-
dence of her senses: but she could not a


206                    Earl Osric.

moment hesitate, on obeying the summons.
It struck her, however, with some natural 
surprise, that the Abbess should so strongly 
insist on seeing her privately, and at length 
concluded, that the unhappy delinquent 
having been discovered, the superior was 
inclined to screen her from the dreadful 
punishment which the Church awarded 
to her offence, and thus applied to her in 
preference to Adeliza's own family, from a 
fear of the truth being known, and the 
poor victim consigned to the horrid cruel-
ties that would then await her. It was
impossible to sleep while such a subject 
dwelt on her mind, and the whole night 
clapsed in wakeful anticipations of what 
she had to hear. To learn all that had 
occurred, and either to conceal it wholly 
from Lady St. Albert, or to reveal it with 
the caution necessary in her present state 
of mind as circumstances should direct, 
seemed so desirable, that she counted the 
hours as they passed till the arrival of that, 
when she had promised herself to meet                  EARL OSRIC.           207

the Abbess-"Thou wilt not leave to
night Almina?" said Arthur as she arose
with an intention of quitting the room
unperceived; her pale countenance, and
the unusual absence of her air and man-
ners, during the day, had more that once
fixed his attention.-"Excuse me, I pray
thee, for an hour or two, St. Albert," said
she; "at the time of supper I will return."
"Art thou not unreasonable, my Almi-
na," he asked, "to deprive us of so much
of thy company?" "I go to attend Ves-
pers at the Convent," said she, "no duty
less sacred, than the one that now  calls
me, should induce me to oppose thy
wishes." He attempted to no farther re-
monstrance, he knew that since she had
become her own mistress, she had insti-
tuted masses for the souls of her unfortu-
nate parents, and that she often repaired 
to the Chapel of the Convent, to pray for 
their eternal repose, and he too highly
revered the innate piety, which dictated
the step, to oppose her purpose. Every208          EARL OSRIC.

hour she seemed to become more dear to
him, and when absent from her, all
company was irksome and uninteresting.
On this evening he seemed to miss her
more than usual; an unwonted pensiveness
hung on his spirits, and the arch raillery
of Sir Ethelred, failed to rouse him suffi-
ciently, to make him join in the conver-
sation.

  The hour for her return drew hear, but
she appeared not, and Arthur became
restless, and even inclined to feel displeased
at her long absence.  "'Tis strange me-
thinks, that Almina is not returned," said
Lady St. Albert; "Vespers must long
since be over."  I will walk to meet her,"
said her son starting hastily from his seat.
"The Lady Almina is so eminently pious,"
said Sir Ethelred, "that it is probable
she seeks converse with the holy Abbess
or Sisters."  It is very odd," said Lady
Douglas, "that she should always be
running to the Convent; I am sure I
could never bear to enter it since poor                EARL OSRIC:    209

Adeliza disappeared, and certainly Almina
might just as well pray in the Chapel of
the Castle, if she must be so much more
pious than other people." It were well
my child if we more nearly resembled her
in that respect," said Landy St. Albert. Sir
Ethelred reproved his lady for the levity
of her speech, but she answered tartly,
that it ill became him to talk of piety,
and advising him with a sneer to recom-
mend it by actions, rather than words,
quitted the apartment. Meantime Arthur
had walked towards the Monastery, but
though a brilliant moon guided his steps,
he saw not her whom he sought. He had
proceeded but a short distance, when he
was overtaken by Sir Etheired, and St.
Albert was expressing his surprise at his
cousin's long absence, when they descried
the white garments of a female, through
the trees, just emerging from the wood.
Arthur sprang forward, and had laughing-
ly began to reproach her for her long de-
sertion, when he discovered it was Isabel.210               EARL OSRIC.

"Where is the Lady Almina, damsel?"
said he. "I know not Sir Knight," said
she calmly, and was passing on, when he
stopped her, to enquire if she had been at
Vespers, and whether the Lady Almina
had not been there engrossed by her own
devotion; she answered she had not ob-
served whether the Lady Almina was
present. "Doubtless," said Sir Ethelred,
she is engaged with the Abbess or her 
Confessor, and as she has of course her
own attendants, if we walk here a short
time, we shall discern her approach." St.
Albert appeared satisfied, and conversed
some time on indifferent subjects; but
an hour elapsed, and she did not appear.
No persuasions could now detain him.
He hastened to the Convent, where he
learned that the Lady Almina had ap-
peared at Vespers, but had not since been
seen. It was not known that any attend-
ant had accompanied her, nor was this an
unusual circumstance. Frequently since
her late residence at St. Albert, had she              EARL OSRIC.

been accustomed  to go thither alone, and
concluding she must have returned to the 
Castle, and retired to her apartment, be-
fore their departure from it, they hurried 
back; but here disappointment onlu await-
ed them; Almina was not there, nor had 
she been observed by any of its,inhabitants
since she left, her friends. The alarm of 
arthurincrcased every moment, as the time
rapidly passed, and no intelligence of her
reached him. Again he visited the Con-
vent, and traversed the wood; the vassals,
domestics and retainers, were all dispatched
different ways, and the long night was 
consumed in unavailing researches. Sir
Ethelred was indefatigable in lending his 
assistance, and in trying to appease the 
distraction of the countess and her son,
but all in vain ;-- an impenetrable veil of 
mystery was thrown over the transaction.212       EARL OSRIC.

               CHAP. XII.
               ----------

           "And is this all?
Then Oh, you blessed Ministers above,
Keep me in patience; and with ripen'd time,
Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up,
in countenance."
                                SHAKESPEARE.

"My lord, I know him, 'tis a meddling friar,
I do not like the man,"               IBID.

  "But whate'er you are,
That in this desert innessible,
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time;
If ever you have look'd on better days;
If ever been where bells have knoll'd to church;
If ever at any good man's feast;
If ever from your eyelids wip'd a tear,
And know what 'tis to pity and be pitied;
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be."
                                         IBID.
                   ---------

  THE well concerted plan which had 
taken Almina at once from the Castle,
from her friends, from peace and serenity,
                   

   



              EARL OSRIC.        213

was too deeply laid to be penetrated by
the means used by those, whom her
strange disappearance plunged into all the
misery of despair. Ardently wishing,
yet almost dreading to hear the disclosure
of the Abbess, she had glided unseen from
the Castle, taking with her no attendant,
from a fear lest her private conference with
the Superior should awaken her suspicion,
when on poor Adeliza's account the utmost
secrecy might be requisite, and even the
appearance of mystery it might be wise to
avoid; doubtless all these conclusions had
been foreseen, and the probability in
favour of the success of the plan duly
weighed.

   Vespers were over, she had seen Isabel,
but not wishing to join her in her return,
she had avoided her, and after her inter-
view with the Abbess, intended to solicit
the attendance of a servant from the Con-
vent on her way to the Castle.--When the
Nuns withdrew she found herself alone,
and hastening towards the western aisle,
214              EARL OSRIC.

saw at its termination the figure of a
Monk in the Benedictine habit.  With 
slow and cautious steps, he advanced, his
cowl was over his face, but in a very low
voice he said, "the Lady Almina will fol-
low our holy mother;" and making a
sign to be silent, he led the way through
a low private door, and by several paved
courts, and pasasges wholly unknown to
Almina, to a narrow winding staircase.--
Engrossed by anticipation of the fearful
intelligence, such an appearance of secrecy
forboed, she followed in silence nor sus-
pected aught of treachery from the agents
of Religion.--The Friar neither paused or
once turned to regard her, but pursued his
way with silent caution, descending the
winding staircase so rapidly that scarcely
could the fleet steps of Almina keep pace
with him.  She afterwards remembered,
that when she had passed down a few
stairs, she had heard he door of the top
locked after them, but at the moment, she
was so occupied by terror for Adeliza's                   EARL OSRIC.        215

fate, that the circumstance was wholly dis-
regarded.-The staircase was of a length
that defied all calculation, as to the dis-
tance she had traversed from the Chapel,
and had so many intricate windings that
she began to weary, and long for the ter-
mination, which at length brought them
into an arched, vaulted passage. It was
possible that Adeliza was herself in this
remote and dreary part of the Monastery,
perhaps concealed by the mercy of the
Superior, from the punishment that
awaited her, and this Monk might have
been admitted into her confidence; if so,
it accounted for the total concealment of
his countenance, since Adeliza's direful
crime would include in its terrific retribu-
tion, all those who showed lenity towards
her. Still deluded by her faith, in the
known excellence of the good Abbess, her
steps relaxed not, till an immense vaulted
subterrane opened to her view-When
they had nearly reached the centre, she
ventured to say-"Holy father whither216             EARL OSRIC.

am I to be conducted? "Yonder," he
answered in the same under tone he had
before spoken in, and he pointed towards
a heavy iron door at some distance.--
With weary feet she hastened towards it.--
One lamp dimly burned within it, but all
was silent as the grave, and no form met
her view.--"Where holy father is the
Abbess?" she asked, while a faint chill fear
came over her. "You must await her
here daughter? said the Monk, "but on
your life breathe not the faintest sound,
the fate of the apostate Adeliza hangs on
a thread.--The Superior will attend you
presently.--Silence and secrecy are the
only chances of rescuing a victim from
destruction. You perhaps may save her.
Fear not but wait patiently.--No person
will approach this spot, but those des-
tined to disclose all to you, which you are
summoned here to know."--Saying this
he glided quickly from the cell, and with
a feeling very like consternation, Almina
heard him close the door, with a sound          EARL OSRIC.

                the fastening of a heavy 
                  to his receding steps,
and devoutly hoped that she should not
be condemned to wait, lonely, in that
dreary, gloomy place.
   Though certainly startled by the sin-
gular mode of her being conducted to the
cell, and by thus being left alone in a 
subteranean chamber, that wier too
much the appearance of dungeon, to be
viewed without awe, still she felt no dis-
trust of any sinister design, but an incon-
ceivable dread of the dangers that threat-
ened the unhappy Adeliza haunted her 
imagination, and made her listen with
chilly dread for the sound of approaching footsteps.- No such sound relieved the 
profound stillness. All was silent, and
she could have fancied herself shut ont
fromo the whole human race, so death
like was the quiet that resigend around;
but fear was a stranger to her bosom, till
the passing time convinced her she must
have been at least two hours in her present
                      L218             EARL OSRIC.

confinement, and dreading she knew not
what, she began to feel and indefinable
alarm steal on her spirits. The cell, in
which she had been left, was small and
close, and if she could open the door suf-
ficiently to admit air, she thought she
shoudl breathe more freely;but the Friar
had certainly fastened if without, for it
resisted her utmost efforst. A long in-
terval again clapsed, but no footfall indi-
cated an approach, and the most fearful
apprehensions could no longer be repressed.
The lagging minutes now passed more and
more heavily; but summoning all her
courage, and calling reason to her aid she
resolved still to hope that no treachery
had been practised, for with whom could
it originate?

  The utter improbability of every sug-
gestion she could raise, at lenght compelled
her, on a review of the circumstances
which had led her to the subterrance, to
believe that the alledged motive for bring-
ing her there was indeed the true one, and             EARL OSRIC.     219

that the Abbess was awaiting a favourable
opportunity of joining her in this terrific
recess. What period of time had elapsed
she had no means of computing, but to
her it had appeared endless, when the low
grateful sound of footsteps reached her
anxiously listening ear, and the cautious
unbarring of the entrance to her prison,
gave her the welcome hopes of deliverance.
The Friar appeared alone; he wore his
cowl less over his face, but his features
were still indistinctly seen. "I fear my
absence has alarmed you daughter," said
he, "but it was inevitable, and the Abbess
dares not venture hither." "And Adeliza,
Father," said Almina, in breathless appre-
hension. "To conduct you to her I
came," said he, "deep concealed in these
caverns, here would a fearful punishment
overtake her crimes were it known; by
caution and prudence we may yet save
her. Have you courage to follow me? In
the recesses of our Monastery of the Bene-
dictine Friars, we have contrived to secrete
                   L 2220                EARL OSRIC.

her, but she languishes in soliude, in
darkness and misery."  "Oh lead me to 
her," said Almina, "let the voice of
friendship try at least to alleviate the
horrors of her destiny."  "Come then,"
said the Friar, "hasten forward; these
caverns are connected with those of our
Monasery, and will conduct us by privae
paths to the poor sufferer.

        Little more passed, and they again se
forward through the caverns, Almina
well knew the situation of the Abbey of
the Benedictines, but it was near the sea
coast, at a considerable distance apparently
of some miles from the Castle of St. Al-
bert; and she wondered that there should
exist a possibility of reaching it by means
of the suberrance, but she knew not the
length of way she had already traversed.
Deceived by the winding of the stairs, and
profound gloom of the passages, she was
not aware that every step she had taken,
had conducted her more distant from the
Convent; and that she was now in one of        ERAL OSRIC.     221

those subterrancan caverns, doubtless con-
structed for monastic purposes of secrecy
of communication. A long and fatiguing
walk brought them to other passages, and
staircases by which they attained what was
probably the Cell of the Friar himself, for
it contained a small couch bed, or chair,
hour glass, and crucifix. " Rest here, 
daughter," said the Friar, "you look faint
and weary, and I will bring you some re-
freshment." Almina did indeed feel the
need of it, but she was so anxious to know
all that concerned the object of her visit,
and so occupied by the desire of returning
to the Castle before its inhabitants should
have been alarmed by her absence, that
she implored the father not to lose time
by procuring her any thing. He an-
swered that he would be back instantly,
and was as good as his word, bringing
with him a small portion of bread and
wine, which he advised he to swallow,
while he prepared Adeliza for their recep-
tion. " But how," said Almina, " will it
                 L 3
222           EARL OSRIC.

be possible to reach the Castle to-night?
"Before the dawn I will myself conduct
you safely there," he answered, "I go.
In a quarter of an hour expect me back."
He departed, and Almina having partaken
the refreshment left for her, felt at first
revived; but the Friar did not return, and 
when she arose from her seat, to listen for 
his steps, her head suddenly felt so ex-
tremely giddy, that she caught the chair
to save herself from falling.  Strange feel-
ings of horror crept over her, she felt quite
unable to walk, but involuntarily she crept 
towards the couch, and instantly falling
on it, her senses seemed gradually to re-
cede, and a stupor resembling deep sleep
succeeded.  In this state of living death, 
she was conscious of being removed, of
forms flitting before her eyes, and of 
awaking more than once to a sense of pain
and illness; but the soporific, which had
involved her senses in a profound lethargy
prevented all exertions of intellect, for-
bade all calculations of time, all recogni-



               EARL OSRIC.              223

tion of place, and left her only alive to a 
painful feeling of terror and debility.  It
was beneath a fine cloudless sky, illumined
brightly by the crescent of night, and in-
numerable stars, the night breeze blowing 
gently on her pallid face,  that Almina
awoke to recollection and consciousness.
She was supported by the arm of some per-
son on whom she leaned, and she was on
the deck of a small vessel which rapidly
moved through the world of waters.  A
long stream of radience, that fell on the
almost unruffled waves, was the first object
that dazzled her aching sight.  She turned
her eyes, and saw she was resting in a 
chair uphel by the mailed arm of a 
Knight whose vizor was down.  Her
voice which faintly sounded on his ear,
in accents of astonishment, seemed to
startle him, but as memory by degrees re-
turned, she gazed more intently on him,
on the scene around her, and repeated in 
accents of terror her rapid questions.
They were cautiously answered.  She was
                    L4224   EARL OSRIC.
advised to be silent, and tranquil; assured
that she was in safety, and would soon ar-
rive at the place of her destination; that
all anxiety would be vain, and that every
step, which had led to her present situa-
tion, had been the consequence of a long
projected design, with which in due time
she would be made acquainted.  Resis-
tance and repining she soon felt convinced
were indeed fruitless, and as the powers
of her mind were restored, and she was
enabled to reflect on all that had occurred,
she saw the work of some invisible hand,
which had thus beguiled her from her
friends, and she determined to await the
event with resolution, assured that only
firmness and courage could enable her to
resist oppression.  The Knight was her
only attendant, he assisted her back to the
Cabin, from which she had been evidently
brought, on account of the heat of the weather, and the cool breeze had revived
and invigorated her.  There a bed awaited
her, and the effects of the powerful opiate             EARL OSRIC.        225

which had benumbed her senses, being
now dispersed, she discovered that the
bodily weakness she felt, arose from the 
same cause, and her strength momentarily
returned.

   At the dawn of a fine morning the
vessel approached land, and Almina found
herself on a beautiful unknown coast,
with the Knight and two men who ap-
peared like domestics.  They conducted
her to a College on the shore, where
horses appeared to be waiting for them, 
but no person seemed within it, and hav-
ing place Almina on one of the steeds, the
Knight and the two men mounted the 
others, and they continued their journey.
A proper habit for riding and every neces-
sary convenience seemed to have been pro-
vided for her, but she had not sufficiently
recovered the effects of the unjustifiable
means which had been used to ensnare
her, to be capable of much exertion, and
she appeared so faint and fatigued, that on
entering a large forest, through the whole

                 L5



226                 EARL OSRIC
of which it appeared they had to pass,
after leading her horse for some distance,
the Knight proposed she should alight
and take some refreshment. "A suitable 
spot presents itself just by,Sir Knight,"said
one of the men who had rode forward,
entering a beautiful and central part of
the forest : the Knight took Almina
from her steed,and provisions were spread
on the grass, the two attendants retiring
to a distance to take their repast. When
Almina, whose wearied frame needed
quiet more than refreshment, had partaken
of the viands set before her, she expressed
a wish to rise and walk for a short time in
the wood. "Not unattended lasy," re-
plied her conductor, "but here are two
attendants if thou wilt summon one of
them." Then calling loadly, he ordered
one of the men to attend her, and quitting
the beaten path, she entered a romantic 
winding walk, which seemed in a serpen_
tine form to have been purposely cut out
of the thickest part of the wood. De-             EARL OSRIC.                     227

lighted with its intricate mazes, and en-
chanted by the carol of the feathered
tribes around her, Almina continued to
stroll, till reminded by her attendant that
they must return, or their absence would
excite surprise.  As she turned to regard
this man, for the first time, her eyes were
fixed on his countenance, which she fan-
cied expressed more compassion than that
of his comrade.  It also struck her that
Valentine, for so the Knight had termed
him, had a superior appearance and man-
ners to that of the generality of servants.
His eyes met hers with a peculiar look of
mildness and respect, when he said "we
must return, Lady, or I shall incur dis-
pleasure, for allowing thee to ramble so
far.  She involuntarily exclaimed, "whose
displeasure will you incur?  Ah who has
deputed you to such an office?"  "I dare
not answer, Lady," said the man, "my
life would pay for my treachery to my
employer."  "But heaven would reward
you for saving the innocent and oppressed,"



                      L6228            EARL OSRIC.

she said.  Her look and action as she ut-
tered these words were so expressive of
grief and despair, and her clasped hands
betokened a mind so ill at ease, that Va-
lentine paused, while different ideas and
emotions seemed contending in his bosom.
At this moment, the gentle twinkling of
some musical instrument reached the ears
of both, it appeared to be very near, and
in a few minutes a very sweet female
voice sung a lively air to its music.  Al-
mina listed in astonishment, her atten-
dant looked round, and motioning to her
to be silent and follow him, they moved
onwards and concealed by some thick
bushes, beheld beneath the shade of a
lofty oak, two female figures, both alike
fantastically habited in short white jackets,
ornamented with wreathes of oak and
acorns in festoons.  Their heads were de-
corated with oak leaves, twisted round
their hair.  One of them appeared very
young, and had a small musical instru-
ment fastened to the waist.  Her counte-
                EARL OSRIC.                 229
nance was beautiful and interesting, and expressive of the most perfect refinement.

 Her companion was neither so young, or so handsome, and appeared like an attendant upon the other.  The former was laughing at something the other had said, and replied, "well if you think so I will only play one more air, and then away to the sports."  So saying, she touched her lively guitar and accompanied it with these words:
   

      Sweet Muse tune my lyre to all that's gay,
      Thy welcome assistance Oh bring,
      And help me to waft to these wild woods my 
      lay,
      Whilst I hail the return of the Spring.
    
      Sweet season of joy and delight!
      Like the opening of youth's early dawn,
      The prospects before thee are bright,
      No clouds overeast the fair morn.

      The birds sweetly carol around,
      While gaily they hop on the spray:
      Rich verdure has cover'd the ground,
      Adorn'd by the beauties of May.

      

        

  
      230 EARL OSRIC.

  Thus infaney fearing no ill,
  With hearts light and sportive as mine,
  Are uncouseious of sorrow conceal'd,
  Within the dark bosom of time.

  She ceased, and her companion gazing
at her a moment while the big tear stood
in her eye, "Ah never my dearest Laura,"
said she, "may that heart be less sportive
and innocent than at this moment." "Oh,"
exclaimed the young stranger starting up,
"let us not talk no grave subjects just now,
you forget that this day is devoted to fes-
vels. The sports wait for us, and I already
hear the merry tamborine strike up the 
jovial dance. Come dear good janette,
for one day banish sorrow and give way to 
mirth."

  So saying, and taking the arm of her
companion, she gaily skipped on, and the
thick foliage soon concealed them from
the view of almina, who darting past Va-
lentine, was determined to appeal to the
           EARL OSRIC.          231

stranger for protection, when the voice
of the Knight who had accompanied her,
reached her ear, and at the same moment
he appeared in sight. Taking her arm
in silence, he led her to the horse on
which he again seated her, and they
once more recommenced their mysterious
journey.232             EARL OSRIC.


                 CHAP. XIII
                    ====

"There is a cliff, whose high and hending head 
Looks fearfully in the confined deep.:
*        *          *        *            *

                "How fearful

And dizzy 'tis to cost one's eyes so low !
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air,
Show scarce so gross as beetles
*         *          *         *           *

                       The murmuring surge
That on the unnumber'd idle pebbles chafes,
Cannot be heard so high-I'ii look no more."

                                     SHAKSPEARE.

                 ======================

   DURING her long and toilsome jour-
ney, Almina had ample leisure for reflec-
tion. She saw herself the dupe of a long
concerted plan, too well and artfully ar-
ranged to have excited any previous sus-
picion. The outrage by which she had
formerly been borne from St. Albert and
by which she was introduced to the fa-        EARL OSRIC.       233

mily of De Mowbray occured to her
memory, and she could have no doubt
that the author of both was the same
person.

  Of the effect this blow might have
on the debilitated frame, and weak intel-
lects pf Lady St. Albert: of the despair,
the disappointment of Arthur, she dared 
not think. For herself she felt humbly
thankful, that her reason, after the tem- 
porary shock it had received, was res-
tored and was assured that if she could
once procure some undisturbed rest, her
health would be re- established.

  They had travelled a few miles through
the same woody country, when the road
suddenly widened, and the most en-
chanting views broke on the eye of Al-
mina. High hills whose sides were
richly clothed with beautiful hanging
woods, now in full leaf, while vast pas-
tures were seen filled with sheep grazing
on the declivities of the mountainous
steeps. On the other side, a wide extent234             EARL OSRIC.

of a well cultivated country, bounded by
the distant horizon, and varied with every
object that could adorn the landscape.

Towards evening they again entered a
narrow woody vale, where the trees grew
so high and close, that they formed a shade
almost impervious to the rays of the sun.
Almina had not slept, since she landed,
and a strange torper seemed now to steal
over her frame, and through her alarms,
instead of diminishing, hourly encreased,
as she was carried farther from her friends,
she felt unable to lament of remonstrate;
her faculties seemed all suspended, which
added to fatigue and want of rest, ren-
dered her so ill that the Knight found an
absolute necessity for allowing her time
for repose.

At length they once more stopped, and
the Knight carried her in his arms into a
building and delivering her into the care
of a woman, ordered her to be put to bed.
His commands were obeyed, for Almina             EARL OSRIC.         235

was so exhausted, that she had no power
for resistence had inclination prompted it.

  Beneath an ancient canopy of velvet,
bordered with a faded gold fringe, and 
attended by a female who sat by her; she 
revived from the faintness which had
overwhelmed her alighting.  Confused, 
she faintly inquired were she was; but
no information was given her.  She was
treated with tenderness and care, but no 
entreaties could gain any intelligence of 
what was to be her destiny.  Many hours
she continued in bed, and at length sunk
into a profound sleep, from which when
she awakened she found it was late in the
evening, and was desired to arise and
prepare to continue there journey.  She 
was still weak and faint, but it passed un-
heeded by her conductors, and again she 
was placed on her horse.  They travelled 
through the whole night, without any
hope of a second escape, like that she
had effected when before carried off in the 
same mysterious manner.              236    EARL OSRIC.
 
  When morning dawned Almina found they were in a wild and mountainous country, through which a majestic river meandered, which they sometimes lost sight of, and then again for miles they travelled near its borders.

   The sun had just risen when they stopped in a hollow valley, formed in the center of three immense hills, to breakfast; they all alighted and Almina seated by her conductor partook of the repast.  It was hastened as much as possible, that they might proceed, and once more mounted, they emerged soon after from the valley.  And now a view met the amazed eyes of Almina, which, in spite of the apathy produced by extreme weariness, attracted all her wonder, and filled her bosom with awe and admiration. They were arrived at the foot of an immense promontary, which, rocky and rugged, hung  its head over the adjacent ocean.  On the farthest point which projected over the sea, as if suspended in air,

        EARL OSRIC.           237

stood an edifice, whose lofty battlements,
and air hung turrets seemed as if erected
in the clouds. Inaccessible except by
one path, the cliff on which it stood ren-
dered it impregnable to all assaults, and
the rocky fortifications by which it was
enveloped, seemed to secure its inhabi-
tants from either attack or escape, and
made it peculiarly appropriate for the
purposes of imprisonments, or perpetual
confinement.

Almina beheld it and suddenly-" Are
we," said she addressing her conductor,
" arrived at the termination of our jour-
ney." "Not yet lady," he exclaimed,
"we have to ascend these cliffs, which
will take up nearly all the day."

   After resting for some time, they be-
gan the steep and rocky ascent, frequently
being obliged to alight, lest they should be
thrown headlong from the dangerous
points of the rocks. The excessive height
of the promontory terrified her, and as
she east her eyes upwards towards the
238          EARL OSRIC.
building on its summit, her head grew
giddy and she could not look up without
feeling dizzy and confused. They rested
about noon, beneath an overshadowing
rock, and as they paused, and Almina
viewed, with inexpressible awe and aston-
ishment the stupendous works of lature
around her, the Knight addressing her
said, "In yonder edifice, Lady, you behold
your future residence."
 
   "Ah who," said she, "can have taken
the trouble to convey me thus far from the
rest of the world?" "That Lady," re-
plied he, "will in due time be known,
at present you have only quietly to remain
there, where you will find every necessary
comfort and accomdation." They now
after a short repast, proceeded to ascend
the steep, and soon attained the airy edi-
fice, many of whose turrets were still en-
tire, through some had fallen sacrifices to
the all destroying hand of time. If Al-
mina had before felt giddy at looking up
to it, she felt the same sensation as she
                   EARL OSRIC                  239

looked down the rugged steep they had
ascended.
  They appeared to be many miles from
the level ground; and rock, piled on rock,
seemed to forbid all descent to the place
they had come from.  By an ancient
arched portal, they entered the building.
  The Knight led the way through a lofty
and extensive hall, to a room where a 
cheerful fire blazed on the hearth, which
Almina was not sorry to find, for the
bleak air of this mountainous region, had
already chilled her with cold.  "You
must for some time remain here, Lady," 
said her guide.  "We have been very
expeditious, and were not so soon ex-
pected.  Your apartment therefore is not
prepared, but it will be ready shortly."
  He placed a seat for her by the fire, and
Almina, who had in some measure reco-
vered from the torpid feel which for the
time had nearly annihilated her faculties,
now exerted herself to entreat he would
inform her to whom this place belonged,240             EARL OSRIC.

and for what purpose she was brought
hither. "The longer," continued she,
"that I reflect on the subject, the more I
am perplexed to imagine, who can be suf-
ficiently interested in my affairs, to have
formed a scheme so strange, and replete
with trouble to themselves, and terror to
me. Voluntarily I have never injured any
human being; who then could be guilty
of an outrage, which has torn me from my
friends, and condemned me to exile in a
place that appears shut out from the rest
of the universe?" "To me, lady," re-
plied the Knight, sullenly, "vain is all
your pleading; I am a mere agent, and
no principal in this affair. You will pro-
bably soon be acquainted with all you
wish to know. It is my part to see you
provided with the necessary accommoda-
tion, and to answer no questions." "Thy
employer, Sir Knight," said Almina
proudly,"seems to have secured an agent
but too faithful to the trust reposed in 
him. Hereafter thou mayest perhaps re





                 EARL OSRIC.          241

gret, that thou hadst not better adhered to
the sacred vows of Knighthood, than to be-
come an accomplice in injuring the inno-
cent.

  ” What impression her words made she
could not discern, for his face was still
concealed by his vizor, but after a mo-
ments pause he said ”this Castle Lady is
impregnable to all attacks.  Bounded on
one side by the immense ocean, and sur-
rounded by inaccessible rocks, it can never
be entered except by those who well know
the dangerous approach to it, either es-
cape or rescue is therefore impracticable,
and when once informed of the destiny
that awaits you, you will doubtless cease
all repining.“  ” For what strange fate am
I then reserved“ said she, but the Knight
seemed not to listen to her, and sullenly
stalked out of the room.

  Almina surveyed his tall figure with
terror, she shuddered at the view of her
own situation, and exhausted her ideas in
conjecturing, who could possibly be the242           EARL OSRIC.

mysterious hand that had unseen guided
her hither.

   At length the Knight entered followed
by an ancient female. "To you care
Ursula," said he "I commit this Lady for
the present, and rely on your fidelity and
attention. The old woman muttered some-
thing, and desired Almina to follow her.
She was bent nearly double with age, and
her forbidding countenance exhibited not
one trait of humanity or good temper.
She led the way up a long staircase,
through two galleries, at the farthest end of
which she unlocked a door, which admit-
ted them into a lofty chamber, it had a
dressing room and closet, and the whole
the old woman told her was for her use."
"There" said she, these are your apart-
ments, but if I see you behave well, and
quietly, I may permit you to come out
sometimes, and walk in the gallery, for I
am very indulgent when I find people de-
serve it."

   Almina, in any other frame of mind,

           EARL OSRIC.

  could not have helped smiling, at the graciousness  of the old sybil, but slightly replying that she should be glad to be left alone, she seated herself by the fire which appeared to be just kindled on the hearth of the spacious gloomy room, that was termed the dressing room.  "Yes, yes, I am going  "said Ursula," but I suppose you want something after your journey.

  "No," said Almina,  " I only want peace of mind, which is out of your power to procure for me, and shall immediately retire to rest."  "Very well," said Ursula,  "if you are not hungry indeed, I shall see you no more till the morning, so good night child, for I am wanted below to attend on my Lord St. Hugh's company."  "Lord who? said Almina," not hearing her.

  "Oh holy mary! I had quite forgot myself "exclaimed Ursula," but I am glad you did not hear, so go to bed, poor child for you look tired, and in the morning I shall come and see after you, I must has.

244                 EARL OSRIC.
ten down, or my Lord H--oh blessed
virgin! there, I had like to have said
it again.

   Well to be sure, this tribe of people
coming in, has put me quite beside my-
self.  Saying this she hastened out of the 
room, and Almina remarked she carefully
locked the door after her.  She was not
sorry to find this ancient guardian, to
whose care she was committed, of such a
talkative turn, hoping to procure from her
some inteiligence respecting her employer.
Though glad to be left alone, she found no
inclination to sleep, she observed a very
small high window on one side of the
room, and wishing to know whither it
looked, with the assistance of a stool, she
raised herself high enough to reach it, but
how she was amazed to find the apart-
ment she occupied hung over the ocean,
whose waves washed the foot of the pro-
montory.

   The silver crescent of night darted its
faint gleams over the undulating.  va-     
                EARL OSRIC,                245

ters, and glittered on its surface. The
solemn dashing of the billows, with now
and then the distant scream of the sea
fowl were all the sounds that interrupted
the death like silence, not a cloud was to
be seen on the horizon, all nature was se-
rene and beautiful, poor Almina deeply
sighed as she surveyed the pale planet of
night. " It illumines alike "said she" the
spot inhabited by those friends who de-
plore my unknown fate, and that to which
I am exiled."

 How often had she in her early days of
secluded happiness, accompanied the Earl 
into the small garden dedicated for her
use, at Osric Castle; and with him ad-
mired the beauty of the heavens spangled
with stars, whose names and course he
taught her.

 In the midst of the fears and anticipa-
tions that harassed her mind, the precious
reminiscences of early happiness would
occur, for they were connected with the
most scared feeling of her soul. A silent

                 M3

 


246           EARL OSRIC.

tear stole from her eye, which with a
suddent return of resolution she was wip-
ing away, when she suddenly fancied that
she could distinguish a sound of low and
faint music, that seemed to issue from the
waters. She listened attentively, it soon
died away, and after near an hours silent
meditation at her casement, she resolved
to seek in the arms of sleep, some cessation
of thought. The exercises of habitual piety
were not forgotten, after which, overcome
by fatigue she sunk to repose.
          EARL OSRIC.               247


          CHAP. XIV.


"To whom shall I complain? did I tell this,
Who would believe me."
                         MEASURE FOR MEASURE.

"Virtue is bold and goodness never fearful."
                                             BID.

"Thou subtle,perjur'd, false, disloyal man!
Thinks thou, I am so shallow, so conceitless,
To be sedue'd by thy flattery.
Return, return, and make thy love amends.
For me-By this pale queen of night, I swear,
I am so far from granting thy request 
That I despise thee for thy wrongfull suit."
                      TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA.



GUARDED by that Power which pro-
teets the innocent, the slumbers of Almina
were quiet and refreshing, and she awoke
early much revived, Ursula visited her
apartment to enquire if she chose

                   M4 
                    248          EARL OSRIC.

breakfast, being answered in the af-
firmative. she speedily returned with it,
and while she waited, enquired how she
found herself, and then with the garrulity
of age continued talking.

"Ah, "said she" you have slept sound
enough I warrant me, poor thing! as I
told the Knight below, you seemed sadly
tired, and luckily for you, the old Tower
did not shake with the wind quite so much,
as usual, it was a fine calm night,---no,
no, no danger last night,"and in an under
tone she repeated the last sentence two or
three times to herself, as she arranged the
breakfast things. Almina was intently
observing her, and on hearing the last
words, she asked to what danger she al-
ludec" danger! exclaimed the old wo-
man, seeming to recollect herself. "Oh
there is always danger you know, in such
old buildings as this, when the wind blows.
ah! it is a fearful sound when the tur-
rets rock with the blast, and the sea foams
EARL OSRIC. 249

against the rocks, but then you'll not mind
these things, when you are used to them, as
I am. Many and many a night have I sat,
and thought we were all going to be tum-
bled into the waves together, but it stands
you see still, and so perhaps it will in spite
of.--

"In spite of what? said Almina." "Do
you like what I have brought you?" said
the old woman artfully pretending not to
hear her, "these satin cakes were baked
this morning. I hardly took time to tell
my beads, I was in such a hurry to get
them ready for you. The Knight too was
all in a bustle, he has been enquiring after
you."

Almina expressed her approbation of
the repast, and asked if she should see the
Knight again, but Ursula either was, or
affected to be ignorant of aught relating to
him, and leaving her, she soon after re-
turned with some linen and necessary
clothes. Almina ventured to ask if there
were and female inhabitants in the Castle,
250          EARL OSRIC.

to whom these clothes belonged, but found
her old guardian too well cautioned, to be
easily thrown off her guard.
 
   By the fineness of the habit, she was
sure they could belong to no inferior rank,
and this circumstance only encreased her
wonder at all she saw. If the prospect
from her window by moonlight had charm-
ed her, she was not less delighted with it
by day, and she gazed, in awful wonder at
the vast expanse of ocean; the vessels which
thinly scattered over it, she could just des-
cry, appeared so diminutive from the vast
height she was above them, as scarcely to
be discerned by the naked eye. The day
passed on in uninterrupted quiet, she
sometimes fancied that the Knight who
had conducted her thither with his train,
was gone from the Castle, but this she
had no means to ascertain, for old Ursula
was so guarded, that her utmost endea-
vour could not have made her utter a syl-
lable on the subject, or have corrupted the
fidelity of the old woman to her employers.               EARL OSRIC             251

 The hours passed heavily, for they were
 beguiled only by her own melancholy re-
 flectins, but she could not remain in this
 state of inactivity. Naturally animated
 and fond of employment, she endcavoured
 to raise all the  powers of her mind, to 
 overcome the despair that at times seemed
 to freeze all her faculties. Many times 
 she paced the narrow confines of her two
 apartments, and treid to find some occu-
 pation, that might aid the lagging hours 
 in their flight, and the very exertion itself 
 was a benefit.
   Not to suffer herself to despond was
 her fixed determination, such an outrage
 as that she had endured, though not
 common, was still not unexampled, and
 that no personal injury was intended her,
 she was induced to believe from the pains
 taken for her accomodation.
    Many, while resident in the great world,
 were the lovers who had sued for her fa-
 vor, and to some one of these, more ad-
 ventrous than the rest, she was inclined
                 M6252             EARL OSRIC.

to attribute this daring seizure.  She concluded the tower must contain more residents, for it was improbable old Ursula should be constituted her sole guard.

   Age, evident infirmities and a great deal of love of talking, seemed to render her far from a secure guardian, where strength and secrecy was required: it was therefore certain that there were others, under whose she acted, though they remained invisible.

   This idea was confirmed, by the indistinct view of a ferocious countenance, which she accidentally caught, at the door of her apartment, that opened from the gallery, as Ursula entered it, by which it appeared that she was not wholly unaccompanied, and she felt not a little comforted, that her doors, being so well secured without, had fastenings within, that enabled her to excluded intruders.

   Still anxious to procure some mode of passing her time more comfortably, and satisfactorily to herself, and tired with EARL OSRIC.                             253
gazing on the ocean, and the adjacent
rocks; she asked ursula, on the third day,
if there were any books in the Castle.
"Books lady! holy virgin." cried the old
woman "what would you do with books,"
"Read them" answered Almina smiling.
"Read them" exclaimed Ursula in asto-
nishment, "I never saw any body but our 
Father Confessor read, but to besure if you
really wish for such a thing, I do think
that I could get some; but then the tur-
ret library, I could never reach it, how-
ever I'll try Lady," and so saying, she dis-
appeared.  After several hours, she re-
turned bending beneath a load of moth-
eaten, half torn books, which looked like
the refuse of some monastic library.

but whatever their contents, they were
an inestimable treasure to Almina, in her
present state, and anxiously she commen-
ced an investigation.  Some of them were
the works of the Fathers in black letter,
with some old Poems in the Erse and
Gaelic languages. Now indeed she bles-254            EARL OSRIC.

ed the power which had inspired the
genius of Osric, to give her an education
that enabled her to extract consolation
from such a source. Ingenious in con-
trivance, and fertile in expedients, she
soon found that she could in more ways
than one, make her recent acquisition
useful. She fancied she could make out
much of the poetry, and possessed of a
genius that in and age more elightened,
might have classed her amongst the lite-
rati of her country, she determined to
adapt them to words and airs of her own.

  Though possessed of no materials for
writing, she managed by assistance of the
fuel brought to her apartment, to form a 
sort of rude pencil, and on the backs of
the vellum covers, traced the characters
which her faney suggested.

  The gentleness and uncommon sweet-
ness of her manners, so won on her old
guard, that she suffered her to walk
through the two galleries for air and ex-
ercise, and unmarked by any event or                EARL OSRIC.       255

adventure several weeks of her life, had
thus passed, when she was one even-
ing passing the western gallery, she
suddenly heard an uncommon noise be-
low, like many voices in loud talk. In
a few minutes Ursula appeared. She
looked frightened and confused. "Make
haste to your chamber Lady "said she,
"for I am frightened to death, lest it be
suspected, I have ever suffered you to quit
it."

   So saying she led her to her room, and
locked her in. Almina heard her take
out the key, and then return through the
gallery. The only conjecture she could
form, was that the owner of the edifice,
who had been absent ever since her arri-
val, was just returned, and this had caused
the bustle she had heard, as well as the
apprehensions of old Ursula, lest it should
be imagined that she had neglected her
charge. A considerable time elapsed, at
length footsteps approached--it was Ur-
sula, who unlocking the door said, "You256               EARL OSRIC.

must not retire yet Lady.  Your presence
will be required, in an hour I shall sum-
mons you."  Again she closed the door,
and departed, "Now" thought Almina
comes my trial, and now the mystery is to
be revealed.

She trembled, and in shuddering terror
awaited the return of Ursula, who at a
late hour once more appeared, and desired
Almina to follow her.  With difficulty
could the latter obey her, notwithstanding
the courage she had determined to exert.
They traversed the galleries, and many
apartments, 'ere they entered a lofty pas-
sage, which admitted them to a magnifi-
cent saloon, illuminated by several lamps,
but ancient and gloomy.  Almina enter-
ed it with faltering steps.  Ursula led her
to a seat, and was retreating.  "Leave
me not Ursula I beseech you," said the
alarmed Almina, but ere she had spoken,
the old woman had hobbled out of the
room.

She sprung after her to the door, but in-
           EARL OSRIC.            257

stead of Ursula, was encountered by a
Knight in Armour, who seizing her ex-
tended hand, cried "why this alarm
sweet Almina?" she shrunk back, but the
Knight kept his hold, and leading her
back to her seat, threw himself on his
knees before her. "Behold too charming
Almina," said he "the humblest of your
slaves, who conquered by your beauty,
has been tempted to commit an action,
which a passion violent and unconquer-
able can alone excuse."

   She shuddered and drew back at these
words. The voice was too well known to
her, but not daring to credit the evidence
of her senses, she only turned away her
head, and waved him from her, for her
tongue, tied by amazement, refused to ut-
ter a syllable; but this was of no avail,
he seized both her hands, and holding
them in one of his; with the other raised
the vizor of his helmet. At sight of his
countenance she shrieked aloud, and avert-
ing her face, uttered in a tone of horror.
258            EARL OSRIC.

"Great Heavens! do I behold Sir
Ethelred Douglas? "Yes beloved Almi-
na, and why this surprise? long ere thou
didst emerge from that obscurity, where, 
for purposes of his own, Earl Osric chose
to rear thee, this heart, confessed thy 
power, and felt too forcibly those charms
which have never for a moment since,
been estranged from my memory, an
ever has it been the determined purpose
of my soul to make them mine. Nay
hear me Lady."

 "The wife interest compelled me to 
choose, is not merely an object of indiffer-
ence, but dislike; but happily her conduct
has found it in my power, to dissolve the
hated bonds that unite us. Thou,loveliest
of created beings,shalt supply her place, 
and become the guardian angel of him
who lives but to adore thee." In unut-
terable amaze, Almina was silent from 
the horror and indignation which took
possession of her faculties. Sir Ethelred
probabley construed her silence favorably,               EARL OSRIC.               259

for he returned her hand, and would have
seated himself by her, but rising with dig-
nity, she withdrew her hand, paused a 
moment, and then said, with a counte-
nance which strongly pictured her feel-
ings.

   "Wonder not Sir Knight that I am
incapable of answering, little indeed with
all thy boasted knowledge, must thou be
acquainted with the human heart, if thou
canst, for an instant delude thyself, with
believing that of any being not wholly de-
praved, would not revolt with shuddering
at the expression of such sentiments from
thee.  But if indeed thou dost labour un-
der such an illusion, listen while I de-
clare that death in any form would be
preferable to the alternative thou offerest.
Nay hear me Sir Ethelred, for the sake of
the injured Elfrida, the excellent Lady St.
Albert, much as I despise thee, I would
conjure thee to reflect on the dreadful
consequences of thy conduct to thyself,
me thou canst not injure, for I have a260            EARL OSRIC.

protector to whom thou darest not apply."
Her eyes were cast upwards as she spoke,
her countenance glowing with the warm 
feelings of her heart, was all animation,
and the almost intimidated Sir Ethelred
seemed to shrink from the keen glance 
of contempt, with which she regarded
him.

   Her whole form seemed to dilate with
more than mortal beauty, and for a minute
the discomfited Knight seemed to feel his 
own insignificance, but he had too much
at stake to be easily repulsed, and soon
recovering his momentary discomposure,
he attempted to reason with her. He as-
sured her that she was so completely in
his power, that "never a second tome,"
said he "canst thou hope to escape me."
A second time exclaimed Almina, "yes,"
he answered, and seest thou not how vast,
how unconquerable that passion must be,
which not discouraged by a first failure,
could persevere till it has thus far succeed
ed. "But canst thou imagine Sir Knight,               EARL OSRIC.            261

asked she ”that violence and confinement
are probable means to attach an heart,
which under any circumstances would
have rejected thee?“  and dost thou not
fear the consequences of a discovery of thy
nefarious plans?  I am not destitute of
friends.“  ”I fear them not Lady,“ inter-
rupted Sir Ethelred.

  ”A secret partiality to your early pro-
tector, the great the immaculate Earl
Osric, is more than suspected by St.
Albert and his family, and to him, by the
measures I have taken, is your flight attri-
buted.  The Earl himself is probably ig-
norant of it, or if not, he has affairs of his
own, that require all his vigilance.  The 
armies of Edward have entered Scotland,
already is Berwick taken after a bloody
seige, and the devoted Scots fleeing to
their mountains, have no chance but in
submitting to their Conqueror.  The Cas-
tles of all the disaffected nobles will be
seized.  Those of Edinburgh and Stirling
are reduced, and Earl Osric may tremble262       EARL OSRIC.

for his hereditary domains, if thus he per-
sists in secretly befriending the Scottish
interest."

  "His own interest Sir Knight, will
never induce him to be a traitor to his
country," said Almina with ill concealed
bitterness. "His soul is too pious too
noble to allow him to sacrifice his eternal
good to temporal benefit."

Sir Ethelred felt the keen retort, and
the deadliest revenge glistened in his fero-
cious eye. After a sullen silence of a few
minutes he arose, and Almina retreating
towards the door, as if wishing to retire he
said, "it is too late Lady, we will therefore
pursue the subject no father now; to-
morrow I shall again see you. Meantime
revolve what I have said in your mind,
and be assured I shall not relinquish a
purpose on which I am decided. This
Tower you never quit, but as Lady Doug-
las, defended alike by inaccessible rocks,
and the foaming ocean, perpetual impri-
sonment awaits you, unless you choose to
              Earl Osric.            263

return to the world as my wife. My inte-
rest with t he king, my rank and character
will shield me more effectually, and your 
free choice, I shall have nothing to fear."
  Then Hastily retiring, he waited not her
answer, and Ursula appearing attended
her back to her chamber, here, unable to 
sleep, she long sat in meditation on the 
wondrous development of Sir Ethelred's
baseness.
  Had she known his real character, it
would not have caused even momentory
surprise. With a heart for dissimulation,
and an unbridled indulgence of his pas-
sions, he had a head fertile in invention,
and ready in contrivance, for his own gra-
tification. Carefully had he avoided shew-
ing any particular attention to Almina,
at St. Albert's, the better to conceal his
villainous intentions, and thus had he pas-
sed unsuspected.
  It has been before said, that he had
served at the same crusade, in which Earl
Osric, while yet in early youth so eminent-


264            EARL OSRIC.

ly distinguished himself, and the seeds of
envy, long laid in his breast, ever anxious
for an opportunity to tarnish the glory of
his rival in fame, whose renown was poi-
son to his ear. Descended himself from
an ancient Scotch family, the Castle of
Douglas was situated so near that of Osric,
that during occassional visits to the seat of
his ancestors, he had, through the channel
of servants and vassals, discovered that a
young person had been brought up in
the Castle, but what degree of relation-
ship she stood to the Earl, and whether
there was any affinity subsisted between
them he could not learn.

   Accustomed to adventures of this kind,
when self gratification was the end pro-
posed, and judging by his own heart, that
Earl Osric ahad some such motive for this
mysterious concealment, his curiosity was
strongly excited, and resolved to get a view
of the Earl's protegee.

   At the first sight of her uncommon
beauty, he was powerfully struck with ad-           EARL OSRIC.    265
miration. In every succeeding interview
her ascendency over his dissolute mind
encreased, and at whatever hazard he
resolved on the pursuit, and though
long ere he beheld her his marriage had
been arranged, from his first interview with
her in the garden of Osric Castel, he was
occupied by the plan he had finally put
into execution.
































VOL. II.    N266              EARL OSRIC.



                CHAP. XXIX.
                  ------

                  “What do I love her,
That desire to hear her speak again, 
And feast. upon her eyes?"

                   "Most dangerous
Is that temptation that doth goad us on
To sin in loving virtue."
                             MEASURE FOR MEASURE.

                   “Sitting on a Bank,
This Music crept by me upon the waters;
Allaying both their fury, and my passion,
With its sweet air."
                                    TRUE TEMPEST.

"Such sheets of ﬁre, such bursts of horrid thunder,
Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
Remember to have heard."

                                      KING LEAR.
                  ------    

ON the following day Almina was again
compelled to endure an interview with Sir
Ethelred. Being now aware of his pur-                          EARL OSRIC.

poses, she met him with a determination
to expostulate coolly in his conduct, and
its inevitable consequences, but she re-
solved not to irritate him by violence, too
well aware that she was indeed at present
in his power.

     It was evident that the firmness and
dignity natural to her character, awed even
him, daring as he was by nature, into res-
pect, and though the unjustifiable passion
he had conceived for her, and the unwar-
rantable means it had prompted to get her
into his power, could only have been in-
dulged and suggested by a heart incorri-
gibly wicked; such was the ascendency
her virtues, not less than her beauty, pos-
sessed over his unprincipled mind, that he
seemed to regard her as a superior being,
and while gazing her with unrestrained
admiration, and hanging on every word
she uttered, he still preserved the distance
which he felt he dared not infringe, and
provoked at his own pusillanimity, felt at
                   N2
268           EARL OSRIC.

times inclined to hate her with as much
violence as he had lovd.

   So inconsistent are the thoughts and
plans of those who forsake the path of in-
tegrity, and follow the guidance of the
passions. Endowed by nature with talents
that might have rendered him an orna-
ment to the world, so miserably had he
perverted the gifts of providence, that the
abilities which might have rendered him
as conspicuous for wisdom and virtue, as
for valour and courtesy, had hitherto only
served for the worst purposes, and invested
him with the power to accomplish deeds
of horror and iniquity.

  It was plain to Almina, that though in-
clination detained Sir Ethelred near her,
he was restless and agitated, and she sus-
pected that some necessity existed for his
presence elsewhere, suppressing as much
as possible her indignation, and the de-
pression natural to feel in her situation,
she led the conversation to public affairs,                 EARL OSRIC.                  269

and anxious to gratify her, he readily ans-
wered her inquires.

  With astonishment and regret she learn-
ed, the submission and final humiliation of
Baliol, who resigning his crown and did-
nity to Edward, was in the hands of his
conqueror, and already proceeding under
a strong guard to England.
 
  "At a place only two days journey
from hence," added Sir Ethelred, "the
wretched Baliol surrendered himself, and
renounced the French Alliance, into which
he had entered against his liege lord, King
Edward, whose triumph is  now complete."
"Is this Castle then in the Scottish domi-
nions? asked Almina." "You are lady,"
he answered," in the ancient Tower of
Glenmorne, ever esteemed an impregnable
fortness, and one of the boasted possessions
of my ancestors.

  Its remote situation makes it little
known, and even in the horrors of war, it
has nothing to fear. The mountainous
approach renders it inaccessible to all,
                    N 3270               EARL OSRIC

but those are well acquainted with this
rocky coast, which is far too dangerous
for any vessel to advance near it.  Thus
by sea and land it is alike defended from
attack, and I quit it in the assurance that
I shall again find here in safety, the trea-
sure which no force shall wrest from me,
when my duty to the king will permit me 
to return.

  Edward is now proceeding farther to-
wards the north.  I must join him at
Murray.  On my arrival in England a
divorce shall consign Elfrida to a Nun-
nery, her levities already excited the 
public animadversion.

  St. Albert is gone to join the King's
forces in Flanders, persuaded that Earl
Osric has secreted the Lady, from the pub-
lic eye, and only prevented from seeking 
him by the positive orders of the King, 
to proceed to the Continent.  "Heaven
be praised," exclaimed Almina, "that such
a catastrophe is for the present averted.
Ah Sir Knight, will not the plea of mer-
     EARL OSRIC.   271

cy avail to save me from father con-
straint? canst thou submit to tarnish thy
fair fame by such unjustifiable deeds; and
suffer the brave and generous St. Albert
to sacrifice his life, or take that of the 
Earl to conceal thy crimes from the know-
ledge of the world; while from the view
of the great judge of heaven and earth,.
they cannot by any art of thine be hid-
den.

  "It is all in vain Lady," said Sir Ethel-
red, my purposes are immutably fixed,
but as you appear so interested still for
you early friend, it may perhaps be neces-
sary to hint, that his fate in a great mea-
sure rests with me, and that it is in my pow-
er to consign him at once to destruction.
Secretly I know he favours the preten-
tions of Bruce to the throne of Scotland,
and with little trouble I would make suffi-
cient cause appear, to place his afe in
danger, but I forbear as yet, in the hope of
your favour, which would at once secure
to the Earl my friendship."  These hints
      
                   N4272          EARL OSRIC.

were darkly and artfully thrown out by Sir
Ethelred, to work on the tender and af-
fectionate heart of Almina, and intimidate
her into compliance, but he knew not the
mind he had to deal with.

  Fervent uniform piety was one of her
most striking characteristics, and she con-
sidered that the destiny of Osric was in
the hand of the God in whom he trusted.
The threats of Sir Ethelred therefore fail-
ed in their intended effect, though they
shocked and harrassed her.

  Greatly to her relief her persecutor was
at length compelled to depart, to join the
King, who, in the forced submission of Ba-
liol, having accomplished his purpose, was
on his way back to England, to be present
at the marriage of his daughter Elizabeth
to John Count of Holland.

  It was to be celebrated with great pomp
and splendour at Ipswich, and Sir Ethelred,
ever foremost in scenes such as these, was
the attendant of the court thither. Left once
more to the dreary solitude of the Tower             EARL OSRIC.              273

of Glenmorne; Almina had however now
obtained from Sir Ethelred the privilege
of leaving her apartment, and even visiting
occasionally the rocks, attended by Mac-
lcod the ruffian like son of Ursula, who was
also a resident at the Tower, and as it ap-
peared, in the confidence of Sir Ethelred.
His was the ferocious countenance, which
she had observed at the door of her apart-
ment, and it seemed that he often followed
the steps of his mother, when she came to
attend on her charge. A fine bright morn-
ing, in two days after she was left alone,
induced her to wish for the first time to
ramble out on the cliff. She imparted her
desire to Ursula, who gave her directions
not to wander far, and Almina, throwing
her veil over her, was attended by her old
guide and followed by Macleod to an an-
cient gateway, that led through three paved
courts opened on the rocky cliffs. With awe
and wonder, she beheld the vast masses of
rocks aboves her head, and still more awful
precipices beneath. Her head grew giddy

                   N 5
274         EARL OSRIC.

and scarcely could she walk steadily long.
She pursued the path Ursula had pointed
out to her, and found it easily attained.
Seating herself on a small projecting cragg,
she now endenvoured to gain a more dis-
tinct view of the country beneath, but
this she found quite impossible.

 The immense distance totally precluded
it, and a thick mist seemed to envelope
every object. after straining her eyes in
the vain hope of a discovery, she found
beyond her power, she was rising, when
a sweet, but very faint strain of music,
stole on the air. It seemed, she thought
to proceed from the sea, and sweetly it
sounded on her ear, disused of late to
strains of harmony.

 "'Tis the spirit of the waters," thought
she, " that sends these airs to calm my
troubled mind," but in a few minutes it
ceased,and after listening for some time
in vain, she again arose, and feeling the
dejection on her spirits relieved by the
freshness of the air, she was determined                 EARL OSRIC.              275

to climb a steeper rock than any she had
yet ascended,in order to gain a more dis-
tinct view of the sea. She had with some
difficulty reached the top, when she sud-
denly heard light footsteps near her, and
turning round, a figure of ethereal light-
ness darted past her; it was that of a 
female, clad in a snow-white robe, with a 
light veil falling from her head over her
shoulders. She could not hesitate to be-
lieve, that this was the person, whose
music she had heard.

The stranger was instantly out of sight,
and Almina,after looking anxiously round,
and having lost all traced of her, returned
to the Tower,still followed at a distance by
Macleod. Waiting till he advanced,she
inquired who the figure was she had seen.
"I saw no figure,Lady," said Macleod,
and he persisted in affirming his igno-
rance,though Almina felt assured he too,
must have beheld it. Not crediting his
assertion,and concluding it but too pro-
bable that it might be some unhappy
              N6278            EÀRL GSRIC.

being, who, like herself, was a a prisoner in
that dreary solitude, she determined to 
question Ursula. 

    Upon her return to her apartment she
found the old woman there, and, without
hesitation, she related her encounter on the
mountain, her conviction that there
were other inhabitants in the Castle besides
herself and Ursula, of her own sex.-
"Well, Lord bless me, said the old wo-
man, looking fearfully round her, "I was
afraid to tell you the truth, for fear it 
should fright you; but since you will hear
it, why you must.  You must know,"
added she, coming close to Almina, "that
some years ago, a very a beautiful lady, as
beautiful as the day, was brought here.
She loved our master Sir Ethelred, and he 
loved her, but by some mischance or other
they quarrelled, and she took it to heart
so, that it is said, and I am afraid it is too
true, that she threw herself from the pre-
cipice below into the sea, and they say it 
is her spirit that rambles about these




                     EARL OSRIC.                277

rooms, and the cliffs yonder. For certain
there are unaccountable noises to be heard
sometimes, and strange moanings in the
air, and no doubt it was her spirit that
you saw on the cliff. The virgin defend
us from such unholy sights."
  " But tell me, Ursula," said Almina, 
"did you reside here at the time of this
catastrophe?" "No, Lady" said she, "I
was removed to a cottage in the vale yon-
der, and they brought their own servants
with them, but I often heard of the beau-
tiful Lady at Glenmorne, from my hus-
band, whose family was always vassals of
of the Douglas, and I had lived here from
my youth up. Indeed I thought it hard
I might not stay to wait on the Lady, but
she was proud though she was beautiful,
so perhaps I had no great miss. But I
must go; some day, when I have more 
time, I will tell you as much as you please,
and show you the chamber that she slept
in, which, the saints defend us," she added,278       EARL OSRIC.

crossing herself, "they say she visits every
night."
   She now left her, and Almina sat some-
time revolving in her mind the tale she
had heard, which, even, though told in the
uncouth language of Ursula, convinced
her that some fearful deeds had been per-
formed there. The terrific storms which
this mountainous region was subject to,
had been less frequent than usual, since
her residence at Glenmorne, but on this
night the wind howled fearfully, and the
red and black clouds appeared gliding
quickly over the face of the moon. From
the window she marked the rapid progress
of the tempest. Soon the face of the
heavens was quite obscured, a thick sul-
phurous feel was in the air, and the thun-
der roared at.a distance. It drew nearer,
and now the vivid lightning played on the
watery main, and she watched the foam-
ing billows agitated by the storm, while
she listened to their astounding noise, as               EARL OSRIC.        279

they beat against the base of the pro-
montory.

   The dismal howling of the wind had
lowered her spirits to a greater degree of
dejection than she had ever felt, and she
resolved to endeavour to explore her way,
through the gallery, and call Ursula, con-
cluding the old woman's natural and na-
tional superstitions would not permit her
to venture in the storm from her own fire-
side. As she quitted the chamber, a loud
peal of thunder seemed to shake the whole
building, and the vivid lightning at once
illumined the whole extent of the gallery.

   Alarmed, she paused, the wind mourned
dismally round the wall, and a second clap
of thunder rolled over her head. She
stood quite still, scarcely daring to breathe,
when through the hollow pause of the
blast, a loud and piercing shriek reached
her affrighted ear, and at the same mo-
ment she descried by the lightning's glare,
a light aerial figure dart across the gallery
before her, but the velocity of the motion280          EARL OSRIC.

prevented her distingutshing more, and
profound darkness again involved the
apartment. Fearing to proceed, she re-
turned again to her chamber.
 
     The fury of the storm at length abated, 
and Ursula brought her supper; she men-
tioned the appearance she had witnessed
in the gallery, and Ursula, shaking her
head, said, "Ah, poor lady, she always
appears in a storm," but Almina would not
give Ursula implicit credit on this head, 
her understanding rose above the super-
stitious fears of the age, and she was yet
inclined to believe that there were myste-
ries at Glenmorne which she had not yet
developed.                  EARL OSRIC           281




               CHAP.XXX.
"she is importonate:inded ,distract;
her mood willneeds be pitied."
                                 HAMLRT.

"follow her close:give her good watch ,i pray you,
oh!this is poison of dee grief."
                                 IBID.


THE impression left on Almina's mind
from the storm,and the continued tem-
pestuous weather,which would scarcely
suffer her to gain any repose ,from the
terrific noises it occasioned,determined
her to ask ursula to cahge her apart-
ment,for one that was less exposed:but
this was refused
     the old woman declared there was no 
other that could be made habitable ,and
assured her that there was no cause for
282   EARL OSRIC.

fear, but the loud howling of the wind seemed to contradict her words, for the
whole building shook with the blast; and the storm towards night appeared to be
again gathering.

The heavens loured most portentously, and Almina watched, with a beating heart,
the heavy lurid clouds,which obscured the sky,or listened to the encreasing
gust,till her spirits once more sunk in utter despondence.Ursula brought her
supper, and tried to persuade her that the weather was clearing, and that if she
retired to rest she would hear no more of it; but Almina's mind was so
depressed, that she scarcely listened to her.

For the first time the old woman appeared to be moved by her melancholy, and
said that as Macleod was gone to bed, she would venture to leave the gallery
doors, unfastened, that in case she should be frightened too much to
EARL OSRIC.   283

sleep, or her light should go out, she might
call her.

The poor prisoner was thankful for even
this indulgence, and somewhat tranquil-
ised, prepared for rest, but towards mid-
night the storm increased with frightful
violence, and the whole chamber was
every moment illumined by the red glare
of the lightning. Again the loud thun-
der in long peals seemed to shake the
rocky foundations of the time-worn edifice,
and vibrated amongst the cliffs, raising
sounds that seemed like distant shrieks,
borne on the air. Often in the course of
her life had she witnessed a tempest, but
it was under circumstances that called
forth gratitude rather than terror, and till
this eventful period she seemed to have
had no call on her fortitude. "Now
then," thought she, "shall I shrink from
the trial? No, rather than indulge these
overwhelming fears, let me fly for support
to the only true source;" and could the
confined literature of that remote age284                Earl Osric.

have supplied her with an apposite quo-
tation, she would probably have exclaimed
with a late elegant poetess,

       "Protected by that Hand, whose law
            The threatening storms obey,
      Intrepid virtue smiles secure,
            As in the blaze of day."

     But memory possessed no such resource
in those times, and by natural piety and
good sense only was Almina

             "Taught to scorn those fears,
            That vulgar minds molest."

     After performing her orisons with even 
more than her wonted devotion, she 
arose from her knees, and turning a deaf 
ear to the howling wind, and deluge of 
rain, that now beat against the exposed 
roof, she seated herself by the expiring 
embers of her fire, till not the faintest 
spark remained. She had just began to 
prepare for retiring, when, as an ancient
clock suddenly tolled the hour of mid-
night, she fancied she heard a step in the 
gallery. She listened, and was con-


                    EARL OSRIC.                 285

vinced she was not mistaken. Sometimes
it paused, and then again approached.

  The solemnity of the hour lent a de-
gree of awe to the circumstance, which
at any other time she would not have felt.
The door was unfastened within and with-
out, but she was incapable of rising.
The step drew near, unlike that of Ursula,
it was light and cautious. She started up
but sunk again on the old couch near
the fire, and at that moment, forgetful of
the hard lesson of fortitude she had been
endeavouring to teach herself, she sat in
a kind of stupor, and heard the lock
turned, and the door unclose, without
power to move; her eyes by an involun-
tary motion were attracted to the opening
door, and with increased terror and
amazement, she beheld the figure that
entered.

  A form so light, so woeful, so sha-
dowy, appeared, that scarcely could her
beating heart acknowledge it to be hu-
man. Long, thin garments of black dra-
pery enveloped it, and a transparent veil286              EARL OSRIC. 

of black gauze depended from the head.
With quick and soundless step it ap-
proached her, gazed on her face with
seeming earnestness and then uttering a
piercing shriek sunk down apparently
motionless.

  Scarcely knowing what she did, Al-
mina was flying to call assistance but a
momentary recurrence of memory stopped
her procedure.  She hastily returned to-
wards the stranger, she gently withdrew
the veil from the face, her eyes fixed on a
countenance wan and emaciated, she
uttered a faint scream, she retreated,
again she advanced, and once more retired
a few paces.  Her voice at length found
utterance, and in a tone rendered, almost
inaudible by horror and surprise she ex-
claimed,--

  ” Gracious heaven! am I not deceived?
can it be possible, that enclosed in a liv-
ing tomb I once more behold Adeliza?“

  ” Who calls on Adeliza?“ answered a
voice so faint, so hollow that it scarcely
seemed that of a mortal being.  ” Adeliza,            
                  EARL OSRIC.               287

dear long lost friend,"said Almina, "dost
thou not recollect me. Oh speak to me
and tell me why i find thee here thus
dreadfully changed, thus insolated?"

   "Too well," replied Adeliza, with a
wild stare, "I know that voice, which 
once in the dire moment of despair, spoke 
of peace and of hope. Did'st thou not,"
she added in a quicker accent, "Visit
me at the Monastery. Ah! miserable as
I then thought myself, those were days
of comparative felicity, for they were days
of innocence." "So I hope," said Al-
mina, taking her hand in a tone of gentle-
ness, "are all the days of Adeliza."

   She shrunk back as Almina spoke, and
covering her face with her hands, seemed
to recoil from her, then looking steadfastly
at her, but with an expression in her 
eyes that shocked her new found friend,
she said, "I have chosen my own fate.-
But why is Almina here? has the same
serpent that detroyed Adeliza's peace be-
guiled her to this aweful solitude?" Seeing

                     288           EARL OSRIC.

her more composed Almina related the
means by which she had been brought
there.--

   Adeliza seemed to listen with even
painful eagerness, but when Sir Ethelred
Douglas was named, she shrieked aloud,
"Never, whoever you are," she said with
the wildness of insanity in her whole as-
pect, "never again utter that name in my
hearing. The dreadful sound threatens
to annihilate me."

   After a moments silence she continued
"I remember you now, but my head is
bad and for a long time I have not spoke
or thought rationally. Oh happy es-
trangement of reason! why did ye not
continue?"

   As she spoke steps were heard in the
gallery. "It is Mabel," said Adeliza,
"poor Mabel she is left to me yet," and
a young female entered the room in whom
Almina instantly recognized one of the
damsels of Elfrida at the Tower, when,
she was resident there. "Mabel too!"--EARL OSRIC 289

"Mabel too!" she exclaimed, "what
farther wonders await me." "Ah lady,"
said Mabel weeping, "times are terribly
altered, since I last saw you. My poor
lady!" "Peace Mable," said Adelia,
lead me to my room." "But I shall see
you again," said Almina, "Mabel shall vi-
sit you," replied she mournfully, "and
me too, but not till all is quiet, for at
night, dead night only can I rove unmo-
lested. Adieu, dear Almina, pray for
your friend."

Saying this she took the arm of Mable,
who in a low voice enjoined her to silence
with Ursula, and promised to see her on
the following night when all the inhabi-
tants of the tower were retired to rest.

Sleep was a stranger to Almina's pillow,
the awful discovery she had just made be-
reft her of all inclination for repose. She
could form no other conjecture as to Ade-
liza's residence at Glenmorne, than that
Sir Ethelred Douglas had by the same

200                 EARL OSRIC.

means used with herself, brought her
thither and the accumulated misery in
store for the hapless Elfrida and her fami-
ly, shocked her beyond conception. Yet
she rejoiced that they were at present in
happy ignorance of his enormities and
trusted the suffering spirit of Lady St.
Albert would be released from carth, ere
they were made known to her, since it
was improbable that a man guilty of such
crimes should pause e're he reached the
summit of guilt.

   The whole night the same melancholy
subject occupied her thoughts, it drove
rest from her frame, and the storm 
wholly from her memory, and she arose
unrefreshed, and more anxious than ever
for an elucidation of the mystery that
surrounded Adeliza. At noon Ursula
came, to conduct her as she had promised
to the apartment formerly occupied by
the lady who had so mysteriously per-
ished. it was situated in a remote part of
the fabric, and seemed to have been su-
           EARL OSRIC                            291

perbly fitted up, but time had tarnished
its grandeur, and effaced almost the re-
mains of magnificence. A broken lyre,
fragments of ornaments, and several 
other memorials of superiority that had
marked the unhappy owner of these now
deserted rooms, were yet preserved. The
chamber was in one of those towers, which
overhung the very cliff, whence she was
said to have precipitated herself, and the
interior as well as the prospect from it,
seemed well to represent the despair that
must have possessed the mind of the un-
happy inmate.

   After having surveyed the apartment,
and heard the same tale repeated of the
unfortunate lady, she returned to her own, 
and impatiently awaited the approach of 
night in the hope of again beholding Ade-
liza.

   Scarcely bad midnight echoed its slow
and hollow vibrations, when the rap at the 
chamber door made her fly to open it,
but Mabel alone appeared. She came to
                 O 2202        EARL OSRIC.

relate her lady's extraordinary tale, and
seating themselves by the fire, with 
mingled horror and astonishment; Al-
mina listened to her relation.  How were
those emotions encreased when she learn-
ed, that the lover Adeliza had hinted at,
when      ave her reason for her dislik
to the monastic life, was no other tha
the treacherous Sir Ethelred, who having,
with the chivalric spirit of adventure, that
distinguished him, got admittance to the
grounds belonging to the convent, where
she had been permitted to walk, had se-
duced he into a regard for him, and un-
der a feigned name, had persuaded her to
meet him occassionally in the same place.
Ignorant of aught relating to Sir Etherlred
Douglas, save that he was the destined
husband of her sister, never had a sus-
picion of ill, entered the artless mind of 
Adeliza, but won by his seductive arts, 
and crediting implicitlythe tale he related,
that he was the son of an ancient but de-
cayed family, whose only inheritance was

            EARL OSRIC.

 a ruined castle on a lofty promontory, in a situation so remote as to elude all discovery; to avoid receiving the black veil, which she was the succeeding week to have taken, she consented to fly with him to this mouldering seat of his ancestors, where, he said, happy in each other, they might live unknown to the world.

  They were married by a priest, whom Sir Ethelred procured, and hither. after various difficulties and contrivances to secrete her, she attended him; but with the inconstancy of his nature, soon probably satiated by her devoted attachment, he left her with a promise to return.

  From this time she had seen him only for very short periods, and during one of these visits, she had by accident overheard a conversation, between him and the confidential Knight, who aided all his plans, which informed her of his real name, his marriage with her sister, and the consequent illegality of her own.
           294     EARL OSRIC.

  Overwhelmed by the sudden blow, in
thus discovering in the object of her un-
fortunate partiality, that Sir Ethelred
Douglas, who she well knew was united
to her sister, and shocked at the horrid
conviction of her irretrievable ruin, sense
and motion forsook her. She recovered
only to the most violent delirium, which
settled on her brain and left her the wan
emaciated object Almina beheld her. The
latter was stupified by the shock such a 
narrative was calculated to inflict, and
listened mechanically to the wailings of
Mabel, who having always been the fa-
vorite damsel of Adeliza, find consented
to accompany her in the flight from the 
convent, convinced she could not do
wrong in saving her from becoming a 
nun; and being as much a stranger to the
person of Sir Ethelred Douglas as Ade-
liza herself, from being coufined to the
tower where Lady de Mornay and her
young charges lived, she was easily de-
ceived.

              EARL OSRIC.              295

  Mabel farther told her, that though in
some measure recovered from that violent
and feverish delirium which had for some
months threatened her life, the lady Ade-
liza's mind was still very unsettled, and
her fits of melancholy and abstraction
were become more frequent and long.
The preceding day she had found means
to steal from her chamber, while Mabel
was a moment absent, she had made her
way to the clifts, and in the transient
view she had then caught of Almina, is
being one of her lucid intervals, she had
probablyrecollected and determined to find
her, but with the art peculiar to insanity
she had coneealed her intention from
Mabel, whom she had no sooner seen fall
into a slumber, than she explored her
way to her apartment.
   While Mabel spoke, Almina had form-
ed a resolution to discover to Ursula her
knowledge of Adeliza, and try if she
could not persuade her, to allow her, to
                0 4296                 EARL OSRIC.

attend her poor deranged friend.  Mabel
blessed her for the thought, but scarcely
dared to hope it would succeed.

The uniform sweetness of Almina had,
however, greatly won on the hard nature
of Ursula, and though at first she would
hear nothing of the subject, yet, when Al-
mina expostulated and offered to give her
any pledge she would require, that Sir
Ethelred should for ever remain ignorant
of the indulgence, she relaxed in her op-
position, and at length consented to open
the communication between the two
apartments, which, by another approach
to each, were much nearer than her
prisoner had suspected, and by fastening
the outer door, which communicated with
the inhabited part of the tower, she still
had them secure.

Delighted to have accomplished her
purpose, and feeling now a stimulus to
preserve her own health and spirits, Al-
mina determined to share with Mabel
the late melancholy task of watching and              EARL OSRIC.          297

soothing the moor maniac.  Mabel was a
simple, light-hearted damsel, ignorant
and superstitious, but she was a human
being who could feel and converse; and
as such, an acquisition that the desolated
heart of Almina had, by sad experience,
learned to appreciate.  Worn out by ex-
cessive grief, she thought that Adeliza
could not long be an inhabitant of the
earth; and when she contemplated her
wasted form and decayed beauty, her
hatred and abhorrence of Sir Ethelred
were encreased to such an height, that
she could not think of him without dread
and horror,  From this time her hour
were devoted to a painful attendance on
her unhappy friend, whose insanity be-
came so fixed, that she enjoyed few in-
tervals of reason, and those very short.
In general, she was sunk into the most
gloomy and silent despondence, or lost
in extravagant delirium.  When not in
the silent fit, she would for many hours
incessantly sing or talk; and frequently

                  05298          Earl Osric

in the dead of night, Almina was awoke
from her disturbed slumbers by the me-
lancholy music of Adeliza's voice, which, 
echoing through the old building, she
remembered she had heard, ere she knew 
her to be an inmate of the tower.
  As the weeks wore away, and Sir
Ethelred appeared not, the fond hope of 
escape from the tower would sometimes
occupy her thoughts; but the discovery
of Adeliza had greatly enhanced the dif-
ficulty of such an enterprise, even should
it ever be at all practicable: and to leave
her in her present state was impossible.
Macleod and Ursula were the only per-
sons she had seen; but she well knew the 
tower was more securely guarded; and 
the immense strength of the fastenings
were such as to resist utterly and force
she could use, even if no dangers awaited
her without; but the rocks and cliffs 
were certainly impassable to those unac-
quainted with their intricacies, and in
despair she felt the she must relinquish
              EARL OSRIC.             299

the dear hope of emancipation, unless
some unforeseen interposition in her fa-
vour should occur. Then would she re-
vert to the friends she had left. What
would Lady St. Albert feel, should she
survive to know the fate her unhappy
child had found? How would the heart
of Elfrida, the maternal tenderness of
Lady de Mornay be wounded, and the
high-spirited and honourable soul of Ar-
thur be irritated, at the indignities offer-
ed to his noble family by the miscreant
Sir Ethelred? She rejoiced that the
good Earl had died ignorant of the
wretched destiny of Adeliza, and had
never known the indelible stain affixed
to her name, by the man he had chosen
for Elfrida. She was aware that Ade-
liza's woes had originated from the con-
straint put on her inclination by her fa-
ther, when he compelled her to enter the
monastery; but she was also conscious,
that the precepts of duty had been wide-
ly swerved from on the part of his daugh-

300             EARL OSRIO.

ter. Her present sufferings, however,
cancelled every: former error, and never
could the voice of reproach have so bit-
terly wounded the heart of Adeliza, as
did her own self-reproving reflections,
in those intervals when reason and me-
mory were partially lent her.
       CHAP.XXXI.

"If, then, true lovers have been ever cross'd,
it stands as an edict in destiny;
Then let us teach our trial patience`,
Because it is a customary cross."
                        
                          MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM.

"The times are wild; Contention, like a horse
Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose,
and bears down all before him."

                          HENRY IV. PART II.

   WHILE Almina, in the solitude of
Glenmorne, was practising "the patience
which endureth," and with pious fortitude 
soothing the wanderings of a disordered 
mind, various were the events which, in
this long interval, occurred in the world
from which she was banished. Her sudden
and extraordinary flight from Castle St.
Albert, cast a deep gloom over its inha-


302             EARL OSRIC.

bitants; and however unwilling to be-
lieve Earl Osric an accessary in her mys-
terious disappearance, so many circum-
stances seemed to corroborate it, that even
Arthur himself was at last inclined to
adopt the suspicion.  The weak excuses
Osric had alleged for not attending her
projected marriage, the secrecy with
which he had reared her, the silence
which he had observed towards his lady,
respecting her residence at Osric Castle,
all now brought forward by Sir Ethelred,
with various other discoveries which he
pretended to have made in Scotland, all-
together formed an evidence which could
not be overlooked.  But the soul of
Arthur was too noble to pine in hopeless
love; he determined to seek the Earl, to
be convinced whether his conjectures
were true or false, and then in the arms
of glory to forget the faithless Almina:
but ere he could set out on the journey
he meditated, in search of Osric, he re-
ceived an order to join the King's forces                EARL OSRIC.                303

immediately in Flanders, and he was
compelled to defer his intended inquiry,
and his meditated vengeance.

He consigned his mother to the care
of Lady deMornay, with little hope of ever
again beholding her.  The blow given to
her son's happiness by Almina's deser-
tion, seemed to have brought her misfor-
tunes to a climax, and she languished in
a state the most deplorable, retaining,
amidst the wreck of intellect, only the
dreary consciousness of irremediable sor-
row.

Earl Osric, meantime, banished the
presence, though not from the memory,
of the King he had so faithfully served,
was performing, with the integrity that
had ever marked his character, the duties
of his station.  Ignorant of the suspi-
cions attached to him, he pursued his 
undeviating course with calm resigna-
tion, endeavouring, by the exercise of
every noble virtue in private life, to obli-
terate from his recollection the ingrati-304              EARL OSRIC.

tude which had driven him from a higher
sphere.

    He was now become a father; and, in
the new and tender office of a mother,
Lady Eleanor had fresh claims to his at-
tention. That she merited all the at-
tachment he could show towards her, he
was every day more convinced. The
conquest of Scotland, as it was not be-
lieved completed by the submission pub-
licly made to Edward, induced the Earl
once more to visit Osric Castle. What- 
ever were his private wishes, he took
publicly no part in the Scotch affairs;
but his lady was charmed with the wild
beauties of Scottish scenery, and fancied
the air would be favourable to the health
of her child. The plan was therefore
eagerly pursued, and, accompanied by
the Baron and Baroness Fitz Oswald,
they settled quietly at the Castle; and
while the mountain game afforded diver-
sion to the Earl, and occupied the time
not devoted to the management of his                  EARL OSRIC.                    305

estate, and the society of his family,
Lady Eleanora's hours were given
to maternal cares, and the now revived 
amusement of adorning and improving
the interior of their residence. Joining
the greater refinements of the south to
the open-hearted hospitality of a Scot-
tish chieftain, the Earl became daily
more loved and respected; and Osric
Castle presented a scene of feudal great-
ness and domestic peace, remarkable in 
times so rude and remote.

From this state of calmness and tran-
quility, Osric was roused by summons
to appear in London, in common with
the rest of the nobility, in order to ac-
company the King in his expedition to 
Flanders.

The invasion of France had long been
projected, and the Earl had held him-
self in readiness to offer his services in
such an emergency, even if they had not
been required. As yet all was quiet in
Scotland, and Eleanora was become much306           EARL OSRIC.

attached to the country: its salubrious
air seemed to have the happiest effect on
her son, and even her own health, natu-
rally delicate, had been much improves
by a residence in the north.  All these
combined reasons rendered her anxious
to pass the period of his inevitable ab-
sence in her present residence; and with
a sort of fearful foreboding of ill, the
Earl gave an almost reluctant consent.

   The protection of the Baron Fitz Os-
wals, now too far advanced in life for ac-
tual service, would, he trusted, secure
her and his son from danger; and should
unexpected disturbances arise, (which,
from his political knowledge he feared
might yet be the case,) he had, by judicious
treatment, he knew, endeared himself to
his clan, and could rely on the fidelity of
his vassals to defend his castle from as-
sault.  Still fearful presentiments hung
on his mind, but his strong desire to ma-
nifest to the King, that his loyalty, like
his courage, was unabated, supported him             EARL OSRIC             307

in his separation from his family; and at-
tended by Osbert, his faithful esquire,
who accompanied him and shared all
his dangers in his expedition to the Holy
Land, he set forward to England.  Ere he
reached London, he resolved to visit St.
Albert: he could not reconcile to his
strict ideas of right, his departure for the
continent without an interview with his
ward, whose marriage, he imagined, had 
been celebrated some time before.

  However his secret feelings might have
prompted him to spare himself the view
of Almina's happiness with Lord St. Al-
bert, the memory of her parents, and his
honor pledged to them to regard her as
his own child, demanded the sacrifice; 
and his steed every hour brought him
nearer to her, a deep shade of melancholy
came over his spirits, and the recollection
of her childhood and early youth, when
he alone possessed her confidence and af-
fection, cast a darkened shade over his
mind.308              EARL OSRIC.

   An observation of his esquire, who had
early known and loved Almina, who had
been his confidential agent in conducting
her mother to England, who had beheld
her noble father breathe his last on the
plains of Palestine, first recalled him from
his reverie.--"So please you, my Lord,"
said he, "we can now just discern the
towers of the Castle from this eminence:
were it not better that I ride on and an-
nounce your approach. Ah, I warrant
me all is joy and happiness now at St. Al-
bert! Dear young lady! never shall I
forget when she was conveyed a helpless
baby in old Maud's arms to Osric Cas-
tle."

   The Earl, waving his hand, bade him
proceed; but unwilling to give himself
time for reflection, he followed with such
expedition, that Osbert had not heard
from the few domestics half that had oc-
curred, when his master entered the forest
adjoining the Castle.

   Every object reminded him of his last             EARL OSRIC            309

journey there, when he brought Almina
from Osric Castle, and involuntarily he
slackened his pace to recover his internal
composure for the approaching interview.
  Considering the happy event which
had lately occurred, he was surprised to
observe such an appearance of quietness,
and almost of desolation.  No train of
well ordered vassals, such as used to crowd
the courts, now awaited his approach:
the grand entrance seemed deserted, and
the long grass waved on the pavement.  
Startled and alarmed, he checked his steed,
but no sound met his ear:  and on survey-
ing the building, he saw that the win-
dows of the state apartments were closed.
An indefinable dread stopped his proce-
dure, and he was alighting from his horse,
when Osbert, with a countenance of
mournful intelligence, appeared:--what a
tale awaited him!  Rushing past the old
servants, who had come forth to meet
him, he demanded to see Lady de Mor-310          EARL OSRIC.

nay. Her depressed aspect and air of
sorrow, as she advanced with melancholy
step through the hall, confirmed all his
worst fears. She could only extend her
hand: the gust of tears which succeeded,
spoke too plainly. "Tell, tell me all,"
said he, in a faltering tone, as he led her
forward: and in silent anguish he listened
to the extraordinary narrative.

   In the heart of Lady de Mornay, he
had always been acquitted of any know-
ledge of his ward's elopement; and she
alone had been his advocate against the
accusations heaped on him by Sir Ethel-
red and Elfrida. That the acquittal was
just, his present conduct demonstrated.
And "Why was not I sooner informed
of all this?" was loudly reiterated ere she
could form a reply that would not betray
the suspicious harboured against him.

   Convinced of Almina's purity of heart,
he felt assured that force only detained
her from her friends; and bitterly now he             EARL OSRIC.          311

deplored the obligation which compelled
him to join the King, instead of seeking
her through the world.
  In the heart wounding distress he be-
trayed, the unprejudiced Lady de Mor-
nay read his entire freedom from guilt on
this subject, an ardently she longed to
impart her own conviction to all those
who had injured him by their unworthy
suspicions. After an interview with
Lady St. Albert, who, deep sunk in apa-
thy, scarcely recognized him, with a mind
torn by anguish, depressed and miserable,
the Earl continued his way to London.
He was in time to be present at the as-
sembly of the nobility and people at
Westminster, where the King arranged
every particular of the intended expedi-
tion. It was evident that his Majesty
derived much satisfaction from Osric's
ready obedience to his summons, and a
high post in command was assigned him.
Yet it was too plain that the heart of the
King was still estranged from him; the312                EARL OSRIC.

poisonous insinuations of Sir Ethelred had
taken their intended effect ; and his re-
port of the late disappearance of Almina,
precisely at the time fixed for her marriage,
with the suspicious circumstances annexed
to ti, exaggerated and embellished by the
genius of the relater, contributed to leave
an impression of the duplicity of Osric's
character, which it ill merited. Fortu-
nately, St. Albert and the Earl were not
destined to meet, till both were on duty
in a foreign country. Ther former had
sailed with the first detachment of troops
before Osric reached London ; and the ill
success of the expedition, compelling the
King to divide his forces, kept them long
separated on the Continent. The event
of this war is well known ; the perfidy
and final desertion of his allies, thwarted
all the measures of Edward : several of
them, seduced by the address and libera-
lity of Philip, King of France, went over
to him, and after much unavailing conten-
tion and bloodshed, the disputes between                 EARL OSRIC                   313

the Kings of England and France were
referred to Pope Boniface, and a truce
granted for two years.  But the period
which had been passed by Edward and his
troops on the Continent, had been pro-
ductive of serious events in his own domi-
nions.  Sir Ethelred Douglas, unwilling 
to engage in the expedition to Flanders,
had had the address to persuade the King,
that his presence could be of more real
utility in England, and in repressing the
rising discontents of the Scotch; but
scarcely had the English troops reached
Flanders, ere Scotland was once more a 
scene of tumult.  The meteor of the
north, the far famed Wallace, had arisen;
encouraged his countrymen to retrieve the
independence they had lost, and leading
them on to commit continual depredations
and invasions, had encreased his originally
small band of adherents, till his power
became every day more formidable.
  An account of the insurrection being
transmitted to the King, orders were sent 314             EARL OSRIC.

to the Earl de Warenne to raise the mili-
tary force of the Northern counties, and
attack the Scots, who had even crossed
the Borders, and began to ravage the 
country.  Sir Ethelred Douglas, with
Henry Percy, grandson to Lord de Wa-
renne, proceeded at the head of forty thou-
sand men into Annandale, while de Wa-
renne himself, with another army, ad-
vanced against the Wallace, who had taken 
an advantageous post on the banks of the 
Forth, near Stirling.  The dreadful dis-
orders and ravages committed by the
English army, threw the peaceable part
of the inhabitants into the most extreme
consternation; and Osric Castle, from its
situation, being exposed to almost certain
danger, share the general peril.  By  
orders of Baron Fitz-Oswald, it was put
in as good a state of defence, as the time
would allow; the vassals were arrived, the
fortifications repaird, and every prepara-
tion made for an attack.  How were the 
feelings of the Earl agitated, when the 

             EARL OSRIC           315
news of this revolt reached him,then at
Ghent,which edward was endeavouring
to defend,while he tried in vain to com-
promise the differences and dissentions that
had arisen among the allies,which threat-
ened to leave the place a prey to philip,
as it finally proved:and distracted by
fears for the fate of Eleanora and his child,
in anguish from the uncertainty of Almi-
na's destiny,and in despair for success of
the undertaking in which he was engaged,
his noble mind was tortured by apprchen-
sions,which the accounts from Scotland
daily encreased;andpowerless to retrieve
them,his days were spent in unavailing
exerion,and his nights in sleepless an-
guish


  END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
          PUBLISHED BY C. CHAPPLE,
    Royal Circulating Library, Pall-Mall.
                    ---
 ASTARTE; a Sicilian Tale, with other Poems. By 
Miss Harries.  8vo. 8s. extra boards
 AMYNTOR AND ADELAIDE; or, a Tale of Life--a
Romance in Poetry, in Three Cantos, F.cap 8vo. 4s. bds.
 THE CONDUCT OF MAN; a Didactic Epistolary Poem.
8vo. 7s. 6d, bds.
 ***In the course of this Poem, an attempt is made to oppose the epicurean system of self-love.
 HEATH FLOWERS; or Songs, Odes, and Sonnets--
By C.F. Webb. 8vo. 4s. 6d. bds.
 MELANCHOLY HOURS; a collection of Miscellaneous
Poems.  By Miss Harries.  Small 8vo. 6s. bds.
 NATIONAL TRIUMPHS. By Mrs. Cockle. 2s stitched.
 SIMPLE MINSTRELSY, By Mrs. Cockle, Post 8vo. 
10s. bds.
 ELEGIAC TRIBUTE, to the memory of Lieut. Gen. Sir
John Moore. 4to price 2s. stitched.
 THE SHADE OF DRURY; a Vision, inscribed to one of
the late Patentees of the Theatre-Royal, Drury-lane. By Mrs. Richardson. 4to. 3s. stitched.
 KATHLEEN; a Ballad, from an ancient Irish tradition in the Valley of Glandilough, County of Wicklow. By John Edwards, Esq. of Oldcourt. 4to. 2s. 6d. stitched.
 MOSCOW, an Ode. By W.A. Downs, Esq. of the Customs,Edinburgh. 4to. 2s. stitched.
 MY COUNTRY; a Poem in Three Cantos. 8vo. 2s 6d. stitched.
 WOBURN-ABBEY GEORGICS; or, The Last Gathering, in Four Cantos, forming two Parts  8vo. 4s. 6d.. each
sewed.
 THE TEST OF VIRTUE; and other Poems.  By Miss
Barrell.  F.cap 8vo. 7s. extra bds.
 POEMS, chiefly Comic and Hudibrastic; containing Burlesque Translations, Dramatic Prices, and Miscellanies, by W. C. Oulton, Author of "Frightened to Death."--"Sleep Walker." &c. &c. 8vo. 9s. bds.