CHAPTER I.

" Ah, me ! for aught that ever I could read—

Could ever hear by tale or history,

The course of true love never did run smooth :

But, either it was different in blood ;—

Or else misgraff'd in respect of years ;—

Or else it stood upon the choice of friends :

Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,

War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it;

Making it momentary as a sound

Swift as a shadow, short as any dream;

Brief as the lightning in the collied night,

That in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,

And ere a man hath power to say, Behold !

The jaws of darkness do devour it up :

So quick bright things come to confusion."



Midsummer Night's Dream.

This family re-union was a cordial in the cup of Lady Howard's life. She seemed to enjoy every passing hour with a greediness of its

VOL. II. B

M112188





• • .• ■ • • • • * • • •

:*2*..: ; • ' Thc" Ebvorced.

value, which might have made a spectator fear for its duration.

About six weeks after Lord Howard's return with his son from the continent, Miss Agar likewise came back with Lord Vernon. Her first visit was to Lady Margaret Leicester.

" I hope I see your ladyship quite well: your looks belie you if you are not in health. Brighton has done wonders for you. Really, you are as blooming as you were thirty years ago."

" Nonsense! my dear Miss Agar; you'll excuse me, but though I may deceive myself in many things, I cannot do so in the belief that I grow younger or handsomer. However, I am in very good health, and able to enjoy the pleasures suitable to my age;—that is a blessing, for which I am thankful. But how comes it, that young and old, men and women, married and single, cannot rest in their own country, now a-days, without fidgetting about abroad, as they call it? Abroad, indeed!—a broad way to destruction very often; for my part, I can see no





ad vantage whatever to be derived from living with a parcel of doubtful characters in a strange land. We have quite enough of such in our own country, without seeking them , elsewhere. What, in the name of surprise, took you off, to swell the list of gadabouts ?"

" I quite agree with your ladyship; but you know poor Lord Vernon is in very indifferent health. He was always an indolent man, and now he is so helpless, that it is pitiable to see him. I am become a necessary part of his household indeed, though I do not mean to praise myself. I must tell you, I have saved him several thousand pounds since I looked into his affairs;—so cheated by his servants !"— she threw up her eyes;—" it is quite frightful to think of it! Lord Stuart is .the most amiable creature that ever lived; but a young man of his age cannot be expected, you know, to act steward or housekeeper. And, then, I make up my lord's cribbage at night—a sad





slavery, to be sure, altogether, but one which I can never have -the heart to break through so long as I live." She paused for breath, then resumed. " Your ladyship has doubtless heard the curious story of Lord Talbot's illness, and of his most amiable brother having paid him such attentions as a legitimate relation alone could expect to receive. He did not stop there —he even persuaded Lord Talbot to return to his disconsolate parents; for you remember he left them in a fit of highflown mortified pride, when he learnt his mother's history. Certain it is, whatever truth there be in that part of the report, Lord Talbot has returned with his father; but I do not suppose he can live long; you know the Howards are all consumptive ; but I ought not, perhaps, to have said this to your ladyship!" " Why not, Miss Agar?" " If all I hear be true; but I can scarcely believe it."





"What do you hear?"

" Why surely your ladyship knows that Colonel Leicester passes all his time with the Howards, and is shortly to marry Lady Alice ?"

Lady Margaret turned very pale, and her lips grew perfectly white.

" Nobody would dare -to tell me such un welcome news; but I guessed the truth. It is a great disgrace."

" My dear Lady Margaret, how I feel for you; but surely you can prevent this ?"

" Yes, by losing my son's affection. If I were to command him, on pain of my displeasure, and in consideration of the wretchedness he would bring on me, not to marry the girl, he would not marry her; but, as he gave me to understand, what would then be the consequence ?— why, he would hate me, and separate himself from me. Thus I should have only a choice of evils. No, it must be so; the blood of the Leicesters -is to be denied; their honours sullied by an alliance, not of inferior birth—for I could have borne that misfortune—but to think of the pollution of vice, the degradation of being allied to a family who are branded with crime,—horrible!"





" Nay, dear Lady Margaret, do not suffer this unfortunate event to take such hold upon you, or it may hurt your health, so precious to all who love you. It is, I confess, a very disagreeable circumstance; but then consider how many persons are in the same boat with you. People do not entertain these matters as they used to do; the generality of the world hold such delinquencies as venial trespasses; and they think nothing of intermarrying in families whose parents have stepped aside, especially when rank and wealth gild the pill. It is in vain to set oneself up on high, and say that we will always maintain our position; everybody comes down in their turn."

" May be so, Miss Agar, as to the outward shews and circumstances of life; but as to the moral dignity of our being, it is only our own depravity which can lower us in that respect."





" In that case, your ladyship personally will not suffer by this untoward alliance."

" In my son's person and interests, I am as vulnerable as in my own. He was my pride, my gloty; now " Lady Margaret restrained the starting tear, and remained silent.

" If this be really the case, and since you feel this affair so keenly, an idea has occurred to me, just an accidental thought, which may save you from losing your son's affection, and yet effectually prevent his marrying Lady Alice."

" Name it; and if you are not deceiving me, I shall have cause to bless you; but the thing is impossible."

" Not so. Mark me, I know Lady Alice— she is a very rare and particular character. Send for her, and tell her the truth—dwell upon the infamy of her mother in having left so perfeet a husband as Vernon—swell the theme with every possible argument which may tend to aggravate Lady Howard's crime—and then put it to herself, if she were a mother, whether or not she could endure that the pride and glory of her House should marry one, who would bring pollution and disgrace upon him. Having secured her refusal of your son's proposal, then exact a promise from her, that she never tells Colonel Leicester why she refuses him ; but you must tell her the truth, and give her your reason for this concealment: say it is because you fear you would lose his affection were she to do so. I know Alice Talbot, and that which no other girl would do, under similar circumstances, she will."





Lady Margaret had listened very attentively; and when Miss Agar ceased speaking, she remained for a few minutes silent. When she resumed the discourse, it was to say,

" Miss Agar, knowing Lady Alice as well as





you profess to do, would it not be more easy and more natural that you should yourself speak to her, and use the arguments which you think would have weight with her?"

" No, no, Lady Margaret, that would have no power to effect your purpose ; my speaking to her would be the very way to mar your end. Besides, I was once her mother's friend, and it would not come so well from me as from yourself. Make her feel that she is the child of a divorced woman; besides, we always plead our own cause best; take my counsel, send for Lady Alice."

After due consideration, Lady Margaret was determined to adopt this advice. So she turned in her mind what would be the most natural way of obtaining a conversation alone with her victim, without exciting any suspicion on the part of the latter; and she decided that an invitation to dine would be the best means of compassing her end.





When the card reached Howard house it excited much conversation and interest between Lord and Lady Howard. " At last," said the latter triumphantly, " Alice's virtues are done justice to—even the haughty Lady Margaret relents."

" I have a great mind not to go, Laura. Colonel Leicester is not behaving well; positively, and for the last time I declare to you, that if he does not speedily come to a decision respecting our Alice, he shall never enter these doors more."

" Very well, Charles, doubtless you are the best judge how to act in this affair for Alice's happiness ; but I do implore you give the Leicesters no handle to break off. Accept Lady Margaret's invitation to dinner—consult Talbot, hear what he says on the subject."

Lord Talbot was of his mother's opinion; indeed he never differed now from any thing that she proposed; only he looked distressed as he read his father's, his own, and his sister's name on the invitation without Lady Howard's. His countenance changed; his long eyelashes dropped over his eyes, and gave them that tender melancholy expression which his mother understood but too plainly. She pressed his hand, and bade him not think of that.





" I am quite satisfied now," she said; " now that you are restored to me, I have more blessings far than I deserve."

Lord Talbot felt that here at least his mother had expiated her offence by the meek endurance of the mortifications which she had suffered, and was hourly to suffer. He felt afresh how wrong he had been, in giving way to that haughty sentiment of self-love and pride which had driven him from his parents, and renewed inwardly his vows of affectionate obedience to them with a fervour, proportioned to the remorse he endured at having ever conducted himself so unlike a son to a parent.

Lady Alice could not help indulging the belief, that this dinner given by Lady Margaret Leicester portended future happiness to her. She naturally thought that Colonel Leicester's mother would never have sought this intimacy unless she had made up her mind to receive her as a daughter-in-law ; for although nothing decided had passed between Alice and her lover, yet that he was her lover she could not doubt, and still less was she in any uncertainty respecting her own sentiments towards him. When the day arrived which promised so much pleasure, with a joy fluttering at her heart, which tinged her cheek with a brighter glow, and glittered in her eyes, Lady Alice kissed her mother's forehead, and ran lightly down stairs after Lord Howard and her brother, who were waiting for her at the carriage door. When arrived at Lady Leicester's house, servants in unusual numbers were stationed at the door and on the staircase, announcing their names with loud reiteration. Lady Alice thought what a numerous party this will be, and was abashed as she passed in review before this formidable phalanx of attendants. When she reached the drawing-room, she scarcely knew whether she was standing in the midst of a crowd or not, so completely had her own feelings confused her; but when she ventured to cast a stolen glance around, she beheld only Lady Margaret and her son, and concluded herself and family were the first arrived guests. After a few unmeaning words of ceremony had passed, Lady Margaret sat down by Alice Talbot, and talked of various subjects, on all of which the latter seemed well informed, without pedantry; and Lady Margaret tacitly thought, that she had never seen so much self-possession of manner conjoined to such modest simplicity—but she was surprised, not pleased at the discovery. Two or three gentlemen soon came in : Lady Margaret's attention to her guests was of course divided ; but the great assemblage which Alice expected, she found, proved only to be the small circle already named ; and the dinner was formal, and the conversation did not flow; she thought it interminable, and felt relieved when Lady Margaret retired to the drawing-room. As soon as they had had coffee, and that the servants were dismissed, Lady Margaret drew her chair closer to Lady Alice, and looking at her very fixedly she said—





" It is painful to me to speak to you on the subject on which I must now address you, but I owe it to myself, I owe it to my son, and I owe it to you, Lady Alice, to tell you, before you have engaged your affections irrevocably—"

Lady Margaret hesitated ; she was not a bad though a hard-hearted woman; and as she looked on the sweet face of Alice Talbot, she could scarcely find courage to wound her, as she knew she should—indeed as she intended to do.

" Yes, I have determined to tell you," she continued speaking quicker " that I never will sanction my son's marrying you under present circumstances."





Lady Margaret's words were so unexpected, that Alice was struck dumb, and for a few moments remained silent.

Lady Margaret awaited her answer with an impatience she scarcely could conceal; but at length, seeing Alice did not reply, she reassumed her tone of calm decision, and .laying her hand on Lady Alice's arm, said,

" Has he proposed to you ?—Have you accepted Leicester?"

Poor Alice! she had buoyed up her heart with pleasure when she came into Lady Margaret's house; the very circumstance of having been invited there, seemed a security of a kind welcome, not merely as a guest, but as Colonel Leicester's future wife ; and now, when Lady Margaret announced her decision so suddenly— so unexpectedly, she was quite unprepared to reply; but she collected her self-command and with that consciousness of innocence in having nothing to conceal, which always restores self-possession after the first moment of surprise is past, she said





" Your son, Colonel Leicester, has never proposed to me, Lady Margaret, therefore I have neither accepted nor rejected him, nor am I aware that he has any intention of asking me in marriage, consequently it is unnecessary to lay your injunctions upon me, or to express your disapprobation at a union which, if persons in general have reported as likely to take place, remains at present unknown to the parties most concerned. How I should act under different circumstances I am at a loss to say, being unprepared to decide the question."

Lady Margaret was surprised and wholly unprepared for such a reply. Well, she thought, Miss Agar never was more mistaken in the character of any one than in that of Lady Alice. Here is no high flown romance, or heroic determination of unnatural self-sacrifice, but a sensible, plain-spoken, cautious reply, which entirely overthrows Miss Agar's plan, and renders it vain for me to pursue this course. But when Lady Margaret looked again at Alice, and saw the changes which passed over her countenance, she was aware that the apparent calmness of the answer differed greatly from the feelings that were passing within. Another pause, and again Lady Margaret resumed her attack :





" Nay, now, Lady Alice Talbot, you must be aware that Leicester is in love with you, that he admires you exceedingly, and no wonder," she added, " for you are very charming."

Lady Margaret was a woman, and what woman does not, by self-experience, know the effect which a word of flattery may produce on some characters, especially:when pronounced at the right moment; and applied judiciously it has the power of disclosing secrets which every other means would fail to unfold.

But Lady Margaret mistook when she used such arts on Alice Talbot.

" Perhaps you do not dislike my son," and she smiled cunningly as she looked hard at the person upon whom she was acting the part of inquisitor."





When a home question is urged, it is difficult to evade a reply in kind; and when the latter asked Lady Alice if she loved her son, there was an end of caution,— an end of reserve on her part, and she answered, her colour varying in a thousand tints as she spoke,

" Yes, Lady Margaret, I will not deny that I love Colonel Leicester, but you are the only person to whom I would confess that love, for, remember he has never said that he loved me. So I trust your honour as a woman, (one who can feel the dignity and the delicacy which every woman owes herself,) to keep a secret, which but for you would never have been revealed."

Lady Margaret was surprised, almost touched ; she had found so much to admire, so much to honor in the person she wished to crush, that she wavered how to proceed; for she could appreciate, though she could not imitate such genuine greatness of character as she had found in Lady Alice, but the principles by which she was guided were so consonant with Lady Margaret's own theory of right and wrong, that she half repented of having spoken so harshly, and pronounced such a peremptory decision.





" You may depend on my secrecy, Lady Alice," was her reply ; and Alice might depend upon Lady Margaret's promise, for she was a woman who never swerved from her word. Still prejudice was so deep rooted in her nature, that she could not divest herself of it, and she thought inwardly—"Yes, she is very captivating—very superior, but still her mother, Lady Howard, is a divorced woman—Alice is come of a bad nest:"—then speaking aloud,—" any one who loves Leicester truly, who loves him not merely from admiration of his personal fascinations, or for the sake of the adventitious circumstances by which he is surrounded, I love. I should esteem such a woman—I should be proud of her personally as his wife. I have certainly no reason to doubt the sincerity of your love for Leicester, Lady Alice, or your purity, but there are circumstances—circumstances not under your control, which oblige me, from the interest I take in my son's welfare, to prevent, inasmuch as in me lies, the progress of his attachment for you ; and I feel imperatively called upon to make known to you both, that, consistently with my ideas of a parent's duty, I never can give my consent to your union."





" I am grateful to you, Lady Margaret, for being so candid, and for giving me warning not to indulge hopes which would fail of being realized, but which, indeed, I have never yet entertained, for I have had no right to do so. .Again I beg to remind you I trust to your honour, Lady Margaret, not to divulge the secret I have reposed in you, and I assure you, that on my part, I will never again encourage attentions from your son which are displeasing to you ; indeed I never would marry any man without the consent of his parents, and should scorn to inveigle a child from its allegiance; no, God forbid that I should ever be so guilty !"





" Yet, Lady Alice Talbot, remember the circumstances, which now oblige me to withhold my countenance from Leicester's marrying you, may be changed; and, then, I could have no reason (if you both continued to be of the same mind,) to oppose my son's union with Lord Howard's daughter. Therefore, do not despair: a few years, nay, perhaps a much shorter time may enable me to welcome you proudly as my son's wife. Life and death are so uncertain (she forgot to include her own in that uncertainty), the unfortunate barrier betwixt you and my son may be removed."

Alice did not dare to ask what barrier, or to say, " To whom do you refer ?" for she perfectly understood the unfeeling allusion; but she determined, if possible, not to suffer Lady Margaret to be aware that she did so ; that triumph of scorn, she thought, shall at least, be wanting to the gratification of her malevolence; and, summing up all her moral courage, she replied :—





" No, Lady Margaret, there are no barriers to Colonel Leicester's union with me, but those which you yourself are pleased to erect; but it is enough that you have told me you do not choose I shall become Colonel Leicester's wife, even were he desirous that I should be his, (which neither you nor I have a right to believe he is;) and however great my affection might be for any man, I have already declared I never would enter as an unwelcome relation in the family, even of the person most dear to me. So enough on this subject, Lady Margaret: be at rest. It is very unlikely that I should ever be Colonel Leicester's wife."

Fortunately for Lady Alice—fortunately for both her and Lady Margaret, the gentlemen came into the room, and prevented any further conversation.





Colonel Leicester came up immediately to the former, with a pleased air, and a happy expression beaming on his countenance. He thought " All now must be arranged according to my wishes. My mother has been captivated by Alice; nothing on her part need prevent my long meditated proposal; and after the proof I have had of her duty and affection for a parent, it were folly to doubt that she will make an unexceptionable wife. What signifies, in fact, the mistaken, harsh-judging, false-judging world? Can the error of a mother sully the purity of her offspring ? No—not in reality, but in appearance—ay, there's the sting "—all these thoughts mingled and shifted to and fro in his mind, although the pleasurable conviction that Lady Alice had ingratiated herself with his mother was the prominent feeling of the moment, and gave to his manner that indescribable charm which the gentler affections never fail to impart. Alas, for Lady Alice ! she was to observe and to feel this: she was to be aware that she was loved — that she was even conquering the cautious and prudential maxims of her lover, but that her success was vain—that she was to see the cup of bliss even at her lips, and to deny herself its acceptance—she was to hide from everyone the pang that devoured her, and smile while her heart was in anguish. Her flushed cheek, her glittering eyes, the state of feverish excitation into which she had been thrown by Lady Margaret, all tended to deceive Colonel Leicester. He concluded his mother had expressed herself favourably to his wishes ; and, thrown off his guard by the deceptive hopes he entertained of her approval of the object of his affection, he said, speaking low and quick, to avoid being heard by others,





" Lady Alice, contrive some opportunity for





me to see you alone to-morrow; grant to me half an hour's undisturbed interview."

" I can have no reason for refusing you, unless it be the idea that I shall give you pain."

Colonel Leicester's countenance changed.

" Do you know, then, the subject on which I wish to converse with you?"

Alice's face was alternately pale, and then crimson, as the blood went and came from her heart.

" I may be wrong, but I guess—perhaps—it is cruel in you so to ask me," and she gasped for breath.

Lady Margaret, who had been watching them narrowly, now called Colonel Leicester to make up Lord Howard's party at whist; and he had only time to say, " Remember, Lady Alice, do not refuse me."

The last three or four words were overheard by Lady Margaret. She looked at Alice,

VOL. II. C





as much as to say, " Are you to be trusted ? will your self-denial bear you through?—will you not break your promise?"

Alice returned her questioning glances with an air of haughty disdain, and bore her part through the evening with a power of selfcommand which pertains to very few characters.

The high spirits of her father, heightened, perhaps, by wine, were not to be repressed ; and as he drove home with her that night, he could not help saying, " Well, Alice, have you nothing to say to me? not one word of confidence?"

" Dearest papa, you know I have never had any secrets from you."

" Then why, Alice, should you have now. You are aware that to see you Colonel Leicester's wife would make your mother and myself the happiest of creatures. We have no care, no interest half as dear to us, for Henry does not want our care as you do. Tell me,





then, for I cannot bear this suspense, has Colonel Leicester proposed to you ?" " No, papa."

" Well, that is most extraordinary. It is not possible he should mean to jilt you. Alice, I desire that if he does not shortly explain himself to you, that you never speak to him again. My door shall be shut to him for ever."

" Dearest papa, I have no right to quarrel with Colonel Leicester: he never professed to love me."

"The more shame for him. He has won your affections, and kept on fast and loose—for what ? for the indulgence of his own vanity, at the expense of your honour and happiness. I have thought hitherto that his mother's disapprobation of the alliance might have been some apology for him; but even that has no excuse; and now, we are certain his mother likes us all, and appreciates you, as she well may; it is therefore, I repeat it, downright villany on his part if he does not speedily come forward, and ask your hand."





" You are mistaken, papa, respecting Lady Margaret. I know that she would not hear of a union between me and her son—it is perfectly out of the question that I should ever become Colonel Leicester's wife."

" You astonish me, Alice ! but be that as it may, he must and shall propose to you, or I will know the reason of it."

Alice sighed, and was silent. That melancholy night was ended,'and her weary and perplexed spirit found rest in sleep.





CHAPTER II.



For several virtues

Have I liked several women; never any

With so full soul, but some defect in her

Did quarrel with the noblest grace she ow'd,

And put it to the foil: but you, O you,

So perfect, and so peerless are created

Of every creature best.



Shakspeare's Tempest.



When Colonel Leicester came the next day, and requested to see Lady Alice—although she had prayed fervently for strength to act, as conscience dictated to her it was right she should—she felt so unable for the conflict, that had it not been for the idea of vexing her mother, and enraging her father, she would have put off the decisive but dreaded interview. After a short, but severe struggle with herself, she went to meet Colonel Leicester.





He opened at once upon his subject. " We have been so long acquainted, so long friends, I hope I may say, that I feel it not altogether so abrupt as it would otherwise be, to declare what you must have already discovered, dear Lady Alice, that I passionately love you; but it is not my practice to yield to impulses, however strong they may be, without consulting those principles of moral fitness, which can alone give stability to the affections. For this reason I have watched you, dearest—dare I call you so?" (she suffered him to take her hand, and kiss it) —" watched you in the most delicate and difficult situation in which a daughter can be placed; nay, even tried you myself, and never in thought, word, or deed, have I found a speck or flaw in you; whilst you must have thought me cold, measured, unworthy of daring to aspire to your love.





I have long wished to implore you to become my wife; but I would not do so till I knew that you could be a wife in all the duty, as well as in all the fondness of the tie; neither would I, while my mother opposed our union, subject you to endure her contumely, which, though springing out of right motives, was in itself wrong; but now, dearest, that she is as much impressed by your motives and charms almost as I am myself—now that she no longer opposes——"

Alice started—" No longer opposes, Colonel Leicester! what do you mean? has she then changed so completely since last night ?"

" Changed, Alice, dearest ? What! did my mother speak to you- on the subject of our marriage, and did she refuse it her sanction?"





" Yes, she did ; and in terms so decisive, that it was impossible I could misconstrue them: she told me that there was a barrier to our union over which I had no controul, and while that barrier existed she said it was her duty, as a parent, to prevent it by every means in her power."

" Is it possible ?" and Colonel Leicester struck his forehead. " And you, Alice, what did you reply 1"

" I told her that neither she nor I had any right to suppose that you intended to propose to me ; but that she might rest assured I never would enter the family of any man who would reject my alliance, nor would I attempt to win the affections of one whose parents disapproved of me as a relation."

" She must have honoured you for the declaration : but hear me plead, Alice. I do not ask you, even now, hastily to break through this





resolution; but I do implore you to give me hope, and to allow time to soften the prejudices of my mother before you altogether refuse my suit."

" Do not indulge such a hope, Colonel Leicester; she will never change, and I will never debase myself. No! though my life should pay the forfeit of my determination. Were it myself only whose interests were to be consulted—whose pride was to be humbled — I might be weak—I might consent to be trodden under foot; but—as it is — Never!—"

" Nay but Alice, dearest, who wishes to crush you ? who could have the heart — who could dare?—should I not resent it to the utmost ? Am I not as jealous of your feelings as you can be yourself? I am—believe that I am! Only, when the happiness of a lifetime depends upon a little forbearance—a little temporising—is it not worth yielding some minor circumstances of outward appearance to ensure so lasting—so great a good ?"





" To what do you allude—be explicit?"

" I allude to this : if my mother exacted of us that you should never see your mother but in my presence, never appear with her in public, never, in short —"

" Never, in short, be as a daughter to my own mother—Colonel Leicester, I am surprised how you should tamper with me thus, or suppose that I could listen to you for a moment. You know my mother is dearer to me than my life— dearer even than my love for you; and I solemnly declare, that no earthly power—no strength of attachment, shall ever make me swerve from that dutiful affection which I bear my mother. I will never be separated from her for any other tie. I will ever love, and honour, and cherish her, and you wound and offend me by touching on this subject; and it





is best that we close our conversation here. I honour you for the love you bear your mother: respect me for that with which I am devoted to mine."

" God knows I do, Lady Alice; but I will not so readily resign all hope. I will use such influence with my mother—such unabating entreaty ; I will place before her consideration such incontrovertible facts, that I must soften her heart; and then will you promise me to entertain my suit 1"

" Colonel Leicester, I may not listen to proposals made under such limitations and circumstances as I cannot be supposed to pardon, neither will I give any promise upon a subject which I am persuaded will never come in such a shape as will justify my considering it beforehand."

" You forbid me your presence, then—you deny me all hope V

" I have no right to forbid you to come to





my father's house ;—that rests with him ! and as to hope, you best know, Colonel Leicester, what cause you have for hope or fear."

Lady Alice rose, and without another word she left him alone. He stood for some time looking after her. He wished to recall his words —his last words. He wished he had made no observation that could have wounded her. He would have given much to have proffered his hand in another manner, and without any limitation or bargaining respecting her intercourse with Lady Howard, but it was too late now; he had sealed his fate ; he was to resign Lady Alice, and endeavour to think that the sacrifice which is made to a mother is always rewarded; but not to an unreasonable, harsh and proud woman, whose own selfish feelings actuated her conduct, and put fetters on that of her son. Duty, in such a case, loses its character of virtue, and almost becomes weakness.

t





As soon as Colonel Leicester had left the house, Lady Howard sent for her daughter. One glance, as she entered the room, served to convince her that her expectations were abortive; and when Alice endeavoured to throw the blame on Lady Margaret, without allowing it to appear that her mother was the cause of her dislike to the match, Lady Howard was aware that she was herself the object of Lady Margaret's abhorrence to the alliance.

How true it is, that we suffer the chastisement of our follies or our crimes long after their commission, and it may be, when we least expect to reap such bitter fruits.

Lady Howard's life had indeed been one tissue of humiliation, but never till she met it in the persons of her children was it felt in all its weight of anguish. It is in those we love that we are most vulnerable. The iron that enters into the soul is that with which a beloved object is wounded. For ourselves, it is easy to forgive slights, injuries, and offences ; but let the least thorn of these piercing goads touch the object of our affections, and the gentlest natures are roused into momentary fury; nay, sometimes where the offence has been of long or repeated kind, there is a lasting dislike to the person who inflicted it, which nothing but the Christian's prayer can mollify.





In this instance, Lady Howard's hatred was turned against herself. She did not attempt to evade the knowledge that it was her crime which now rendered her daughter a rejected woman; and if ever punishment can be supposed bitterer than another, it is that which makes us feel we have caused the misery of the child of our love.

Lady Howard did not tell this to her daughter, but her pangs were only aggravated by being unshared and unknown to mortal.





When Lady Alice had to explain the same story to her father, he took it up in quite a different point of view, and conceived that Lady Margaret's supposed opposition to the match was only an excuse which Colonel Leicester made to break off from an engagement of which he was tired; and though Alice was rather happy than otherwise that he should thus misconceive the motive of Colonel Leicester's conduct on one account, yet on another, she suffered the most poignant anxiety. In order, therefore, to turn her father's displeasure solely on herself; she declared that nothing would make her accept Colonel Leicester."

"Ah !" said he, " I thought so; I thought it was some devilish fantastical notion that you had taken into your head, which made you say something to offend the man. He could not —he durst not otherwise have behaved as he has done. Then you refused him?"





" Yes."

" Well, that was quite enough to disgust any man with you, after all the encouragement you have given him. And still he implores to be received in our house as a friend ;—still supplicates that you will permit him to entertain a distant hope, however faint, that you may think otherwise at some future time. I therefore expect, Alice, that you will treat Colonel Leicester with the politeness which is due to my friend; and that you will, by no implied dislike, become the means of depriving me of his society."

Alice knew the injustice of her father's harshness, but she had wished to shield the man she loved from all imputation of blame; and, above all, she desired to ward off from her mother any humiliation from which it was in her power to save her, even at the cost of her own happiness.





Another cause of anxiety and interest now visited the Howards, and made their thoughts centre in one object, to the exclusion of all else, for the moment.

The winter had set in with unusual severity, and the dangerous symptoms of Lord Talbot's malady returned. The physicians wished him to go abroad, but he would not hear of it; and he said to his sister, when they were alone together,—

" Alice, dear, do not let our father and mother torment themselves and me unnecessarily I know more than the physicians know. Let me pass what yet remains to me of life in my own country, surrounded by you all."

Alice looked earnestly in his countenance; she endeavoured to turn aside the melancholy presage which his words foreboded ; but he resumed the conversation.

" My dear sister, you have a character of firmness, tempered by gentleness, which will enable you, I trust, to support our parents under their trials. But you will require it all; for your task, dear Alice, is a grievous one. However, there are yet bright days in store for you, I hope. As to myself, I was never very covetous of life: and since I learnt a fatal secret, which either you do not, or do not choose to know, and of which it is best you should remain ignorant as long as you can,—since, I say, that secret has been known to me, I have never had a wish to live."





" Not for our dear parents' sake, Henry?"

" If I could have made them happy,—yes;— but as it is—no, Alice : you are the apple of their eye; you are the pearl of price to them."

" We are equally dear to them, Henry. Oh ! if you knew how my poor mother mourned over your absence,— how very bitter were the tears she shed,—how bitterer still those heart





griefs, in which none might participate, you would not be so cruel, so unduteous, as to say that your life is valueless to your parents ?"

Lord Talbot replied :—" I do not mean to be disrespectful or unkind; still less, to dispute the will of the Most High. I am resigned to live or to die;—only remember, Alice, never abandon our mother, whatever temptations may assail you under specious disguises; and recollect, that parents are the dearest of all earthly relations ; they are given to us but once."

This, and many similar conversations, made Alice to conceive much more seriously of her brother's malady than any one else did. She forgot everything—even Colonel Leicester— to attend solely to the object of her duty and her affection. Others went and came in his apartment, but she never left him: a bed, erected in an adjoining room, allowed her to be his nurse during the night as well as the day;



and often, when his attendants slept, her watchful ear heard the moan and the heavy breathing, whether of pain or of uneasiness, and hastened to place a pillow in a new position, or tender the liquid that allayed the parching thirst, or speak the word of cheerfulness and soothing; or utter the short prayer of faith, which, if not heard in the way it is wished by the blind supplicant, is never prayed in vain.





Thus passed night after night, and day after day, the medical attendants always framing their bulletin after the manner of the oracles of old, which would serve either way, as the exigency of the after-moment might require. Yet, why blame them ? They say, and perhaps justly, that were they to lift the veil with which they cover the opinions they give, that the most interested, and those whose feelings are most deeply dependent on the issue of the malady





on which they are called to pronounce, would be unfitted for the attendance on their patient which they wish to pay; and even their very lives may be placed in adequate danger with those on whom they are watching, if they were made acquainted with the real opinion of the medical attendants on every turn and in every stage of the disease. Let those, therefore, who are called upon to this sad and tender duty, remember to be indulgent to those whom they consult: it is best to go through the mournful task in a prayerful spirit, using all diligence; being instant in supplication, and leaving the issue to that Almighty Power, in whom alone are the issues of life and death. Oh ! let the mourner remember, how, when having pressed to hear the unbiassed opinion of others on the state of those most dear to us, we have involuntarily loathed the persons who spoke, the truth without disguise. And when we have urged





them to the utterance, we have unjustly hated them at the moment for that very sincerity which we forced from their lips. What can be said of such contradictory elements of human infirmity, unless it be to humble ourselves in the knowledge of our unreasonable feelings, and to bow low and kiss the chastening rod ?

In the course of a long illness, the flux and reflux of hope is ever changing, ever buoying us up on high, or sinking us into despair. For many days together, Lord Talbot's appearance was such as to deceive even those best versed in the fluctuations of the disease; and Lord and Lady Howard were completely blinded as to his danger. The former, more especially, seemed to take particular pleasure in forming schemes for the future, and settling what he would do next spring.

A cruise would be the surest way in the world to restore Henry's health; they would go to Naples, and bask in the southern sunshine; then return to the north of Italy, before the weather became too hot, and Henry would have it in his power to pursue his love of arts in southern climes.





There was no end to the schemes Lord Howard formed of amusement. Sometimes his son entered into these with real or pretended interest, but often a shade of gloom was visible on his countenance, when he spoke of such plans; and it distressed both Lady Howard and his sister, to hear his father pursuing his own chimeras with all the impetuosity of his sanguine temperament, regardless of that more awful warning which might have made him pause, and remember how impotent are our wills—how frail our hopes — how utterly it is beyond our ken to say what a day may bring forth.

While such were the false hopes and presumptuous plans of Lord Howard, his wife saw through a very different medium into futurity. Her conscience was perpetually reproaching her as being the cause of her son's illness : it was owing to his wounded feelings on her account, that he had left his home; that he had plunged into an alternate course of study and of exercise, equally hurtful to him; that he had courted that excitement of feeling, in short, which brought on his malady; and she thought it was impossible for her to humble herself sufficiently, in order to avert the wrath of Heaven by penitence and prayer. The mother was ever abject to her own son ; a suppliant for his affection; a positive beggar on his bounty, for that filial love which every parent has a right to command — every parent, who has not to blush before their own offspring! But she drank the very lees of wretchedness, and dared not even say, " This is hard !" If ever woman did, she bore her dishonour meekly; but tears, nor prayers, nor humiliation, were permitted to be of avail in restoring to her—her son !





He became rapidly worse; she saw that he was to be taken from her.—Not so Lord Howard : to the very last, he spoke as though his child was to live; he spoke so, though the conviction was at his heart, and before his eyes, that Lord Talbot was dying. But even to such mourners, we may extend commiseration, for they are maddened by despair; they are not of the schooled in sorrow, the chastened, or the holy, who bow to afflicting dispensations; and that very circumstance is an additional reason why they should be pitied.





Lord Talbot died a peaceful death. His mother and sister watched over him to the last. His father came to the door of his apartment every moment, but he could not endure to look upon his dying child; he asked how his son was going on, and answered himself, saying, " Yes, he is better;" then rushed away again, and rode or walked like a madman.

Grief takes many shapes;—who can prescribe to its modes or degrees ?—but, certainly, some

VOL. II. D





griefs appear to flow from a more selfish source than others. We are shocked at the violent, the unbending, murmuring, or arraigning mourner; but weep with our whole hearts for those who weep the silent tears of uncomplaining anguish.

Lord Howard's misery quickly exhausted its violence, but it took, soon afterwards, another turn; one more offensive still to look upon, were it not that it was known to be, as it were, grief travestied; odious, indeed, to behold, but still grief in all its anguish. This fashion of woe was, with him, an assumption of total forgetfulness. No one was to mention Lord Talbot's name in his presence; no allusion whatever was to be made to him, no more than if he had never existed.

Very soon after the fatal event, Lord Howard expected the family to meet at the regular hour of meals; some guests were invited; and that his wife should do the honours of the table; and his daughter should smile and converse as





usual. In regard to himself, he affected an ease of manner which must have been perfectly insufferable, even to the most hardened or indifferent spectator, acquainted with his recent bereavement, had there not been a look of suffering, and an occasional expression of wretchedness, which burst forth under all this masquerade, and rendered the disguise only the more apparent.

During the whole of Lord Talbot's long illness, Colonel Leicester had been unwearying in his attentions to Lord Howard: he had felt for and with him. These two rare unisons of sympathy, which alone renders it a balm to the wounded spirit, were, in Colonel Leicester's case, bestowed upon Lord Howard in all their warmth of feeling.

Those who feel for ourselves only on such occasions, bestow no welcome cordial to the sinking heart. We want some one, to feel with us—to feel for the dear lost one—to enter into our love for them. Our friend must have loved the departed; and even then, what is the love of the whole world, to that one powerful tie which made the lost one a part of ourselves! Weep, weep ! sad lonely eyes, and bleed a long and sanguinary course of sorrow; yet still look up, all true mourners! and be comforted, in the assurances that are given you of comfort and of mercy.





" Not to the grave O power, of wondrous grace !

Direct the mourner's dark despairing eye ;

Not in that loathsome, that terrific place,

Whence shrinking nature turns instinctively.

But strong in faith of a Redeemer's love,

See heaven's own portals opening from above.



" See the glad day shining from on high,

Brighten the dreary darkness of the tomb ; .

When death shall swallowed be in victory,

And all come forth to meet th' appointed doom.

Then with the angel host our loved one see,

Rise 'mong the heavenly throng, exultingly! "





CHAPTER HL



Is it a mother's part to wile

The heart, out of her offspring's breast,

And place it on a funeral pile,

Where pride a bed of thorns has drest \

Is it a mother's lore can see

The slow consuming of that heart,

And triumph in that agony,

Nor writhe to see its cruel smart 1

Yes ! pride can quench a mother's love,

And turn the heart to stone.

For nature has no power to move

Those who are pride's alone.

MS.

Parents, mothers in particular, who think they have gained the mastery over their sons, should remember, that if the cord even of affection is pulled too tight it will break.

Lady Margaret Leicester had had sufficient power to prevent Colonel Leicester's marriage with Lady Alice Talbot, but not to eradicate his love for her; and he, on his part, had felt himself estranged from Lady Margaret, more even than he cared to avow, since her treacherous show of friendship towards the object of his affections, which had been followed up by so much bitterness, and such undeviating enmity to the Howards, proved to him that her conduct proceeded more from an adherence to her own prejudices, than from a real affection towards himself. Though Colonel Leicester was not altogether without prejudice, (who is ?) yet he had more manly freedom of thought, more of what is truly great and good in character than his mother; which enabled him to distinguish between a love of virtue, and a slavish adherence to its ceremonial laws; and had in consequence avoided her presence, to escape hearing a repetition of dry axioms which he knew by rote, if not by heart, as much as from a desire to avoid coming to an open rupture with her. Yet he felt that he would rather go anywhere than to his mother; and this melancholy but sure effect of a conduct which she had adopted on principle, and maintained from obstinacy, nearly made them total strangers.





Lady Margaret certainly regretted her son's absence as much as she could regret any thing; but there are stme persons who are wound up like clock-work, and go on living supinely from day to day, satisfied that they are fulfilling the ordination of their existence— and perhaps they are. Accordingly, whether she was more or less pleased,—(happy was a word that neither entered her vocabulary or her comprehension)—whether she was more or less pleased, Lady Margaret portioned out the hours of her day, applying them to her several occupations, just as she would have done had her son been in constant intercourse with her, and following them up with a diligence and care which in any one else would have been a merit, but in her, and with her narrow views, was rather the effect of habit, than a praiseworthy volition of usefulness. She was actuated merely by a routine of regularity and order, which degenerated into becoming a piece of mechanism, that performed its effects, independently of all outward circumstances, and was not deserving of the commendation which a wise application of time merits. One of her employments, which she exalted into the sphere of duty, was working a certain quantity of needlework daily throughout the year, (Sundays and Fast-days excepted), on a very ugly piece of tapestry, forming squares and stars of precise dimensions, in every possible combination of the most hideous colours. Nay, it may be questioned if this very absence of all charm did not render the work the more meritorious in her estimation; and she felt a complacency in supposing that this proof of patient industry





would be handed down from generation to generation, as a sample of the domestic virtues, and an heir-loom to her descendants.

It was while engaged in this laborious nothingness, that her son came into the room without being announced, and caused his mother to start from her seat, and utter an exclamation of astonishment at seeing him ; but, nevertheless, the first surprise over, pleasure was evidently the chief feeling she experienced.

" Why, Leicester, it is so very long since • you have come near me, that I thought I should never behold you again;" and she looked reproachfully at him. " How are you?" she added, taking hold of his hand, and clasping it affectionately in her own.

But Colonel Leicester returned not the pressure, and remained silent for a few moments, whilst Lady Margaret went on to say, looking anxiously in his face as she observed his dis



i tressed countenance and worn-out appearance, and she was thrown off her usual measured expression.





" What is the matter, Leicester ?—tell me, for God's sake ; are you ill ?"

" No, I am not ill,—I am quite well, thank you.—Nothing, Ma'am, I assure you, nothing."

" No, Leicester, that is not true ; I am sure there is something the matter with you."

" If you do not believe me, I cannot help it," • he replied pettishly, and turned away, and looked out of the window.

Lady Margaret grew angry.

" I am sure I do not wisli to know any of your secrets, Leicester ; but I think it would be better for you if you were less reserved with your mother, and had less confidence in strangers : however, I am used to this change in you now, though it is a sad change to me. Ah ! Leicester, you'll not be the happier for forsaking your mother, and keeping company with such people as the "





If the former part of this speech softened Colonel Leicester, the last words provoked him, and he stamped his foot on the ground, and muttered, with suffocating rage,

" This is too bad, too cruel; I will not listen to it;" and his hand was on the lock of the door, as he prepared to leave the room, but Lady Margaret went after him, and besought him not to go so soon away from her.

" I will not say any thing to vex you; I promise you, dear Leicester; I will not, so come back;" and at the moment she was sincere, and did not intend to utter any thing more that was cross and unpleasant; but Lady Margaret could not help saying disagreeable things, especially about the Howards.

Colonel Leicester consented to her entreaties; and reseating himself by the fire, he tore up her supply of neatly twisted pink and blue matches, and scattered them over the hearthrug, whilst his mother watched him all the while.





" Will you dine with me ?" she asked him, after some little time had passed in silence.

" I do not know," was his reply.

Lady Margaret was puzzled to guess what could occasion her son's strange manner. Had Lord Howard and he quarrelled?—an event to which she had always looked forward with eager hope, as a means of extricating him from the snare of the fowler, as she termed the Howard family — was Lady Alice going to be married ? Still more fortunate, she thought— an event devoutly to be wished, though scarcely to be believed ; but of all the suppositions that crossed her imagination, it never entered into her mind to think it possible that Colonel Leicester was in distress for the grief of his beloved—it never occurred to her that Lord Talbot's death could produce such an effect on her son ; she asked him, therefore,





" Will you take some refreshment ? Will you eat any thing now ? Shall I send for some curacoa, or an egg beat up with wine, or some soup? for you look tired."

" I dare say I do; but what signifies talking about it—I would rather not have any thing, thank you."

Lady Margaret shook her head, with an expression of astonishment at his refusal of all her kind offers, and recommenced working assiduously. '

" How high the wind was last night—it blew down one of my chimneys, and I was obliged to get up out of bed, and awaken the servants to see what was the matter—it made such a noise; I thought the whole house had blown down."

" Yes, the wind was very high, I observed, about four this morning."





Lady Margaret lifted up her eyes from her work, and fixed them on her son.

" Were you up at four this morning? what made you rise so early ? no wonder you look tired."

" It is not surprising that I should, for I have been watching, till an hour ago, by poor Talbot's death-bed—he died a little after five this day."

" What! he is dead," she said quickly. '" Poor young man ! that is fortunate; for with the story of his birth attached to him, he never could have enjoyed this life. Well—so there is an end of the Howard peerage— that is to say, in the direct line : the next heir is an eccentric character—a miser—a low man, living no one knows where, or how. The direct race is spun out; and no wonder, when there has been such coarse yarn interwoven in it. Such alliances never bring forth good fruit—bad must come of them. Doubtless, Lord Howard and his daughter are in great distress—did he suffer much, Leicester ? Poor young man !"





During this speech Colonel Leicester had bit his lips with anger, till he had almost made the blood come, and he answered,

" If you cannot feel compassion for your fellow-creatures in sorrow, at least pray say nothing about them—not to me, at all events; I will not hear such brutal observations."

" How you are infatuated, my poor Leicester, with these people; how they have deceived you! and made you to believe them perfection. This much I will say," her choler rising as she spoke, " I feel my mouth polluted by mentioning her name. Lady Howard is a whited sepulchre, fair outside, but foul within ; and her daughter is in reality a very artful young lady, in spite of all her semblance of ingenuousness and meekness. I think I had some pretty good traits of that fact. As to Lord Howard, he has been a weak, unprincipled, licentious man in his early years, and is now an ill-tempered, tyrannical one; ashamed, as he well may be, of himself and all those belonging to him. In regard to Lord Talbot, I know nothing about him ; but that such is the general character of this family with whom you are so infatuated, is certain, and I must confess it grieves me to see you enthralled by them. Lady Alice Talbot's refusal of your hand when you proposed to her, was a mere pretence, in order to obtain you upon higher terms: she only did so because she thought it was a means of making you more enamoured of her. She has acted veTy artfully, and I am sorry to see, with too much success; but I suppose it is vain to speak to you on this subject, so I will say no more;—as to feeling, I shall never cease to feel that they have taken you away from me, and that is an injury which it is a duty to resent."





There was, in Lady Margaret, a mingled affection for her son, with a haughty self-love conjoined, and a hatred of the Howard family, which, like religious persecution, was inextinguishable, because it assumed the garb of a virtuous abhorrence of vice, that produced an odious result altogether, and of course estranged Colonel Leicester from her more and more. The oftener she expressed her prejudiced abuse of them, the oftener was he reminded not to suffer himself to be biassed by her opinions, and he replied,

" My dear mother, you will not change your notions concerning the Howards, neither shall I mine. Of this rest assured: all I request of you is, that you will not name either Lord or Lady Howard, or their daughter, nor the late Lord Talbot to me. I do not wish to be roused into angry feelings towards you, or betrayed into disrespectful language towards my mother; but I will not tamely listen to such narrow prejudice,—such harsh, and, as I conceive, false opinion of persons whom I value above all the world besides."





" Very well, Colonel Leicester! I hear it from your own lips, your mother is nothing to you"— and the thrill of anguish reddened her eyelids, and convulsed her features, but she restrained the bitter tear which she scorned to shed.

" Do not, my dear mother—do not, I beseech you," and he took her hand, for he too was touched, " be so unjust to me, so disparaging to yourself. I both love and honour you as a son should do a parent. How much I honour you, has been proved in the most momentous concern of my life. I have very nearly sacrificed my whole happiness in existence to you; if you are not satisfied with this irrefragable proof, words can avail me nothing; but at least, for such filial forbearance, I am entitled to expect in return some motherly sympathy— forbear, therefore, to wound or taunt me unnecessarily; and now, for the present, adieu. I am weary, and going to attempt to rest; but do not expect to see much of me till after Lord Talbot's funeral, which will take place this day week; it is, by his own request, to be strictly private, and without any pomp whatsoever; but I have entreated to be allowed to attend, and I hope I may be of some comfort to Lord Howard."





" Well, I am sure you are very good—very kind, Leicester."

" Neither the one or the other ; I am merely obeying an impulse of common humanity and duty in showing respect to the memory of my friend, and to the feelings of his remaining relations."

" Very true—but under circumstances "

Colonel Leicester made a movement of impatience. '

" I do hope," she added quickly, desirous to give her meaning a different one from thr " which she really intended, " I do hope, my dear son, you will take care of yourself. I shall be sadly anxious. You know more deaths have occurred from attending funerals than almost from any other cause. I pray you have a care."





Colonel Leicester waited not to hear the exordium out, but burst away, wearied and disgusted, to follow the bent of his own inclinations.

When the last melancholy, yet (to Christians) consolatory duties had been paid to the remains of Lord Talbot; when the family of the Howards sat down and looked sadly at each other, and thought, " it is then all over, nothing remains for us to do, nothing but to suffer;" they experienced that blank which is one of the many various stages of grief that the bereaved have to pass through. Lord Howard, sooner than his wife and daughter, roused himself to active employments, all tending to hallow the memory of the departed, in his own peculiar way, but to which some mourners cannot at first, if ever, apply for relief. He had Lord Talbot's bust and picture executed by all the best artists in London, and would drive from one to the other of their studios with a restlessness and anxiety, which took no hue from resigned sadness ; and when of necessity these occupations ceased, he was fractious like a wayward child to those who, concentrated in their wretchedness, owned no relief from outward circumstances.





Yet let not persons who do not feel with Lord Howard, refrain from feeling for him.

Grief has as many shades of various tints as joy; as many outlets, as many degrees as there are various and varying features of countenance. Complexions — temperaments— habits —hardly any two people suffer alike. God apportions to each their quota; but under all its modifications, anguish is anguish still, and cannot be evaded. The proud, like the humble, —the gay, like the serious, when their hour comes, are bowed low; for man is born to sorrow as the sparks fly upwards.





Colonel Leicester's assiduous attentions to Lord Howard could not, after a considerable time elapsed, prevent his reflecting upon the consequences which his perpetual presence must have, if not on the happiness of his daughter, at least on her reputation; and he determined to open the subject once more to him.

They had been taking a drive in an open barouche to Box-hill, and in walking over that beautiful country, Lord and Lady Howard had accidentally gone on before, and left Lady Alice and Colonel Leicester alone.

When the latter rejoined them, Colonel Leicester's countenance had assumed a deeper gloom, and the traces of recent weeping were visible on his companion's.

The drive home passed in silence.

When Lord Howard. found himself alone with Colonel Leicester, he remarked these circumstances, and said : " I have now only one child; you cannot be surprised that her happiness should make me overpass the bounds of delicacy, and ask you to tell me whether you believe you have any interest in her heart, and on what plea she refused your honourable offers of marriage ? Was it that she felt she could not return your love, or was. it some fancy, such as women have, that makes them forego the happiness which is within their power.





" I am overstepping, perhaps, even the right a father has on the score of a child's interest, in thus questioning you, Colonel Leicester; but the bitter loss I have sustained makes me doubly alive to every circumstance which is likely to bear on Alice's fate, and I appeal to you as an honourable man, one in whom I place implicit confidence, and who is, I believe, my friend, to tell me what you know concerning my daughter's affections. In every instance of her life she has been the most dutiful, the most obedient of children, but she is reserved on this one subject,—the reason why she refused you; and it has appeared to me unlike her, that she should show you so much preference by a thousand nameless attentions, while she discarded your suit.





Every word Lord Howard uttered went to Colonel Leicester's heart. He hesitated, and felt that whether he spoke the truth, or remained silent he should equally offend. At length, however, he determined to be sincere, cost what it might.

" I perhaps flatter myself too much, when I say I indulge a hope that Lady Alice is not wholly averse to my proposal. But she is too dignified, too good, too pure, to like to become the wife of a man whose mother's prejudices and unjust prepossessions render her inimical to our union. This I believe to be the cause of Lady Alice's rejection of me."





Colonel Leicester breathed quick, and thought he had managed that difficult business with as much delicacy as the nature of the case admitted. But Lord Howard looked him very steadily in the face, and replied:—

" If this, indeed, be a true statement, you are acting a dishonourable part in keeping up an interest in her affections, while you are convinced that she never can, consistently with her idea of propriety, become your wife ; and from this instant, Colonel Leicester, whatever regret I may feel at losing your society, I must request never to see you within my doors after this night."

Colonel Leicester bit his lip, drew himself up to his full towering height, and replied:— . .

" If any other man had treated me thus, except yourself, Lord Howard, I should not be inclined to waive a further explanation of such

VOL. II. E





unjust allegations, certainly not without an attempt on my part, to exonerate myself from the charge of having acted dishonourably;— but from you, my Lord, from Lady Alice's father,—it is different. I bow to your behest, and ask no questions."

" To accuse you of intentional dishonour, I never did, Colonel Leicester; but I must think that man cold-blooded, and undeserving the worth of a first and innocent attachment, who would resign Alice's hand for any unreasonable prejudice, even that of a parent. Besides, what prejudice can your mother have, to make her find fault with Alice?"

" No, my lord, I am not cold-blooded; although I do not allow my own selfish wishes to make me induce the object of my affections to act a part unworthy of her. I feel for her honour as for my own. I would not make her amenable even to my own mother's animadversions and reproaches."





Again, Colonel Leicester thought he had warded off any direct allusion to Lady Howard, and he rejoiced at having escaped that painful part of his task. But Lord Howard, forgetting his own and his wife's position, was tenacious of his imagined superiority, and demanded peremptorily what were Lady Margaret's prejudices, and how they could be of a nature to produce disapprobation of Colonel Leicester's marriage with his daughter.

The latter looked at him with an expression of deep concern; and with whatever anger he might have been disposed to resent Lord Howard's treatment, that feeling gave way to a very different sentiment, when he beheld him quite unconscious of the real cause of Lady Margaret's obstinate refusal to grant her consent to his marriage with Lady Alice.

So true it is, that some persons actually forget that they have placed themselves in a situation to draw down the scorn or the blame of the world, or if they do remember their delinquencies, there is something in their own peculiar case which, they think, alters the nature of the offence, and entitles them to a more lenient award. - ;





Colonel Leicester saw that the first of these was the error into which Lord Howard had fallen; and he preferred to endure any personal affront towards himself, rather than wound him further—rather than be the person who was to awaken Lord Howard from his forgetfulness.

But, again, the latter asked angrily:—" Pray, sir, what right has Lady Margaret to object to my daughter?"

" Oh! she has no objection—she can have no

objection to Lady Alice; but "

" Well, be explicit, I entreat you.—What do you mean ? to what do you allude ?"

" Force me not, my lord, to hurt your feelings and my own.—Why make me utter what are not my sentiments, but those of my mother?"

" Yes, sir, I do ask you, as a man of honour, to tell me, in plain words, why Lady Margaret Leicester refuses to give her consent to your marriage with Alice ?"





There was no possibility of evading a painful reply, and he answered :—

" Lady Margaret Leicester does not choose the daughter of a divorced woman should become her daughter."

Lord Howard started up, clenched his hands, and struck them on his forehead with violence; then gave way to a paroxysm of rage and grief, which lessened the tenderness with which Colonel Leicester had lately participated in his feelings, but made him fear for the consequence of his ungovernable temper. He remained, therefore, with him, patiently awaiting till a pause in his violence afforded him an opportunity of offering such palliatives as he conceived most likely to soothe him. But all would not do; and, finally, Lord Howard rushed out of the room, leaving Colonel Leicester alone.





Having waited some time, in case he should return, and finding he did not, and that it was very late, he went sorrowfully away, hardly expecting that he should ever be allowed to enter that house again.

Lady Howard had gone early to bed that evening, having been more unwell than usual; but although she had hoped to obtain rest, she had not yet slept when Lord Howard entered her room. She had been thinking over the past, as well as on those more recent and agonizing hours which she had gone through; — at what hour, at what moment, does every circumstance recur to our memories so distinctly as at the nominal hour of rest ? Her first marriage day—Lord Vernon —Lord Stuart—that first life of her life, when every hope shone brightest in imagination, but all proved defective or utterly abortive in reality: then her second life—for so that portion of her existence might be called—with all its stormy joys, its guilty fears, its hopeless sorrows—then of Lord Howard's passionate love, his subsequent tyranny, the thousand mortifications she had endured in a thousand different shapes, not only from the world, but from himself—





" And hard unkindness' alter'd eye,

That mocks the tear it forced to flow."



The day in which her child's heart was first made to feel the retribution due to its mother's crime, when Lady Alice wept for the loss of Fanny Harcourt's friendship—her own humiliation before her son—his illness—the alternate changes of hope and fear for his life, which had reigned in her heart for the last months of his existence—and finally his death, and the agony she felt when she saw him taken from her—all these images crowded in upon Lady Howard's mind, rendering sleep impossible; but when at length her husband opened the curtain, and looked to ascertain whether or not she was awake, he found her closing in that unquiet sleep which follows overwrought feeling, and he saw that her pillow was wet with her tears. Tears were coursing down her cheeks, and harsh lines of care were imprinted on her countenance that he had never observed before.





Lady Howard had exhausted herself with weeping, and was just in the act of dropping into slumber, when the light which Lord Howard held roused her, and with that fear of evil which those who have long been awaiting some dreaded event (particularly those who have been watching a dying person), and expect to hear that the sick one is worse, or that they are gone— Lady Howard, forgetting that this event was past, and that she no longer awaited such a summons, started up, exclaiming, " I am coming directly;" then jumped out of bed, and seizing the light her husband held, was rushing past him to go to the room where her son had died— '





" Laura, it is only I," Lord Howard said, calling to her.

Then Lady Howard remembered all—remembered that her son was dead—the confusion which comes over the mind between sleeping and waking was in a moment cleared away, and she replied, " Oh, yes! very true—I had forgot—here I am, Howard—is it not .late? are you come to bed ?" and she looked at him with a vacant expression of wretchedness, which in his present mood only served to provoke him. •

He saw in her only the cause which had been a barrier between him and prosperity—the object which reflected disgrace on him and his children. He thought not of her devotion to himself—he remembered not the days when she had been the delight of his life—he considered not the pangs, the humiliations, the numberless trials, she had gone through, in order to become his wife—nay, he even forgot the anguish which he had so lately shared with her, and he replied, in a loud angry voice, " Coming to bed ! no, there is no rest for me."





Lady Howard's nerves had been much weakened by constant agitation; and the want of sleep while watching over her departed son, rendered her feeble in body as in mind. Lord Howard's angry tone made her tremble, and she sunk on the bed by which she was standing.

" What is the matter?" she inquired timidly.

" The matter is, that cursed old devil, Lady Margaret, will not permit Colonel Leicester to marry your daughter, madam ; and her conceited, consequential son, has at last made known to me his determination not to disgrace himself by marrying Alice."

This was not true; but Lord Howard had lost his temper; and persons seldom repeat a conversation literally, to a third party, when they are in a rage. He continued—





rt It was an honourable declaration, truly, after having made love to her for the last twelvemonth, and even proposed; but because the poor, foolish girl would not listen to his mean bargaining about not seeing you as often or as freely as she wished, he thought he had a plausible excuse to be off with her altogether— scoundrel that he is ! He shall never enter this house again. My poor Alice ! she has you to thank, madam, for this pleasant business. It is a pity a man finds out, when it is too late, that he has marred his fortunes for ever. I have never repented my folly but once, and that has been ever since the date of its commission."

Lady Howard heard this cruel taunting, as she had done a thousand times before, in meek silence, and in inward prayer she had again laid her weary head on the pillow, and even tried, in the midst of the storm, to lull herself into the temporary forgetfulness, by falling into such sleep as those alone know who, like her, endure, it may be, merited suffering for past crimes, but unmerited from the being by whom it is inflicted. ...





" What, madam, you are sleeping, are you?— by heaven that is too bad ! but I wifl" teach you what it is to be indifferent to your husband's wretchedness, to your children's misery and dishonour. You have occasioned the death of one, perhaps you may also that of the other; and you sleep,—do you, when I place these truths before you ? Charming innocent! you pretend to be composed and serene,—do you, while you see.me raving like a madman?"

" I am anything but composed, anything but erene: I feel as if my life was fleeting fast „iway—would to God it was gone !"

" Mighty fine all this high-flown language,truly! very romantic and. interesting, I doubt not—quite suited to the Minerva Press: but madam, at your age, and in your circumstances. something else is called for than the affected sentiment of a girl of fifteen."





" Good heaven ! Howard, how can I pacify you ? what can I say ? where find words or meaning that will soothe you ? You may trample me under your feet—you may bestow every dreadful name upon me, and I will not turn and defend myself. I plead guilty—guilty from my very soul; but not guilty of want of love for you : with my dying breath I will testify that no truer devotion was ever felt for mortal than that with which I have served you, and sacrificed myself to you. If I did not speak to you before, it was because I hoped my silence might allay your wrath; and now that I have spoken, it is only to repeat what you know so well already. I am your true and faithful wife, whatever I have been to others."

Lord Howard made no reply. He could not make any that would have justified his own violence and brutality, and so he went to bed, and to sleep directly, as men can do, though they have caused all sleep to fly from their wretched partners.





Are such scenes true to nature or not ? Alas !





CHAPTER IV.

" Yet can I not persuade me thou art dead.

Or that thy corse corrupts in earth's dark womb—

Or that thy beauties lie in wormy bed,

Hid from the world in a low delved tomb;—

Could heaven for pity thee so strictly doom 1

Oh ! no, for something in thy face did shine

Above mortality, that shew'd thou wast divine."



Milton.

When the tidings of Lord Talbot's death reached Paris, Lord Stuart felt it deeply. It seemed to him as though it awoke a new sense for his mother; and drew him closer to her, although she had ceased to be a mother to him: but now, he thought, now I am her only son; she must remember me now, if she has never thought of me before. Oh ! would that I could be near her—could dry her tears— could tell her that she has still a son who loves her dearly, as dearly, perhaps, as the favourite whom she has lost. Dear Talbot, noble creature ! so he is gone in the prime and bloom of his early career. Well, at least I loved him as a brother should, and he knew I did : we felt for each other. Alice, too, my sister—why may I not see her ? why not tell her all these natural feelings of regret and affection, but I may not— oh! my father. Why should such cruel contradictions destroy all the social affections? why should it offend my father that I love my mother and her children? and yet it must be so. Yes, I feel the bitter consequences of a parent's error, but not the contumely or scorn with which it inspires others.





Lord Stuart's grief was genuine, and his feelings were of the most true and kind nature.





Lord Vernon saw through the constraint he put upon himself to appear cheerful in his presence, and loved him the more that he was unable to disguise them.

To one person only did Lord Stuart dare to open his whole soul on this subject—to Fanny Harcourt, who participated warmly in that confidence. Glad of an apology for tears, hers flowed as it were for him; but they were, in truth, occasioned by that deep-rooted love which she had felt for the late Lord Talbot. She shut herself up from all society; would see no one except Lord Stuart; and told her mother, without disguise, that her every hope of happiness was gone.

Lady Harcourt lamented and lectured, and complained to sundry old ladies of the sad effects produced by careless governesses when walking in squares, who allowed their pupils to make acquaintances which might affect their future lives.





" I am sure I cannot blame myself; for the moment I knew of my Fanny having become acquainted with the Howard children, I broke off the connexion directly. Yet you see, my dear friend, it was too late; the seed was sown, and there is Fanny making herself wretched about that young man, who never cared for her. Well, I cannot understand it."

The only consolation Lady Harcourt had was in thinking that Lord Stuart might, in time, grow from being a consoler to her daughter's grief, the successor in her love; she therefore did not use any violent efforts to dissuade Fanny Harcourt from her present mode of life, and played the convenient mama to perfection ; hoping, as she expressed it to her very particular friend, " that good might come of it."

After Colonel Leicester left Howard House, he felt that he could never enter it again unless as the accepted lover of Alice, and he determined that nothing should be left untried on his part to bring about this event, on the success of which he was sure his happiness depended. He went, therefore, to his mother, and she saw, the first moment she looked at his countenance, that he was about to reproach her.





" My dear son," she said, endeavouring to, deprecate his wrath, " whatever I may have done or said that has displeased you, has nevertheless been the result of affection for you; the consequences of those principles of duty which my parents, and theirs before them, have handed down unsullied and unbroken to us. Yet my weakness is so great"—(and Lady Margaret's voice faltered as she said this)—" that since I found myself losing your affection, I have questioned whether I did not carry my system too far—whether I might not give way to my child's wishes, without incurring any blame— and, finally, I am determined to yield to your determination, and receive Lady Alice Talbot as my daughter-in-law."





" Madam," replied Colonel Leicester, " this condescension on your part comes too late. There was a time when it might have rendered me blessed; but now I am turned out of Lord Howard's house, and I must allow he has had reason, for forbidding me his presence. He accuses me of dishonour—of winning his daughter's affections, while at the same time I made such proposals, as she could not consistently with her duty and love for her parents accept. And it is true, madam, it is too true, I feel myself to be justly condemned; and it is my own mother, who has brought me into this state of misery and self-reproach; I am therefore determined to go to the Continent, and endeavour to get into some public career, no matter what, which may employ me for years, till age may blunt the feelings of youth. I think it my duty to tell you this, and to add, that although I must ever remember you are my mother, yet joined to that remembrance, will always be attached the idea that you have blighted my hopes, and crushed my heart."





" Leicester, my son, my only child, hear me! I will do anything, everything, to regain your affection ; everything to bring about that which I have so strenuously opposed hitherto. I beseech you, remain in England. Leave me to manage the business, and await the result of my endeavours, at least before you resort to any extreme measures. If you ever had any respect, any affection for me, I conjure you to grant me this request."

Colonel Leicester listened to his mother's proposal, and finally gave her his promise that he would not quit England.

No sooner was Colonel Leicester out of sight, than Lady Margaret thought, " Ah! it is a sad price, though, that I have paid for this concession on his part;—the daughter of a divorced woman ! What would Lady Priscilla Leicester" (that was his grandmother, looking up at a picture of her, which hung over the fire-place), " what would Lady Priscilla Leicester have said to such a union ? Well, but now-a-days these things are quite common "—(as if she was apostrophising the picture)—" the more's the pity. Well! I have given Leicester my promise to get "him reinstated in Lord Howard's good opinion, and make him the husband of Lady Alice. Must I then go and unsay all I have said to the girl ? Must I go and visit Lady Howard ? Dreadful pollution ! Horrid degradation !"





But Lady Margaret recollected that she had a tool to make use of which would spare her the first mortification; and as for the last, " sufficient for the day is the evil thereof." Besides, she thought, many things fall out between the cup and the lip. The marriage is not settled yet. Thus, to the last, did she reserve a hope against hope, that her endeavours to bring about the union might fail. And now she sent for her cat's paw, Miss Agar, who came quickly to the summons.





Lady Margaret explained the reason of her having requested an interview, and detailed the foregoing conversation with her son, only coloured after her own manner; she summed up all by saying,

" You will understand that there would be much indelicacy in my going in my own person to discourse with Lady Alice; but you, my dear Miss Agar, with that taste and propriety which is so peculiarly your own, and for which you have been always famed in every business in which you have taken a part, will explain to the family how ready I am to enter into my son's views, and that I hope no unnecessary delays will take place, but that Colonel Leicester may be permitted to plead his own suit immediately. Remember, my dear Miss Agar,"—and she spoke eagerly, heartily,—"remember, my happiness depends upon this, because I love my son, and shall lose his affections altogether, if I do not succeed."





How strange ! and still an under-current of a contrary nature was lurking within her. What an unaccountable anomaly is the human heart!

" Thank you, Miss Agar, thank you, for promising to undertake the arrangement of this affair," said Lady Margaret, in reply to Miss Agar's consent. " I shall never forget the obligation. 1 am sure it is very kind—very friendly in you to do so."

" No thanks, my dear Lady Margaret, no thanks. If I am successful in arranging this matter comfortably for you, I shall be very happy. Adieu for the present—depend on my losing no time;" and Miss Agar hurried out of

the house, and walked briskly down

street with that peculiar air, for which she was so famous, and which had, in her youth, caused the passengers in a foreign country to exclaim " Quelle marche de deesse," but the light trip which she still assumed, suited her far less well than it had once done; and the occasional totter was ill concealed by the affected airiness of tread.





As was usual, Miss Agar did not escape observation while on her way to Howard House, for her dress and appearance were too singular not to attract attention. Her figure had preserved its erectness ; it was still slight, and her feet and ankles had lost little of their beauty. She always wore very short petticoats, and a particular shaped shoe of a light colour, tying with a bow in the front; but her face evinced the ravages of time, and presented a pitiable spectacle of artificial youth. Her cheeks, cracked and parched, were literally formed into furrows, in which rouge and pearl powder were deposited like mud in a gutter. Her grey eyebrows were coarsely blackened, giving a fierce expression to her countenance, and on her

V0-. II. F





head was placed an enormous mass of black wig, formed into bows and curls like cannon on a fortification. A small white beaver hat, with a profusion of white feathers, waving, as she thought, gracefully around in all directions, was her favourite head-gear, and crowned the whole of her singular attire. Thus accoutred, Miss Agar set forth on her mission; but during her walk, her mind was not idle; she reviewed every circumstance which had come to her knowledge respecting the Howards, and Colonel Leicester's attachment to Lady Alice, and, after much deliberation with herself, so deeply was she engrossed in weaving toils for the unhappy objects of her hatred, that, contrary to her usual custom, she passed by several acquaintances without recognizing them, a rare occurrence to Miss Agar, who never let any one she knew go by in the street without stopping them, and turning them to some account, either by eliciting news from them, or disseminating her own, or





requesting them to drop a letter for her (if they were going that way), or giving her a frank, or any other minor office which she could think of at the time; so that upon this occasion, the persons she met wondered what was the reason of Miss Agar's abstraction, and how she came to allow them to pass her with impunity. And as she walked by the club-houses, all the men expressed their astonishment that she had not, as was her custom, beckoned to any one of them to throw up the sash of the windows, and hold a conversation with her.

Arrived at Howard House, she felt somewhat fatigued, for it was a long walk for any one, and especially for a woman of her age.

However, Miss Agar's besetting sin was not indolence, or want of zealous perseverance in anything she purposed to do; in the present instance, she was too eager to execute the plan she had arranged on her way, to allow herself to think of personal fatigue.





" Is Lady Alice Talbot at home V she inquired of the servants, resting her, hands on her hips. .

They could scarcely refrain from laughing at her ridiculous appearance, for Miss Agar was a stranger at Howard House, and not knowing who she was, and seeing her arrive on foot, and unattended by any of the liveried species, they answered with the insolence of many of that pampered tribe,—

" No—and if she was, pray what may yon want with her ladyship ?"

But Miss Agar took no notice of the impertinence of the reply, and only said, " I am come by appointment to see Lady Alice Talbot. Tell her that the Honourable Miss Agar is here," and she entered the house.

The footmen did not dare to question this authoritative assertion, accompanied as it was by the action, and showed her into a room where Lady Howard was sitting alone.





" Shall I let Lady Alice know you are come, Ma'am ?" asked the servant. " If you please."

He shut the door, and Miss Agar was unexpectedly confronted with Lady Howard.

The latter was turning over the leaves of a music-book which lay by her as she was seated with her back to the door at the farthest end of a very long room. Her harp was before her, and not having heard the door of the antiroom open, she continued to strike a few desultory chords, apparently endeavouring to recall a half-forgotten melody. " Ah!—no," she said aloud, " it has passed away like allthe rest."

Miss Agar looked at her for a few moments through her spying glass to ascertain if it was indeed Lady Howard she beheld, and to observe what ravages time and sorrow had made upon her since she last saw her. Should she go on and make herself known, or should she retire unperceived ? She determined on the former, and coughed several times to announce her approach.





Lady Howard ceased playing, and turning round, beheld Miss Agar. The latter held out her hand.

" Laura, do not agitate yourself; it is I; but be not alarmed. I am not come to say anything unpleasant, but the reverse ; however, it is owing to a mistake of your servants which has thus unexpectedly brought me into your presence. I did not intend to see you, my visit was to your daughter, Lady Alice; but never mind, we will talk of old stories. Old stories! those words ' have a strange power in them, have they not ? Old circumstances set before us unexpectedly, as well as old friends, come, as it were, back from the dead, and are very often as fearful to us as spectres."

Miss Agar knew the effect these words would produce on the person to whom they were addressed, and therefore she uttered them.





But Lady Howard recoiled from the touch of her hand. She was too noble, too sincere, to pretend to retain any sentiment of friendship for Miss Agar, and she replied with self-composure,

" Since it is owing to a mistake of my servants that I am indebted for the honour of seeing you, Miss Agar, I conclude you do not wish to prolong an interview which must be painful to both ; and whatever other business you may have in this house, I request you will execute it speedily; in the meantime I need not remain, as our meeting cannot be agreeable to either of us," and, curtseying, she prepared to leave the room, but Miss Agar laid her hand on Lady Howard's arm, and rejoined,—

" No, Laura, I entreat you to stay. I wish to converse with you on a subject which concerns your daughter's happiness; and since I have met you, although I intended to confine my communication to Lady Alice, it will be better that I avail myself of this opportunity to impress upon your mind certain facts with which I am made acquainted, and in which I may possibly be the means of serving you. Indeed, I have come on the part of Lady Margaret Leicester to explain matters which require the interference of a mutual friend, so do not go away. I will not touch on other subjects, I promise you: I will carefully avoid them," and she looked significantly at her.





Lady Howard dreaded a continuation of this interview. The very person of Miss Agar was hateful to her; but for her child's interest what would she not endure 1—and she replied,

" If this is really the case; if Alice's happiness is concerned in what you have to communicate, I will remain. Will you not sit down 1"





" Shall we not be interrupted ? " questioned Miss Agar.

" No ; Lord Howard and my daughter are both out."

" So much the better. Well, my dear Laura,'' resumed Miss Agar, in her familiar tone, " I am happy to see you so comfortable, and looking so well. Your deep mourning becomes you. There are few persons can bear it, and it is a pleasure to me to see you so well established," looking about the apartment; " indeed, I may say, surrounded by so much splendour. It gives me real pleasure, after considering all things, for many men to whom such sacrifice are made, are not always so grateful for them.

Lady Howard felt herself turn sick at heart, as she shrunk from Miss Agar's gaze, and heard these impertinent and false professions of an interest she knew she did not feel; but she remained silent, for she was in the presence of her who had witnessed the guilty part of her life, and she was abashed before the woman she despised; but she rallied her sinking spirits; she drew herself up to the full towering height of her stature, and tried, with answering gaze, to meet that of her false friend, but it would not do. Her eyes dropped on the ground — her cheeks were scorched with the blush of shame, and an alternate chill trickled through every vein, and seemed to concentrate the life blood of her heart.





" Poor Laura !" said Miss Agar. " Come, come, lay aside all restraint with me; it is of no use; let us be natural. Again allow me to assure you, it affords me real pleasure to see you are so comfortable, so happy, and really," she added, in her loud tone of voice, " still so handsome. I could not have believed it, for it is more than twenty years ago, Laura, since you and I met, and I feel sure you could not have preserved your good looks if you had been, ill-used or miserable. I am agreeably surprised to find the rumours which are spread abroad are untrue, of my Lord's being tyrannical and ill-tempered. It it quite false I am certain; ay, to be sure. Is it not entirely without foundation V





Lady Howard could not endure that one of the retributions due to her crime, namely, the violence and ungovernable temper of her husband, should be known to any one, much less to Miss Agar.

It is wonderful what some women will suffer rather than let the world know that they meet with the bitterest punishment for their follies or their crimes from the very object for whom they have been guilty of them. This silent endurance does not always arise from an amiable motive—it is more frequently owing to a wish of escaping the world's unfeeling scoff of— " She has met with her desert."

Both these feelings actuated Lady Howard when she answered Miss Agar's question, saying, " Howard is a good husband to me, whatever rumour says to the contrary. Our children have been"—(her voice faultered, as she remembered that one ' was not,' and that the plural was now reduced to the singular number) —" all that is most duteous, most affectionate. Alice is a good child: I have every reason to be thankful for the blessings which are accorded to me."





" I trust they may long continue to you, my poor Law; but I was sorry to hear of Lord Talbot's death; it loosens your hold over his father; and if you survive Lord Howard, he might have protected you in advancing years, when people begin to find old friends drop into the grave, and new ones become scarce: but perhaps you may yet have another heir."

Again Lady Howard's courage failed her, and her patience was nearly worn out; but she bore all, thinking that at last she might hear something which it imported Lady Alice's happiness to know j but not yet was she to come at this, for Miss Agar went on to say—





" It would be a pity the line old place and title went to the miser who lives in a hovel, they say, somewhere in Cornwall,—a strange, and altogether disgraceful character. How unlucky ! it could not, by any possible contrivance, devolve to your other son by your first husband. By the way, have you ever seen Stuart of late ? He is not handsome, but very like his father : something of an air and manner which is extremely fascinating, and he is a dear good creature : you really ought to love him—so kindly did he behave to his brother, so attentive to his poor father, who has never held up his head, as the saying is, since you left him, and is now fast declining into his dotage, I think. By the way, since we are upon this subject, I may as well tell you something about your former relatives, or rather your relative that is; for as to poqr dear Lord Vernon, you never cared for him. But where was I—oh, I recollect. Concerning Lord Stuart, you know he is in love with la petite Fanny Harcourt; but she is not so with him. It is very odd, for what a marriage after all it would be for her to make! The Tinker's great-grand-child, absolutely her grandfather, made all his wealth by ' Have you any work for the tinker !' as the old song says. That is a curious story; I must tell it you some day, for now we have met, we must meet often, my poor Lau ! To return. — Fanny Harcourt was in love, you know, with Lord Talbot: however, she misplaced her affections, for I believe he never cared for her; and now the best thing she can do is to transfer her affections to his brother. That puts me in mind—why did you not answer my letter which I wrote to you from Paris, announcing your son Talbot's illness? it was not like an old friend to leave that letter unanswered—it was not like you."





" At that time, Miss Agar, I had no thought of anything but of him : your letter, with many others, was cast aside, almost wholly forgotten."

This was not true: Miss Agar knew it was not, and replied,

" Ah! I know it is not always pleasant to remember; but never mind, do not be so confused ; I was not angry, only vexed: but it is time to come to the main subject which brought me here."

Lady Howard thought it was more than time. She placed herself nearer to Miss Agar. Her countenance expressed the interest she felt.

" Of course you know there has long been a love affair between Lady Alice, your daughter, and Colonel Leicester : 2" do not much like him,—between us be it spoken,—but Lady Alice loves him, does she not 1"

" Alice is so gentle, and has so much retenue, that I cannot answer you any further than by saying, I believe she is partial to Colonel Leicester; but would not, I am certain, allow any prepossession, however strong, to induce her to enter a family of which the parent or parents were averse to the alliance."





" Ay now, my poor Lau! we draw nigh to the point. You know, or do not know, as seems best to your discretion, that Colonel Leicester has proposed to your daughter, and has been refused. But perhaps you do not know why she refused him, not exactly; though the general outline of -Lady Margaret's disapprobation to her (as your daughter), for in every other respect she thinks Lady Alice unexceptionable, you are acquainted with". Now as I am certain you have nothing so much at heart as Lady Alice's happiness, and that she is evidently pining away, I am come to tell you how you might ensure it. You are too sensible a woman not to bear a few unpleasant truths with patience, when your child's felicity is at stake.





" The fact is, Old Lady Margaret Leicesteris an antiquated piece of stiff starched propriety, who adheres to her own prejudices much more from obstinacy, than from any conviction of right or wrong; and she declared to her son, that she would readily consent to his marrying Lady Alice, providing only, she should never be asked to visit you, and that Colonel Leicester would give his word of honour, you should never see Lady Alice but in her husband's presence. Now this is very foolish, very childish; but in truth, I believe she is growing into second childhood. Oh! she is such a bore," shrugging up her shoulder, " still I think it is worth your while to consider whether you will waive your own prerogative in favour of your daughter's happiness, and overlook this harsh determination regarding yourself; or, whether you will adhere to your rights as a mother, and forget your child's interest."





" I would forego any thing—every thing for Alice—endure every thing—but I am certain, that being acquainted with the terms by which she has to procure Lady Margaret's consent, she would scorn to purchase any selfish felicity at such a price. Besides, Alice is in ignorance of her mother's fall:" and Lady Howard bowed her head, and a few tears gushed from her burning eyelids.

" You think so—you think Lady Alice is not aware that you are a divorced woman ?"

" Miss Agar chuckled with fiendish pleasure, knowing that she herself had informed her of the fact.

" Well, poor Lau ! you do astonish me. So Lady Alice does not know that you were Lord Vernon's wife !—How very extraordinary ; but surely when she does, she will be more rational, and think twice before she rejects so great a parti as Colonel Leicester, and the man she loves too, for a mere form—a pretence; for you know she might very easily enter into that cross old lady's vagaries, and do as she choose afterwards."





" Miss Agar, you totally mistake Alice's character. Indeed you cannot possibly understand it. When she makes a promise she will keep it; but she will never make any, which can divide her from her mother."

" So then I am to give an unqualified refusal to all Lady Margaret's overtures of peace, and all her condescending propositions of consent to her son's marriage with your daughter ?"

" Miss Agar, I have never acted in any affair of moment without consulting Lord Howard, and I certainly shall not in the prsent instance; I will faithfully report your words respecting Alice, and he shall himself let you know his wishes. I am prepared to do exactly what he thinks proper."





"This is very well, Lady Howard ; but if I were you, I would take the reins into my own hands, and turn the comer of this affair before I put it in the power of any one to mar my child's happiness. Remember, I am not defending that buckram Lady Margaret, but I advise you to accept her terms, and then afterwards you can follow your own feelings. You will rue the day, take my word for it, if you neglect this golden opportunity; it will never return again."

" Miss Agar," replied Lady Howard rising, " I have given you my reply—I have none other to give."

" Humph! Well, poor Lau ! you will repent it—you will bitterly repent it—I am half sorry now that I did not see Lady Alice; she might have thought otherwise on the subject."





'" Miss Agar, I conceive that it would have been an unpardonable act in you to have discoursed to Alice upon the matter, and I must positively forbid your doing so, till I have made Howard acquainted with the affair; and now permit me to say that it is time we should part. I wish you a very good morning."

" It is rather a peremptory way of turning me out of doors, but I forgive you, Lady Howard. The sight of me cannot be'pleasant to you ; and even though I come as a friend, you would rather I did not come at all. Poor Lau ! poor human nature!

" Well, I shall do the best I can for you with Lady Margaret, I will endeavour to soften down this mode of receiving her ambassage; but considering her vantage ground, you have not acted wisely. Good morning, Lady Howard, I wish you well."

Lady Howard courtseyed,—rang the bell,— the servant opened the door —" Call Miss Agar's carriage."





" Lady Howard, I walked here," said the latter. " I love exercise—it is not disagreeable to me to walk through the streets; but some people do not like it. Good bye, poor Lau !— remember I am your friend—good bye—compliments to Lord Howard and Lady Alice."





CHAPTER IV.



" She cried

There is, I feel there is a world beside !



We shall hear not then

Of hearts distress'd by good or evil men ;

But all will constant, tender, faithful be—

So had I been, and so had one with me :

But in this world the fondest and the best

Are the most tried, most troubled and distresst.

This is the place for trial—here we prove,

And there enjoy the faithfulness of love."



Crabue.



When Lord Howard came home, his miserable wife stood like a culprit before him, ready to receive her senteHce; for she well knew that the intelligence she had to give would draw down his severe animadversions. He hated Miss Agar, and would doubly hate her now that Lady Margaret Leicester had made her the channel of communication respecting Colonel Leicester's; conduct to Lady Alice. In despite of Lady Howard's gentleness of manner, and the cautious wording with which she made known to him the purport of Miss Agar's visit, the storm of his displeasure burst as she expected it would.





"In the first place I shall turn away the servants that J let that detestable old gossip into my house; and when she did enforce her entrance what could make you such a fool as to listen to her—why did you not ring the bell and order your servant to turn her out ?"

" I was so surprised; I may say, so distressed, she came upon me so unexpectedly, and addressed me in such a manner, that I could not collect my thoughts ; and then her declaration of being come with a message from Lady Margaret Leicester, which nearly concerned our child's happiness—"





" Madam, you should not suffer your curiosity to entangle you in such a manner. You know how I hate that woman—that go-between— that meddler—that cursed intriguante— and you ought to have turned her, or yourself, out of the room, without an instant's delay: as it is, you had the pleasure of hearing yourself insulted, and your husband through you. A pretty story, indeed ! to have one's honour in the keeping of such a woman as you, madam; but I am well rewarded for my folly. Here my children are degraded, looked down upon, because they are yours. One has lost his life, I may say, for your sake—the other loses her happiness. Her fortunes are blighted—the man of her choice, and who would have chosen her, but for you, is separated from her—she is wretched—and I too am the husband of a divorced woman."

He walked up and down the room in fury.

" Howard," said his wife, with a firm, but



VOL. II. G





melancholy composure of voice and manner, which commanded respect even from him, " there is a degree of unreasonable cruelty which steels the heart against the endurance of such conduct. You charge me with a crime, of which you were the author, and in which you share, although the customs of society exonerate the man from all penalty in our case, and place it solely on the woman. But there is a tribunal in the breast of every upright judge, which metes out the degree of punishment, much more impartially : and there is a higher tribunal still, to whose mercy we must both equally supplicate for pardon, and before which no sophistication of argument, no custom or expediency, no pride of male pre-eminence and tyranny, will have the slightest claim to be heard in preference. My interview with Miss Agar was accidental—it was fully more painful to me than it could be to you; and I cannot better prove my love for you, and our dearest





Alice, than by repeating to you a proposition the most humbling one woman could receive from another ; and at the same time declaring my readiness to comply with Lady Margaret's terms of consent to the marriage of her son with our daughter."

Lord Howard was silenced. He wished to have had some excuse for further ebullitions of anger; but he had none—none against his wife at least, and all he could say, was,

" Well, madam, that is not a bad oration. I suppose you practised public speaking: d—d provoking to have an educated wife ! No woman ought to learn to read or write. More harm comes of stuffing their weak brains with matters too high for them, than any advantage that ever was gained by it. By Heaven! I'll fling every book out of the window. It is owing to her learning that that hateful stiff old Lady Margaret is such an impertinent haughty jade. She pretend, indeed, to lay down agreements, and plan out rules of conduct for Alice; but neither her pragmatical son, nor her prejudiced insolent self, shall have anything to say to any child of mine. And, hark'ee, madam, if you ever admit Colonel Leicester within my doors, or ever connive at Alice's meeting him, it will be the worse for you, that's all," and he flung the door to with violence, and left the room.





No sooner had Lord Howard reached his apartment than he wrote a letter to Lady Margaret Leicester. He professed himself astonished, that she should have sent a third person (one whom he had every reason to dislike, to insult him by propositions which he deemed both unworthy of her to make, or of himself to listen to for a single moment. Colonel Leicester had already behaved in such a manner, that he had been under the necessity of declining his visits at Howard House, and compelled his daughter to declare to him that she would not be his wife; and he begged, therefore, that for the future, he might never hear more of an affair in which he considered himself and his family cruelly aggrieved.





Miss Agar was sitting with Lady Margaret when this letter arrived. She had been declaring to her that nothing could exceed Lady Howard's violence, and her dislike to the connexion. That she had great influence with Lord Howard, and whatever sentiments of an opposite nature he might entertain, they would all be sacrificed to her vindictive spirit, which never forgave any one who had shown her a slight.

" Indeed, Lady Margaret, I consider it a fortunate circumstance, that the Howards should have received your overtures, your generous overtures, in this spirit—for theirs is an alliance which could do no honour to you, and might possibly have done the reverse. Now your son will see the propriety of conquering a passion' which was never returned as it ought to. have - been; and while you have done everything, made every sacrifice, to the furtherance of his wishes, the family of Howards have so insulted you and himself, that he will no longer desire a union, which he must feel to be, under all circumstances, so derogatory to his own happiness and dignity, as well as to yours. For my part, I am only sorry you ever condescended to court them as you have done."





" Condescended, my dear Miss Agar," rejoined Lady Margaret, her face reddening with anger. " Yes, I think, I have condescended —and if Leicester is not satisfied now, 1 must suppose that he is wholly careless of my affection. But here is a letter from Lord Howard," looking at one which was brought in.

She took out her scissors, put on her spectacles, cut the paper carefully round the seal, and read the letter aloud.

" There's for you, my Lady Margaret," said Miss Agar, who had read the letter over her shoulder, putting her hands on her hips—" there is the confirmation of what I have been telling you — you see what they are: I am sure I suffered enough with her in her young days."





" Ay, there indeed," rejoined Lady Margaret ; " I think this letter finishes the business. I have only to show it to Leicester, and he will be aware what his mother is, and what those people are who have been endeavouring to wean his affections from me."

Miss Agar's malice was now fully gratified. She was revenged on Lady Howard—she had broken off the marriage on which Lady Alice had set her heart, and she had managed the affair so adroitly, that it seemed to be the act and deed of Lord and Lady Howard rather than her own.

When Colonel Leicester was informed of the contents of Lord Howard's letter, he felt that all hope was over for him! What, after his mother had waived every prejudice, and smoothed every obstacle by an unqualified consent—the Howards haughtily repelled his suit, cast him off, forbade him their house ; and Alice did not put in one word of regret, or express the least kindness towards him, but preserved the same indignant feeling which she had felt when on a former occasion she refused his offer, under limitations. .;





He honoured her for that very refusal, and ceased not to reproach himself for having so made it; but now that Lady Margaret declared she would take her to her heart as if she were her own child, and for her sake receive Lady Howard, he felt certain that Alice had never loved him—did not love him, since she rejected his suit: but then again a thousand tender reminiscences, trifling in themselves, but conclusive from presumptive evidence, came to his recollection, and rather embittered than soothed his present disappointment ; for how reconcile her behaviour at various times, ex~





cept by thinking she was fickle and capricious ? Resting on this idea, he determined he would root out all remembrance of her—he would apply to business, pleasure—have recourse to those various sources of occupation which are open to men on such occasions, and seek in higher pursuits of honourable ambition, to lose all thought of his late dream of domestic happiness : nor was he tardy in putting his resolve into execution. He thanked his mother warmly for having yielded to his wishes, and endeavoured to promote them, and told her he yet hoped to prove himself worthy of her affection.

An opportunity offered of accompanying a friend to Greece, and he left England about a week after the final close of his hopes.

Lady Alice had awaited from day to day, trusting that her father's preference for Colonel Leicester would have induced him to recall the former to their society, after the last quarrel they had had, even as he had done once before; but day succeeded to day, and he came not— neither did she hear his name mentioned.





She observed that her mother's countenance was more sad than ever, and that the lines of care began to be fixed residents on her hitherto placid face. The loss of her brother was a grief which she felt that she could not herself ever entirely recover; and she knew that to her mother the blow had been so heavy, that she dreaded it was only the forerunner of a second calamity. But Lady Alice was now aware that there was yet another anguish, which was renewed, day by day, and was bowing down Lady Howard with additional weight every time she rallied from her former grief. This was her father's increasing ill-temper; and from the ungoverned fury with which he frequently re- preached his wife, as well as the violence from which even his favourite Alice did not escape, she looked forward to some awful catastrophe.





Lord Howard even allowed himself now constantly to make insulting allusions to her mother before her, which was quite a new feature in his conduct; for hitherto, at least in the presence of a third person, he had been tenacious of upholding his wife; and it required all Lady Alice's watchfulness either to go out of the room, and so avoid hearing it, or by seeming not to be aware of his meaning, when she was obliged to remain. She had determined that she never would allow to mortal that she knew of her mother's guilt; and that no earthly power should ever induce her to betray, by word or look, that she was acquainted with her disgrace.

Hours passed into days, and days into weeks, . and weeks to months: the sound of music or of mirth was never heard in Howard House. Lady Alice suffered in silence. She tried to smile, but it produced only a melancholy expression ; she tried to converse on subjects which had been





interesting to her father, but he always made some bitter remark, which led back to the source of his ill temper, and then her mother looked terrified, and she relapsed into silence.

One only pleasure in her sad history remained for her—it was painting a portrait of Colonel Leicester. Whenever she thought her presence was not wanted, she retired to her chamber, busied herself with this occupation, and succeeded in making not only a likeness, but a picture. There was in her room an oldfashioned closet; and in this, as in a frame, she placed the portrait. From time to time she would open the doors that concealed her treasure, and sit before it till tears blinded her.

One day she was called suddenly, and forgot to lock up the portrait: she ran hastily down stairs to her father, always in a tremor when summoned by him ; and was somewhat relieved from a fear of unknown evil, when he said—





• " Alice, read me those newspapers—I like to hear your voice."

These were the first kind words he had addressed to her for a length of time. She looked timidly at him, and he held out his arms; she rushed into them, and embraced her father.

But all this agitation was too much for Lady Alice. She endeavoured to compose herself. She knew that Lord Howard could not bear what he called making a scene, and she succeeded in checking any outward show of emotion. She took up the newspaper, and read steadily on through long debates; and then turning to the news of the day, she came suddenly on the following paragraph:—

" We are sorry to hear that Colonel Leicester, son of Lady Margaret Leicester, in making an excursion from Athens into the mountainous districts, was attacked by banditti, and severely wounded."



t





Lady Alice did not finish the paragraph, but she remained in the same attitude, and putting one hand to her breast, said:— " I am faint," when a rush of blood flowed from her mouth.

Lord Howard started up; rang the bells with violence, opened the door; called loudly; returned to his daughter; and caught her in his arms. In a moment Lady Howard and all the servants were assembled—some ran for medical assistance—some screamed, and no one, save Lady Howard, had sufficient presence of mind to give her any relief. She immediately administered that which at the moment was necessary—that horrible medicine which undermines the life it is given to save, and the usual course was adopted which is ever followed on similar occasions.

Lord Howard was distracted—Lady Howard the image of depair—Lady Alice alone was calm and serene.

" My dearest mama," she said, " do not be alarmed, I shall recover; or if God wills it otherwise, you must think of poor papa, and forget those who are gone before you, or only remember them to think they are in heaven."





" Do not speak so—do not, dearest, I cannot bear that; besides, you know you are forbid to speak at all."

What avails it to dwell upon the sad slow stages of decay,—to watch the symptoms which so deceptively hold out an appearance of renovated health,—the delicate rose hue of the cheek,—the glistening diamond of the eye,—the light step, and the occasional cheerfulness of the voice, which disguises the canker of consumption.

Lady Howard saw all—felt all—but this time she bowed low before the chastening rod ; she prayed not for the life which contained her own :—her prayers were voiceless, speechless— her agony was her prayers.

It chanced one day, in looking for some book that Lady Alice wanted, she opened the press which concealed Colonel Leicester's portrait. Lady Howard started back — she remained some time in mute astonishment before this image of her daughter's lover; a thousand contradictory thoughts and feelings came and went in brightness and in darkness to her thoughts ; they all resolved themselves into one idea. Lady Howard would go to Lady Margaret Leicester; she would implore her to save her daughter's life, on any terms however humiliating to herself. It was then love—concealed love— which was wearing away the existence of Alice; and if that love was answered, if she obtained the object of her devoted attachment, she might yet live—she would live—live to bless her! The hope was too dear to be abandoned, and she believed that it was not consumption which preyed upon her, but the disappointment of her heart's first young affections.





Persuaded of this for the moment, it seemed impossible, but that when she confided the whole truth to Lady Margaret, a mother's breast would soften to a mother's pleadings.





She went to Lady Margaret's house — she thought not of her own humiliation — she thought not of being spurned, perhaps from Lady Margaret's presence—she thought alone of saving her child's life.

When she arrived at the door, she sent up word by the servant, that a lady desired to be allowed a few minutes' conversation with her alone.

Lady Howard's equipage, her attendants, her own appearance, obtained from the servants that respect which is always paid by the lower orders to rank and wealth. The message was delivered—the doors were opened wide—Lady Howard, breathless and trembling, stood in the presence of Lady Margaret Leicester.

" To what am I to attrribute the unaccountable circumstance of seeing Lady Howard under my roof?"





Lady Margaret rose as she spoke, and put her hand on the bell. She did not ask or even motion Lady Howard to sit down.

" To the desire of saving my daughter's life," was her reply; and here Lady Howard rapidly unfolded her own history and her daughter's; for the latter was so involved in hers, that half the beauty of Lady Alice's character would have been lost, had she not done so, and had she not particularly rested upon the circumstance of her being now aware that Lady Alice must have refused Colonel Leicester, only, because she conceived that Lady Margaret was averse to his marrying her. For she went on to say " I have had the most undoubted proof that her very life depends upon his love, and that she is dying literally of despair.

" Come Lady Margaret, and behold your son's picture, painted by her pencil;—then look upon her innocent countenance, and refuse to save her life if you can."





" This is most extraordinary; I am at a loss to understand you, Lady Howard. After my conduct in this affair, I cannot unravel the contradictory statements which seem to render your words—the words of a person who is distracted.

" Are you not aware, Lady Howard, that, touched by my son's entreaties, and rendered miserable by seeing his misery, I determined to forego every thing for his sake, and I commissioned one whom I believe to be your friend as well as mine, to request Lord Howard and yourself would accept of my tardy consent; and that, seeing our children were so deeply attached, we should mutually lay aside all our preconceived objections, and place no selfish obstacle in the way of their happiness?"

" Is it indeed possible, Lady Margaret, that you should have committed so kind a trust to so cruel a messenger ? Hear me declare to you, that Miss Agar, so far from holding out any unconditional hope, came, as she said, for the express purpose of explaining the only terms upon which you would ever consent to Colonel Leicester's union with Alice; terms so humiliating to me, that few mothers, even those in my unhappy case, would have brought themselves to accede to them ; but I determined in my own mind, that no selfish feeling should interfere with my child's happiness. Nevertheless, it was to Lord Howard, and not to Miss Agar, that I was to make known this resolve ; and I replied, " that I would consult him on this point, as I had done on every other, and could give no answer till I had communicated the affair to him. Miss Agar told me I should repent not acting upon my own judgment, and left me.





" Lord Howard, already offended at Colonel Leicester's conduct in respect to our child, became more incensed when I repeated to him the purport of Miss Agar's visit, and he wrote the. note which you must have received, Lady Margaret, and which broke off all further negociations on the business. Alice has been evidently declining in health ever since, and some weeks ago, while reading the newspape r, which contained an account of Colonel Leicester having been attacked by banditti, to her father, ruptured a blood-vessel, and we have despaired of her life ever since."





Lady Howard's voice failed; she seemed ready to faint.

Lady Margaret placed a chair for her ; hitherto she had not asked her to sit down ; and laying her hand gently on Lady Howard's arm, evinced by her countenance that she felt for her.

Lady Howard made an effort to resume speaking. *' This day I opened a cabinet in my child's room, and beheld the portrait of your son. A sudden gleam of hope shone out upon me. I knew that Alice had a very tender preference for Colonel Leicester, but I never knew, till now, to what a degree her happiness is involved in her attachment. She would not have busied herself in secret with recalling his image to her mind; she could not have suddenly acquired skill in an art which I had no idea she possessed, and with which love alone could have inspired her. Convinced, therefore, that her happiness, nay, her very life, depends upon her union with Colonel Leicester, I come to supplicate your pity.—Yes, Lady Margaret, it is a mother that sues for a mother's pity."





" I am so astonished, Lady Howard,—I will add, so touched," and she wiped away a few tears, " that I am unprepared to answer you."

" Ah ! Lady Margaret, this business admits of no delay. I am in breathless agony while you delay announcing the word that is to save or lose my daughter. I would kneel to you— implore you—if that could move you. Oh! come to her—look at her—promise her that you will recall your son — that you will give him to her. Even while I am speaking, the decree may have gone forth—your relenting may be too late."





" Remember, Lady Howard, I did relent before it came to this. Miss Agar was not a faithful interpreter of my sentiments. On her alone lies the blame and the consequences. But if you really think I yet may save Lady Alice Talbot, God forbid that I should not do as you wish. I will accompany you to Howard House."

" May He reward you, I cannot," and Lady Howard wept in silence:—But hope was in those tears.

As the carriage conveyed them rapidly to Howard House, they neither of them spoke.

Lady Margaret wondered at herself. " What!" she thought, " is it possible that I, Margaret Leicester, should be in the carriage of Lady Howard, a divorced woman, and going for the express purpose of asking her daughter to marry my son 1 It was, she thought, an event which ought to form a new epoch in the history of morals, and of manners. But she had not much time to reflect upon this before she found herself in Lord Howard's house.





Lady Howard at once conducted her to the room which contained her son's portrait, and having thrown open the door which concealed it, left that image to confirm the tender impression which she had succeeded in making on the inaccessible heart of one who had fenced all natural feeling round, with the prejudices and letter rather than with the spirit of virtue.

Lady Howard then sought her husband,— related to him every thing that had occurred, and dwelt upon Lady Margaret's kindness,— her intention respecting their child,—and the infamous falsehood with which Miss Agar, for some unknown purpose, had perverted Lady Margaret's intentions.

Lord Howard was visibly affected. His wife's disinterested conduct,—her love for their child,—her readiness to humble herself, even to the very dust,—restored for the moment all his admiration of her character—all his affection for her as the object of his first and passionate attachment.





" Now we shall be happy, again," he said, with that self-presumption which a sanguine temperament is too prone to fall into. Now our Alice will recover. Now we shall see our children's children, and through them the attainder on our reputation, and the stain will be wiped off. We shall feel once more, that we are living in the world we ought to live in, and among the persons whose rank and station are our own."

" If it so pleases God," rejoined Lady Howard.

" By Heaven, madam, you are enough to kill any man with your buts and ifs always thrown in to damp the lustre of joy;" and he passed

VOL. II. H





angrily from her presence, and sought Lady Leicester.

The latter, more inclined to show attention and respect to him than to his wife, listened very courteously to his explanations, and entered with more of warmth than was usual to her, into a defence of her own conduct in the business, and into that of Miss Agar's with great reprobation.

Lord Howard requested her permission to write to Agar, and express his anger and astonishment at her behaviour.

" No, my dear lord ; leave that to me if you please; she shall be made fully aware of her despicable and unaccountable deportment; but I wish to do this myself."

They now resumed what was to both a far more interesting part of their conversation, namely, the manner in which Lady Alice should be made acquainted with the apparently sudden change which had taken place in Lady Margaret's views, and of the whole unravelment, in short, of the story.





Lady Margaret promised to write to recall her son, and Lord Howard was, also, on his part, to address Colonel Leicester.

Thus visions of happiness and of future prosperity for himself, and those dearer to him than himself, filled Lord Howard's mind, and he was again the gay and careless being he had ever been.





CHAPTER V.



" Lady, that in the prime of earliest youth,

Wisely hast shunn'd the broad way and the green,

And with those few art eminently seen,

That labour up the hill of heavenly truth,

The better part, with Mary, and with Ruth,

Chosen thou hast. And they that overween,

And at thy growing virtues fret their spleen,

No anger find in thee, but pity and ruth ;

Thy care is fixed, and zealously attends

To fill thy odorous lamp with deeds of light,

And hope, that reaps not shame. Therefore, be sure,

Thou, when the Bridegroom, with his faithful friends,

Passes to bliss, at the mid hour of night,

Hast gained thy entrance, virgin, wife, aud pure."

Milton.



When Lady Howard with every care and delicacy of mind and manner, made known to her child the fortunate turn which had taken place in her favor, and the near accomplishment of her wishes, Lady Alice looked up meekly to Heaven, and putting her arms round





«

her mother's neck, said—"Too late, dearest mama!" Lady Howard understood what she meant, but she would not say she did so; and with superstitious awe which seizes the wisest persons sometimes, on similar occasions, she would not reply to her child's warning, lest she should confirm the sentence she had pronounced.

Colonel Leicester received all the letters which were addressed to him, and his mother had the happiness of knowing that her son blessed her from the recesses of his heart, and that in less than two months she might expect his arrival; but she neither blinded herself to Lady Alice's extreme danger, nor allowed herself to believe that if she did die, it would be for disappointed love; nevertheless, she sincerely regretted not having sooner given her consent to the marriage, especially as the same result, namely, Lady Alice's death, might have taken place, and her son would not have had any latent feeling of anger to urge against her. In addition, therefore, to every better sentiment, she heartily prayed for Lady Alice's recovery, and was assiduous in her attendance in the chamber of sickness. The former felt that to have Colonel Leicester's mother near her, was a happiness which in itself repaid her for all she had suffered.





What can be dearer to an affectionate heart, after their own parent, than the parent of the object of their love !—How much does the fond and loving heart seek to strengthen the tie by identifying itself with those from whom they sprung, to whom they owe the being of their beloved ! There is something radically wrong; something of the corrupt alloy of a factitious life, when this is otherwise. Self-interest, and the pollutions of society render such feelings null and void; much confusion in families accrues, and most assuredly those words of divine truth are written in indelible characters upon all such—" A house divided against itself cannot stand."





Lady Margaret Leicester was forced to confess that every additional hour showed her more and more the worth of her whom she had slighted; and she honoured, as well as loved, the child of the divorced Lady Howard !!

Miss Agar had written an artful letter to Lady Margaret, endeavouring to exonerate herself from blame, by saying that she had merely sounded Lady Howard in order to rind out whether Lady Alice really loved Colonel Leicester or not, and that she had intended to return the next day with the unqualified message of which she ought to have been the bearer; but that Lord Vernon's sudden departure for the country had prevented her doing so. Of course this artifice was easily discovered ; and Lady Margaret banished her for ever from her society.

Meanwhile Lady Alice was fast declining. One day, after Lord Howard had been buoying himself up with a hope that he knew was fallacious, he said in his daughter's presence, " How well Alice is getting ; did you ever see such an improvement?"





Neither Lady Margaret nor Lady Howard answered, and the object of this remark was evidently pained by the light tone in which he spoke. At length, after a pause, she said—

" My dearest papa, while there is life there is hope, but I must not deceive you, neither would I have you deceive yourself. As long as I could I have kept silence, but now the time is come when I must express to you my belief that my hours are numbered."

Lord Howard started forward, caught his child's hand, and bent his head over it.

" Dearest papa! the longest life will appeal as short as mine when it is about to close. It is not how long, but how we live, that signifies. Let me implore you to think only of this. Do not allow yourself to repine. When I am gone, remember dearest mama; comfort and support her ; and my second mama, dear Lady Margaret, let me implore her to identify herself with my parents, and to feel that the tie which was to have united them on earth still exists, though one of the links is gone. I beseech you, dear objects of my tenderest love, be all united. Let not any dissensions arise among you. I forgive Miss Agar. I pray you all to do so likewise. Tell her so; and tell her a dying woman entreated her to think that there is an interest to be pursued for the life that is to come, as well as for that which now is. To Colonel Leicester I leave my earnest supplication to believe that Lady Margaret fulfilled a mother's tenderest duty to him in all respects ; and on all occasions relative to himself and me, he was my first, my last, and only love. His image was ever present with me. I only transferred it to canvas, not that I might see him more distinctly, but in order to multiply his form to my eyes. Tell him I did wish to live to meet him once again on earth, but it is not to be, and, doubtless, it is best it should not. Tell him I am quite resigned."





This simple and solemn address was heard by those present in silence. All self-regrets were hushed before the parting words of Lady Alice. Soon after she dropped into a quiet slumber—when she awoke it was to pray. She signed to her father and mother to join her, as well as to Lady Margaret; they knelt around her bed, and her spirit had departed before they knew that she was dead: so calmly—so like the slumber of an innocent child, were the last moments of Lady Alice Talbot.

The first dreadful moment of such a loss is not the worst—it stuns the senses; and, strange as it may appear, after a few hours Lady Howard fell asleep, and did not awake till towards morning.





During this time Lord Howard sat opposite to Lady Leicester. Occasionally he glanced reproachfully at her: but Alice had entreated them all to forgive one another's wrongs. Alice had herself forgiven— Alice had bade them comfort one another in their sorrow, and Lord Howard did endeavour to repress the angry feelings, which it was perhaps natural he should entertain towards Lady Leicester, whose prejudices and unbending principles had been the occasion of preventing his daughter's marriage till the consent came, when it was too late. He could not help regarding Lady Margaret, in a great measure, as the cause of his daughter's death.

Time alone could subdue this feeling in Lord Howard's breast; for though his child's parting injunction to every one dear to her was to eradicate all harsh sentiments, and be at peace one with another, it would have required to be under control of a very different principle from that by which he was governed, not to resent the misery he felt, and of which he conceived Lady Margaret to be the cause.





Both sat silently looking at each other; and while Lord Howard indulged this feeling towards her, it would be doing injustice to that by which she was actuated not to say, that she experienced the bitterest pangs of remorse at the fatal consequences of her relentless conduct towards the departed Alice, and at the wretchedness her inflexible ideas had cost her own offspring—at the bereavement which Lord and Lady Howard now endured, and at the last hope of the unfortunate mother being thus cut off in the very bloom and beauty of her innocent life: and as she reflected on the sorrow of which her conduct had been the occasion, to the being she loved most upon earth, her son— she could feel, and intensely too, for the sorrow of others ;—she placed herself in idea in their circumstances, and she acknowledged that she had been too rigorous, too uncompromising.





Lady Howard awoke—started up in the bed : she glanced quickly round the darkened room, and said — "It is over, is it not, Howard? Alice is dead. Tell me, when was it, for I forget—my poor head aches so—is so confused," and she pressed her hands against her temples.

Lord Howard approached her, and said, in a low, suffocated voice, " Yes, Laura, dear; we are childless—Alice is dead. Be calm, dearest —try to be calm, for my sake."

" In time, Howard, I shall be calm; but you must give me time first. Lady Margaret still there ! she must be worn out; it is many hours since she tried to rest. Do ask her, Howard— entreat of her : she has yet a son to care for— her life is precious to him."

Lady Howard's heart was tender; and forgiving, her nature was characterized by gentleness. Even the woman who had once been cruel to her child—even with the person who had dealt most harshly with herself, and put her to an open shame—even to her she bore no resentment, and she felt for her at the moment when her own sorrows were sharpest.





Lady Margaret shook her head mournfully in dissent to her proposal of attempting to rest. She knew she could not rest; her heart was scorched by the burning of self-reproach.

Lord Howard continued to sit by the side of his wife — their hands were locked in each other's. He felt that Lady Howard grasped his arm convulsively.

" My sin is visited upon us, Howard," she murmured — "I knew the punishment would come: sooner or later, it always comes. The love that made me forsake Vernon—the love that gave our innocent ones birth, was heinous in the eyes of God and man, and the phial of wrath is poured out upon us. I have endured much; but I have never endured such grief as this. My poor child ! my dear Alice! is it possible you are dead ? Why it seems as if it were only yesterday that you laid your head in my lap, and wept for the loss of your playfellow's society. Your first sorrow, dear one, was caused by your mother: your blighted affections, your early death, are all the fruit of your mother's sin. It is well, it is right that I should lose you: but she forgave me ; did she not, Howard ? I half forget that last dreadful night, though I remember clearly many years back," and she shuddered —" but our dear child forgave me, did she not, all the wrong I have been the means of doing her ?"





"Yes, Laura, one sorrow has been spared you— your children have never blamed you—they never failed in their respectful love for us both— Alice never owned to the knowledge of our story. That she did know it, we can have no doubt ; but she never confessed to such knowledge—never even betrayed that she knew the painful truth, Your prayer has been granted, my poor Laura: your child never did change in one shade of her love for you."





A knock was heard at the door; Lord Howard went to inquire what it was. He was called out of the room, and Lady Margaret Leicester and Lady Howard were left alone together.

The former looked at Lady Howard with an expression of kindness and of sympathy; the more affecting, because it was rare in Lady Margaret.

Lady Howard's long hair had fallen from underneath her cap. Till that day its colour i had been like the raven's wing.

Lady Margaret had often marvelled at its beauty and preservation, considering Lady Howard's age. She knew every woman of title's age; but now that part which grew on her temples was as white as snow, and the rest of the long beautiful tresses were thickly interspersed with grey.





Lady Margaret gazed for some moments at the sufferer, who sat with her head leaning on her knees, hiding the day-light from her sight. Oh ! how painful day-light is at first, after a heavy grief. Was it possible, thought Lady Margaret; could sorrow have turned her hair grey in one night, or had she been deceived hitherto, and had Lady Howard worn false hair ? But no ! with the scrutiny of little minds on little things, even under circumstances that might well have power to set aside all the puerilities of life, she ascertained that the beautiful growth of the hair on the temples was the gift of nature. It must then have been sorrow for her child's loss that had done the work in a few hours which years of humiliation and pain had not achieved.





Lady Margaret was touched. She felt compassion for a sorrow which had worked such a sudden change.

" Do try, dear Lady Howard, to sleep again: think how necessary you are to your husband— preserve your life for his sake. Can I do anything for you ?"

Lady Howard turned towards her, and fixed her eyes vacantly on her countenance.

" Thank you, Lady Margaret, but I cannot rest any more. Mine was not sleep—it was temporary insensibility: but I am awake again to all the keenness of anguish;—nevertheless, I feel your kindness. Oh! if you had been as kind a short time ago. But forgive me; I know it was love for your own son—consideration for him—that made you forbid his marrying Alice. It was natural; but, Lady Margaret, by that very love which you bear your child, you may form some appreciation of my sorrow. It is a sorrow of aggravated kind; for I have the bitter conviction that I am the cause of my own wretchedness—that my sin has brought this merited punishment upon my offspring—that I am the dishonour of Howard House, as well as of the family of Vernon;— think of all this, and then you will pity me,—yes, Lady Margaret Leicester will pity even me !"





She did truly commiserate that unfortunate woman. She determined to remain her friend— to soothe, to comfort, to uphold her.

This was a great step in Lady Margaret's advance to Christain charity. She remained with the Howards till the last duties were paid to Lady Alice, and offered every consolation which it was in the nature of that unconsolable grief to administer or to receive.

Lord Howard, strange to say, appeared to lean more on Lady Margaret for support than he did on his heart-broken wife. He was flattered by the attentions of one so highly considered in the world's estimation. Lady Margaret Leicester was to have been his Alice's mother-in-law. Lady Margaret Leicester continued her friendship to him and Lady Howard after that tie was dissolved. Of all this Lady Howard thought not. One only feeling filled her breast—a sorrow, which she knew would end but with her existence, and that it might hasten her death was the only prayer she offered up to Heaven.





Lady Margaret received letters from her son —letters of rapture—letters of grateful affection. They named the day of his arrival at Calais. They harrowed up the hearts of the mourners. His mother determined to set off and meet him on the other side of the water, purposing to persuade him to remain some time on the Continent, for she dreaded for him his meeting with the Howards, and wished to spare him that pang, till his grief should have worn off its first sharp edge. Colonel Leicester was himself delicate—she feared the consequences of too great excitement—she feared the very air of Howard House ; at the same time she was aware that it would cost her some ingenuity to prevent his coming to them directly ; and, therefore, she persuaded Lord Howard to write and say, that he feared the trial would be too much for Lady Howard to meet him so soon, and that it would be better to let a short time pass over before this renewal of their misfortunes should take place.





When Lady Margaret departed, it seemed to the Howards that the last link between them and their child was torn away. She, who had been the cause of their daughter's misery, had, in the latter days, become as it were necessary to them. They felt their utter loneliness when she was gone.

When Miss Agar heard of the sad event at . Howard House, she was not so unnaturally malicious as not to feel some compunctious visitings, recollecting how she had first wounded





and blighted Lady Alice's happiness, by telling her of her mother's disgrace, and her subsequent cruelty in turning a message of joy into one of wretchedness. Yes, she did feel a sting of self-reproach, but it was soon silenced by the recollection that Lady Alice's mother had taken Lord Vernon from her in the days of her youth, and she thought, I am revenged. There are some minds to whom revenge is sweet. What a hell such persons must have within them !

Some chance visitors, who had forgotten the circumstances which attached to the Vernon family, mentioned Lady Alice's death, and added, that she was one of the rare instances which might be cited as having died for love.

"Nonsense!" replied Miss Agar; "she died as all the Howards do of a pulmonary complaint."

Lord Vernon looked at her with a very peculiar look. It was not lost upon her. She was silenced ; but from that moment she felt it was high time she should look out for some other home. She was determined not to do so, however, till the last moment.





Six months had nearly elapsed since the last child of the Howards was carried to the tomb. During this time grief had run its course. Lady Howard had not wept much; but her heart had bled with that anguish, which finds no relief, no outlet for its concentrated woe. She walked through her house—she sat down on the various seats, where she remembered to have seen her daughter—she held the implements of her painting in her hands—she touched the canvass, on which was an unfinished sketch—she gazed at it with a sort of idolatrous love, and then pushed it from her, and said,

" How worthless now ! What matters these remains of genius ? Of what avail are they ? Can they give me back my child ? Ah ! no; they only render my grief more poignant."

Sometimes she thought she would burn every vestige of a remembrance, which only served to pierce her through with many sorrows ; while, at others, she wished to save them from decay, and to transfer them to some less perishable material; but in the meanwhile she passed whole hours before these objects, which gave her back her child's talent6, and recalled her various charms of intellectual grace more forcibly than the words of any . other person could do.





Sometimes Lord Howard came to seek his wife, when his own desceuvrement made him not know what to do with himself; and, instead of entering into her feelings, he would say some harsh reproachful word, and talk of women's grief being as frivolous as themselves.

" What matters it to cherish a bit of senseless paper or canvass ? to sit brooding over these valueless objects, which only serve to draw off your attention from the living object of your duty and your care; but you was always romantic, high-flown, useless."





Lady Howard closed the portfolio she was hallowing with her touch, and rising in silence, she followed him out of the room, glad that he did not tear to pieces those precious relics, to her so dear.

Lady Howard now experienced how light was every trial she had hitherto undergone, compared to her present bereavement; and she looked back with surprise to the time when she had murmured against the lot, which, after all, she had chosen for herself; and when she thought of its comparative happiness, to that of the present time—

" Ah!" she said (as many have said before her), " I was not sufficiently thankful for my blessings : their value is only known and appreciated by me now that I am bereft of them. Then I had my children, and then I repined-^unworthy that I was of them.

Vol. n. i





Lady Howard's appointed trial was now indeed hard to bear; for Lord Howard, partly from violence of temper, partly from his own agonizing regrets, spent most of his time absent from her. He generally dined out, frequently left town on shooting or fishing parties, with men of his acquaintance, leaving his wretched wife alone, to bear her sorrows and remorse unshared —unpitied; for remorse was a constant inmate in her breast. She knew all she endured was merited; and, strange to say, she was half glad when her husband was so engaged—for though he did not take pleasure in the pursuits he followed, she knew his home was changed to him, and that it was the last place he wished to be in.

When it comes to that—when a woman feels that her husband is happier away from her than in her presence, and that for the very love of him she is compelled to wish him absent. What hope is there of returning happiness? Yes ! when it is truly love for him and not





indifference to his presence which induces the feeling, there is hope—at least there is a consciousness of deserving that he should return. But Alice, his child, the favourite of his heart, was no longer there' to welcome her father when he came to his home ; and the sorrowful face of his wife, with her fond but melancholy greeting, had no charm for him now —rather the reverse; and this was the end of that passionate love which he had once borne her—this was the close of his conduct towards the woman for whom he would once have sacrificed his life—for whom he did sacrifice all the interests of honourable distinction;—this was his conduct to the erring but nevertheless devoted partner of his existence—and such is the conduct of many of those who sacrifice virtue to passion. But nevertheless it was most cruel, and even the cold heartless world pronounced it to be so.

Lord Howard ceased to invite any one to his house, for he had nothing belonging to him now of whom he was proud. His young, his beautiful, his innocent Alice, no longer graced his board. The hope of his family, Lord Talbot, was no more. His wife had no longer those personal attractions which excite admiration, and make the indifferent and the careless forget all else. Nobody would envy him the possession of his handsome wife now; there was nothing whatever to natter his vanity. The sharer of his home had grown old, and sorrow had made her older even than years. She was nothing now, but the divorced wife of another man. How worthless is such love as that which Lord Howard had bestowed on her, when she ministered to his pleasure and gratified his sight! For worthless is the love which tires by lengthing years—which lessens with the decay of youth and beauty—which can be extinguished by the changes which added years produce even on the fairest forms.





Such love as Lord Howard's was as worthless as it was sinful. Not all his wife's constancy —not all her unceasing zeal to please him, could ensure to her a continuance of that passion which was sinful in the eyes of God and man ; and which never is blessed, let appearances disguise the fact as they may.

Often Lady Howard asked herself, " Can this be so ? — Yes; I have sown the wind and reaped the whirlwind. Howard fails me !" and her spirit grew faint, and she wished to be no more.

As long as her daughter lived, she had never felt utterly bereaved; she had never felt what it is to look for fondness and to find it not. There was a being who bound her husband to her.

» Miss Agar's words were true; she felt their force, when speaking of the loss of her son, trebly verified in that of her daughter. " It loosens your hold over the father, but it I





is all deserved." All,—save the loss of Howard's affections, and she thought, " I shall not have the strength to endure much more; it will soon be over,—my heart must break !" How little do we know what we can bear. We can bear all that it is ordained for us to bear. Our strength is freshly renewed with every renewal of trial.

Twenty years back (twenty years which had passed to them with the briefness of a moment now that they were gone)'—had any one told Lord Howard he would love his Laura less than he had done at that time—that he would live to be unkind to her—he would have spurned them from him ; but it never occurred to him now, to think that such was the case.

One evening, in the month of November 18—, when he returned home to dress for a dinner party that was to be given at a tavern in the City, famous for its turtle. He looked into the dining-room, where his wife was sitting alone. He came in, asked her if her head-ache was better, of which she had complained in the morning, and inquired if she would like to see a physician.





" No, dearest Howard, thank you. No physician can do me any good, but will you "

she hesitated as she looked in his face, and saw the habitual frown now impressed there, more deeply marked on his brow; that brow which had been so bland and radiant.

" Will you," she said, speaking kindly, " if it is not a very particular engagement that calls you from home,—will you remain with me this evening? It is your birth-day, and I should like very much to pass the remaining hours with you. I will not often ask you to bore yourself with me. But this night, Howard"— then seeing his displeased expression, she added, " Never mind, love, another time will do —go out and enjoy yourself."

" Thank you for the permission, Lady Howard : I am exceedingly obliged to you. I regret that having made an engagement of some standing, I cannot have the pleasure of staying with your ladyship. Some other evening, I trust I shall be so fortunate as to be disengaged when you do me the honour to invite me;" and he curled his lip satirically as he looked at his wife.





She made no reply by words, but she gave him a glance, which might have softened his heart, had he any left.

Lord Howard quitted her without one relenting word. While he was dressing, he observed a sprig of myrtle and a rose, one of those late roses peculiarly redolent of perfume and typical of true affection, which linger in their bloom and sweetness long after their natural season is past.

He took the flowers up, looked at them, and flung them aside. They had been his favorite flowers — those which he used to give his wife





when he loved her. No one could have placed them in his waistcoat but herself.

He finished dressing, and was about to extinguish the lights, when the flowers again caught his eye. He took them up. There was no one present to witness the weakness. He would indulge the feeling that made him place them in his waistcoat. He would go into his wife's room — beg her pardon ; — but why should he do so now? it would be time enough when he returned, and he left his home, and drove rapidly to the rendezvous of mirth and good cheer.

As soon as he left Howard House, his wife had searched for the flowers. They were taken — they had been accepted. That trifling circumstance gave the unhappy one pleasure. When is the human heart quite closed to pleasurable feelings? Never till it ceases to beat.

She said, " Perhaps he will again be fond of me;" and with that firmness of affection which formed such a beautiful feature in her character, she forgot all his past untindness, at least she forgave it, and that evening was passed less heavily than usual.





Lord Howard, meanwhile, was surrounded by the convivial party he had joined. He partook in the loud laughter of his associates. No one present seemed to enter with greater zest into the witticisms of the celebrated wit of the day,—the buffoon of the great Dinnerman of his time,—and he gave out sallies of bon mots which were loudly applauded. But all the while, he had never felt more oppressed by sorrow; never had he reproached himself so deeply for his unfeeling conduct towards his wife as on that evening, while mirth and revelry were around him; and her lonely image seemed to rise up before him.

To dissipate this gloom he had recourse to the factitious exhilaration of wine, and he quaffed it to excess.





When the conversation became general,—" Is

it true," asked one man, " that Mrs.

refused to run off with Lord ? I cannot

believe it; for what a parti for her!"

" Yes, she did refuse him," was the reply. " She had the good sense to resist his

entreaties. Mrs. is a very wise

woman. In her present position she has all the advantages, and none of the disadvantages which she would have had if she became his wife. She has escaped the disgrace of being a divorcee. . I am always surprised when a woman sacrifices her position by running off. It is so easy to manage the affair skilfully, and not to pay too high a price for it It never answers to the unfortunate woman who shuts herself out from society for the sake of the man; but the game is not equal; he doesnot—cannot return the compliment, for he bears no particular blame, goes about as much as ever, for he soon wearies of having no society, and then, ashamed of his victim, of course he leaves her, to follow the bent of his own inclinations."





" It is a terrible mistake that some people make, do you not think so, Howard 1" added the speaker, turning towards, and addressing him."

Every one stared—looked at the man who made this extraordinary speech,—then at Lord Howard; but the man who had made this unlucky remark, remained quite unconscious of his offence.

Lady Howard's name had for so long a time ceased to be mentioned, that by most persons her existence even was nearly forgotten. '

Lord Howard bit his lip, drew himself up, and left the table without saying a word.

" How could you ask him, of all men in the world ?" said several of the party speaking at once, after he had quitted them. " How could you ask Mm such a question ? Why, Laura Vernon is his wife. She was divorced, you know."





" Aye, very true," replied the person who had made the remark; " so she is. I totally forgot. I hope he will not take it amiss. I meant no offence."

" Luckily," rejoined another man, " he has drank so much wine, he is not likely to remember any thing to-morrow morning."

When Lord Howard reached his home, the fumes of the wine, together with the supposed affront he had received, made him rave and rage like a mad person.

He sat down, wrote a challenge to the man who had asked him the question about the divorced woman; then threw it into the fire, saying, he would not make himself ridiculous by defending the woman who was his wife, but whose conduct could not admit of defence; then he cursed himself for having married her; then he thought of her affection, her devotedness to him, of the heartless manner in which he had treated her; then of his children whom he had lost.





The fumes of wine added delirium to these thoughts, and he summed up all by saying, " It is more than I can bear,—more than I will bear!" He snatched a pistol which hung always loaded in his apartment, and levelled it at his breast. His aim was sure, and in an instant he was in eternity.

The report of the pistol awoke Lady Howard. She rang violently for her maid, and enquired if she had not heard the discharge of fire-arms.

" No, my Lady," replied the sleepy chambermaid ; " I heard nothing."

" But, indeed I did," rejoined Lady Howard, evidently alarmed.

" La, my Lady, your ladyship's alarming yourself for nothing; do not be so terrified."





" Go wake Thompson, and desire him to search the house."

" Why, if so be as your ladyship thinks there's danger of thieves, my Lady, I do not like to go down stairs alone; and she, too, began to partake of her mistress's alarm."

" Is Lord Howard come home?" Lady Howard asked.

" How should I know, my Lady, as I sleep in the next room to your Ladyship. His Lordship, you know, seldom comes home till daylight, and generally lets himself in with his pass key."

Lady Howard felt indignant at her maid's impertinent answer, but she made no reply, and determined to go herself to her husband's room.

When she reached his door, she knocked several times, but receiving no answer, she said, " Howard, pray open your door for a moment.—I beseech you, open it."





She repeated her entreaty several times, but receiving no answer, she thought, " He will not hear me, or else he is so sound asleep, he will be angry if I wake him;" so she returned to her own apartment, sent her maid to bed, and tried to calm her fears, and seek rest herself.

In the morning, the maid looked distressed and terrified when she entered her mistress's room, but seemed unwilling to speak. At last she stammered out, " If you please my Lady, Mrs. Thompson wishes to—to speak to you."

Lady Howard looked at her with astonishment, and exclaimed, " Gracious Heaven! what is the matter? Howard—Howard !—and she screamed his name out so loudly, that it resounded through the hall and passages ; but her screams, heart-rending as they were, had no power to awaken him upon whom she called, from his long — last sleep. She went to his door, it was fastened. Howard, — Howard ! open—open your door!"





The butler laid his hand on her arm. " My Lady, do not, I beseech you," and he attempted to lead her away: but she appealed to him, and said, " if you know any thing dreadful, tell it to me. I command you to tell me all you know, for this suspense drives me mad."

" It is my painful duty to tell you that my Lord has shot himself."

Lady Howard said impetuously, " Let me in! let me in !—I will see him."

" No, my Lady, it is impossible; I beseech you not to put yourself to this trial."

She leaned for some moments against the door in silence. Her attendants perceived she had fainted, and conveyed her to another part of the house. She remained insensible for such a length of time, that they became alarmed, and sent for a physician. The means resorted to restored her to consciousness. It would have been merciful, perhaps, if she had never recovered it; for how awful was the catastrophe which summed up the complement of her woes!





CHAPTER VI.



" What is the worst of woes that wait on age ?

What stamps the wrinkle deeper on the brow 1

To view each lov'd one blotted from life's page,



And be alone on earth as I am now.

Before the Chastener humbly let me bow,



O'er hearts divided, and o'er hopes destroy'd

Roll on, vain days ! full reckless may ye flow,



Since Time hath reft whate'er my soul enjoyM,

And with the ills of old mine earlier years alloy'd."



Childe Harold.

However great sorrow may be, — however mourners may be bowed low, or rendered careless of all worldly considerations, there are always those who come forward upon such occasions to inquire into, and settle the circum stances of the deceased, and take cognizance of every particular of their temporal affairs. The business of this life goes on just the same, though the widow lies insensible upon her bed of despair, or the orphans lift their hands for bread, or the broken heart sits down in silence to die.





If death is in every shape the King of Terrors, still he comes in very different degrees of terror to claim the debt of Nature. To the Christian, death is despoiled of half of its gloom —to the believer, it is a transit from darkness to light. But how awful is such a close to existence as that of Lord Howard, when with an uncleansed heart, and prayerless lips, he rushed uncalled into the presence of his Creator! Were it not for mercy, the thought would be too terrible to think, and live.

Lord Howard left no relation, except the distant one whose penurious habits and strange character had made him to be considered with a sort of superstitious dread by the lower orders, and with contempt by those of his own station: nevertheless, he was the person summoned to be present at the opening of the will.





Mr. Grey, the agent of the deceased Lord Howard, arranged the peculiarly painful circumstances attendant upon his obsequies. The verdict brought in by the coroner's inquest was couched in those usual terms which give a colour of excuse for the crime of suicide,—he had shot himself in a fit of temporary derangement. Mr. Grey's next duty was to search Lord Howard's papers, in order to ascertain if he had left a will or written document respecting the disposal of his worldly affairs; but after a most minute investigation, none whatever was found,—nil, therefore, devolved to the heir.

On this being made known to Lady Howard, she said it was well, it did not signify, and relapsed into the same state of stupor in which she had been plunged after the dreadful event. From this insensibility she was aroused by the announcement made to her, by Mr. Grey, that she must leave Howard House immediately, such being the orders given him by his new client.





She put her hands to her head, as if to recollect what had befallen her; and then replied, that in four days she would leave her house.

Mr. Grey looked at her with commiseration. " I am afraid your ladyship is not aware that there is no provision whatever made for you on Lord Howard's estate,—but of course you have other resources suitable to your rank and station."

Lady Howard made no answer: but the fact startled her; and she remembered that when she left her first husband, Lord Vernon, her uncle, under whose care and protection she had been brought up from early childhood (her parents having both died soon after her birth), was so incensed at her conduct, that he left her totally unprovided for, as far as he was concerned, declaring that his niece had forfeited all claims upon him,—and he had further said that no good would come of such conduct, but that the curse of heaven would rest upon her.





Lord and Lady Howard had at that time laughed at the old governor's words (as they called General De Lacy), little believing that " the sunset of life gave him mystical lore;" but now Lady Howard thought she heard these words repeated in her ears in the same sonorous voice in which they had been addressed to her in his life-time, and now seemed to speak to her from the tomb.

Her senses were completely restored to her. She could understand the full weight of woe which had fallen upon her. She was a childless widow—without home or shelter, or means to procure either,—yet, strange to say, she felt strong in bodily health. Nature demanded these necessary supplies, and she thought, " how shall I procure them" ? One only resource offered itself to her. Her jewel-case—those ornaments given to her to decorate her person—were now to become the means of her subsistence. For the moment this thought was a relief to her. " Once placed," she said to herself, " in any abode, however humble, I can then give scope to my sorrow;—all I have now to do upon earth is to weep."





Lady Howard took an opportunity to steal out of the house unobserved by the domestics : the motive for doing so was to look for a lodging—and she did not like those who had waited upon her state to watch her poverty. These are feelings which cleave to us to the last.

When first she found herself in the open street alone, at night-fall, a strange feeling of desolation came over her. She fancied every passenger was looking at her—every rude man of the lower orders was about to insult her;— she pulled her deep widow's veil carefully over her face whenever she passed one of the gaslights, and wondered at the careless joy of every 'prentice lad as he passed by, in his coloured apron, whistling and jumping along in mirth of heart;—then the rattling cab, and the tired horses of some hackney-coach dragging the jingling vehicle along — and the bold, lost women, lurking in the thievish corners of the streets—and those lit-up pandemoniums where wretchedness and vice are licensed to hold their court;—all these sights and sounds appalled the trembling Lady Howard, who, for the first time in her life, found herself exposed to them.





" I must not think," she said, " I must act;" and looking up to a small bow-windowed house, she read, by the light of the lamp immediately opposite, ' lodgings to let.' She knocked timidly, unused to perform that office for herself. How little things sometimes rend the distressed iu heart; and when they think the cup of grief is full, another drop is added to increase the bit

VOL. II. K





terness. The door was opened by a respectable-looking person. Lady Howard asked to see the apartments.

" Oh, madam," replied the woman, " we have only two small rooms to let. They will not do for such as you."

" She knows me, then," thought Lady Howard. " How unlucky !"

But she did not: only she saw the nameless air, and the peculiar tread, which designated Lady Howard to be not one of the common throng. Those only who, like her, have proved the wretchedness of actual poverty, with an appearance of greatness attached to them, of which they cannot divest themselves, even under rags, -^•those alone can know what it is to endure the sneer, and the contumely, with which they are goaded in their hour of penury and want.

Poor Lady Howard! she asked humbly, to be allowed to look at the rooms, and was shown up the little narrow dark stair





case, and the door was thrown open, whence there came out that mixture of a damp smell, with the remains of eating, which is so sickly and oppressive.

" And what do you ask for the lodging V said Lady Howard, sinking upon one of the hard horse-hair chairs.

<** That depends, ma'am, upon how long you may. want them. If by the week, three guineas —if by the month, two and a half a-week— if by the half-year, two a-week."

" The latter," said Lady Howard.

And then came the details about the housemaid and the cooking. How these realities disgust those who hear of them for the first time in their life.

Lady Howard, nevertheless, calmly concluded her bargain, gave the woman an earnest ef a guinea, which made her drop a very respectful curtsey, and then she stole back again to Howard House. But when she entered the vestibule, the servants looked at her, she fancied^ with curious and altered countenances. " But after all," she thought, " what matters ? Is there anything now that is of consequence to me ?" The obligation, however, to act for herself, had the effect of wearying her bodily frame ; and for the first time since her last awful bereavement, she slept soundly, without uttering those restless screams which terrify the hearers, and of which those who utter them are frequently not even conscious.





The next day, Mr. Grey came to remind her ladyship, that on the morrow the heir was coming to take possession, and requested to know if her ladyship had decided upon any plan of life, or if he could be of any use to her. She thanked him ; told him she had taken a lodging, that she should remove to it the next day, and that she should go alone.

Mr. Grey, though well-accustomed to such events, was touched by Lady Howard's misfortunes. He expressed himself kindly,—respectftilly. The sympathy of any living creature is, at times, a refreshment to the wearied spirits. She went through the remaining scene 4 of this part of her existence with a heroism of which she did not even know herself to be capable. She saw the remnants of her wardrobe placed in a hackney-coach, and she took up the jewel-box, her only means of subsistence; but she dared not go through the apartments of Howard House—she dared not lift her eyes as she passed down the great staircase. She fenced her heart with iron resolution—she felt it was compressed almost to suffocation, but she walked bravely on.





Mr. Grey handed her into the hackneycoach. The old porter, the last and only servant who had not been paid off, bade God bless her; and, as he put up the elinking iron step of the vehicle, she saw a tear upon his aged face,—then her strength failed her, and she wept. The coach drove on at a rattling pace; the driver thought he was doing her honour, by going as fast as his horses could go, and she was very shortly set down in Orchard-street. Her luggage was lifted out, —she entered, and walking up the narrow staircase, sat down in her desolate abode!—The landlady came in to ask for the coachman's fare.





" He wants three shillings, ma'am, for bringing these two or three bits of boxes; but it is an imposition ; two is as much as you ought to pay him."

" Never mind," said Lady Howard, taking out her purse ; " pay him what he asks, and let me hear no more about it."

The woman looked astonished—this was not what she was used to. These matters being settled, and Lady Howard having ordered a fire, was alone with her misery, and she hugged it to her heart, and hoped that she might be spared a protraction of her wretched existence. At first there was something to be done. There was a necessity of having food, and a roof over her head ; but these matters once effected, all was completed, and her days passed on in such unvaried wretchedness, that she knew not the difference of one from another, the morning and the evening seemed to her as the same day, and months glided by which appeared like one long track of gloom.





But time was in its course effecting the various changes of its appointed mission. Lord Vernon died after a very short illness, and Miss Agar found herself once more completely upon the pave. She had made sure of an establishment in his house, or at least expected that in his will she should find an ample provision; but what was her astonishment and anger, when she learned that her cousin Lord Vernon had not left her a sixpence, nor even made mention of her. Such ingratitude ! after all she had done for him! and she Tang a peal of complaints in all the neighbours' ears, dwelling upon her wrongs with infinite self-love; and not obtaining any sympathy, but on the contrary, every one of the persons to whom she addressed these ridiculous murmurs, when her back was turned, said,—





" What a tiresome, unreasonable, old woman ! the neighbourhood will be well quit of her. It was really surprising to see such a man as Lord Vernon harbouring that ill-tempered mischievous creature."

Miss Agar had now to seek out some other victim on whom to fasten herself; but she knew that this must be done, as though she were conferring, not seeking a favour. She must be rich and independent in the eyes of the world to ubtain its good graces. The name of poverty is the gorgon's head from which instinctively the very children flee; nothing is so foolish as to complain of being poor. Miss Agar knew that well; ar.d though she was poor, she had always continued to appear rich, by living upon others, not as receiving charity from them, but as a condescension on her part to serve them. Hitherto this game had been successful, but now she scarcely knew where to play it.





The present Lord Vernon was married to Fanny Harcourt, and she was no favourite with either; she could not hope for a place in their establishment; besides, she always preferred a single gentleman's protection* She turned over her note book, in which during her whole life she had kept memorandums of who, and what, might be serviceable, come a rainy day, as she called it; and in doing so, she lit upon the name of Mr. Willoughby, her partner at all the Dowagers' card parties for the last twenty years. He, into whose pocket, as she herself declared, she had put many a guinea, by her dexterity at play.

"That will do," she said, "I believe he is pretty much panier percte, and the remnants of my stock, which I will take care to magnify, may prove a bait of sufficient temptation to catch him."





It was not very usual that this sort of compact should take place in this country, but Miss Agar contrived to make out a claim of cousinship, as she had previously done with Lord Vernon, and she hoped the thing would take, and that she should set the fashion.

Accordingly she proceeded in the late Lord Vernon's equipage for the last time, as she observed to herself;—it was a pity, but it could not be helped : vain regrets were only for fools.

She took Mr. Willoughby by storm, made him acquainted with the purport of her visit, and proposed, in consideration of their relationship and of his deranged affairs, to make bourse commune, and dwell in the same house.

Mr. Willoughby burst into a fit of laughing, and said, " My dear Miss Agar, I am exceedingly obliged to you, and very much honoured by being your cousin twice removed; but think of the ill-natured world—and as to marriage, you know I am too old to be married."





"Married!" replied Miss Agar, reddening with anger, " I don't want to marry you, I can assure you. How vain men are!—No, no, my good friend, you are, as you say, too old to be married;" (she knew that would pique him) " but the arrangement that I proposed to you has nothing to do with anything of the kind. Can we not put our monied interests together in life as we have often done at the card-table, and you know with what success ? Can we not be a pis aller to one another when the town is empty ? And when we can do better and more agreeable things, can we not both go our separate ways ?" " No, no,—Love, you know

' At sight of hmnan ties,

Spreads his light wings and in a moment flies.'"



" I remember reading that when I was in love; but our ties would be much surer—those of self-interest. I could give you wealth ; you could give me your consideration and agrtment in the world."





" I am extremely flattered—flattered beyond the power of expression," taking her hands and kissing them; "but you would find me a terrible bore, and on the whole, I think we had better remain friends under separate roofs."

" Humph ! Well, Mr. Willoughby, when you are confined to your arm-chair, and your gouty feet swathed in flannel, perhaps you will wish you had me to repeat news, and refresh you with a little lively conversation ; but it will be too late, then ; now or never, is my motto; good day to you !"

" Allow me, Miss Agar, to hand you to your carriage, and believe me one of your most devoted slaves."

She shook her head, pointed to his foot, which was rather painful, and laughed as she saw him limp back again into the house.





Miss Agar's plans were quickly settled. She went to Brighton for her health, as she said, after the loss of her dear Lord Vernon, whom she should never cease to regret, though he had behaved so ungratefully to her; and there, in a boarding-house, Miss Agar took up her abode, always hoping that her note-book might direct her to some useful hint,—and passing her life upon the watch to obtain something better; playing for sixpences instead of guineas; dealing in the lower scandal of the gentry instead of that of the noblesse; and happy to get a dinner where she could.

There are many such,—many who wear away existence in the same profitless, worthless manner, and who drop into the grave unblessed by a single blessing—unhonoured, and unloved.

Lady Howard had, during the last portion of her existence, exhausted the resources of her jewel box. From time to time she had placed some token of past love in that wretched, yet sometimes blessed, receptacle of the miserable, a pawnbroker's, till all was gone, and she owed the last month of her lodging. She had eaten her last crust; she had no clothes but the rags on her back. This is the romance of real life, a thousand times more touching than all that fiction can devise.





In mute hopelessness she opened her jewel box,—she lifted up tray after tray,—in vain ;— for not one of the precious gems, with which it had been filled, was left. Not one of the gems, with which Lord Howard had taken such pride and pleasure in decking out the beautiful form of his wife, remained to procure her bread, in the hour of destitution;—not one of the tokens of that love, which had led to her undoing; not one of the gifts from him, for whose sake she now endured actual want, was left. It seemed as though it was her punishment to be bereft of every thing connected with the man, for whom she had been guilty.





What an indescribable anguish it is, which is caused by the utter devastation of every minor object which linked the memory of those we loved with our existence ! But she recurred with greater fondness still to those records of memory, which never could be taken from her while her life remained. The remembrance of Lord Howard's passionate love for her—the remembrance of his once doating kindness—the remembrance of his admiration—still were hers; but all else was gone. His children, those dearest pledges of affection, were taken hence—the house in which they had been born, and lived, had passed into a stranger's hands— the old servants, who had loved them from their birth, who had felt for their master's disgrace, they were now the servants of others: desolation had swept the race of the Howards off the face of the earth.





Life was utterly valueless to Lady Howard; but as long as it lasts, human nature is compelled to think of food, and sleep, and clothing, and shelter. It is surprising how the hard necessity of obtaining these, drives away all other feelings from the mind.

She now thought she would perform any labour, whether of head or hands, or both, of which she was capable; but who would employ her, an unknown ? or, if known, known as a divorced woman! She would, she thought, try to sell some of the drawings which her husband had been so proud of, but she was not sure they would be bought. The shops are overstocked with such merchandise, and many a clever sketch lies in the shop-window for months, without obtaining a purchaser, till, at length, the disappointed artist takes it away, soiled, and rendered useless.





Then she thought she would teach music. She would give mechanical lessons to some mechanical pupil—she would teach the letter of that spiritual art with which she had charmed Lord Howard, that art which she had exercised with such a magical and soul-stirring effect upon her hearers! Those only who have practised music with such feelings, and such conformation of organs, as Lady Howard's, can know what it is to be a teacher, and, above all, of music.

Then she asked herself, " Have I a friend left?"—that question, which is so grievous to the guilty and the despised ; and she thought of those who from compassion might have tendered her relief,—Lady Margaret and Colonel Leicester ; but she had never written to them ; they had never written to her, at least not that she knew of; but as she had changed her name, and was dead to the world, they might have done so, and she might not have heard of it.





All these thoughts came and went, but they brought her no actual relief. Again she took up her empty jewel box; she touched a sectet spring, which she remembered lay concealed beneath all the trays; it opened, and she beheld a gem of great price: it had been given to her by Lord Vernon, and therefore had been forgotten. It had been given to her on the occasion of the birth of her first-bom son. It was a sapphire ring, with the name and date of Lord Stuart's birth engraved on the gold that encircled the finger.

This ring was the only gift from her first husband which she had retained, and it had lain there forgotten rather than kept, and now it seemed to be a means left in her hands by Providence to aid her in her extremity. This thought brought penitence and remorse in its train, and reproached her silently for her desertion of the donor.

Lord Vernon had been the best and fondest of husbands; but Lord Vernon, as an injured and forsaken man, had been more, he had been a forgiving Christian. All these thoughts and feelings, however, faded before the one idea, that she had not wherewithal to live or maintain the life, which, though she loathed, she instinctively clung to.





" I should think this would bring me a large sum," she said, looking at the gem, " for it is very magnificent."

Evening was come; it was a brilliant sunset, colouring every object with the last blaze of the golden orb: the park was deserted by all the gay crowd which had a short time before thronged its drives and walks, and now gave place to the eager, up-turned gaze of the urchin, who watched his kite rise high in the air,—to the languid step of the pent-up artizan,—to the sick, creeping along, leaning on their faithful servant's arm, — to the infirm, wheeled in their prison-chair,—or those happier





ones, linked arm in arm with their loved though humble partners, who come forth at that hour in the summer season, to enjoy the remains of the long fine day which has preceded the evening, but which has been to some of them a day of toil, or pain, or sickness,—or weary labour, or worse than labour,—of hopeless leisure.

Myriads of such individuals, upon whom poverty or suffering has set its mark, if not in a striking manner, in that nameless air of desultory if not defined wretchedness, which is impressed on so many in this great city, now filled the park. The distant rumble of carriages conveying the rich to their banquets, and the loud scream of the delighted boy, as the evening breeze carried his kite far above out of his sight, and the gay bark of some romp-loving dog after some romploving child, were the sounds which had succeeded to the galloping of horses, and the buzz of voices, .and the slow rushing noise of the wheels of the equipages as they paraded to and fro. Such was the appearance of the scene when Lady Howard traversed the park on her way to the pawnbroker's, whither she was going to deposit Lord Vernon's gift.





One by one, as the several individuals above described passed by her, she bestowed on them that feeling of compassion which she had in her noon of prosperity never denied to the wretched; and which she now, by selfexperience, felt still more keenly for others, while the few loved and loving couples caused her that darting pang of anguish which says, " Once / was like those."

At length she found herself in a different scene in the middle of Piccadilly. There was

a great dinner that night at House, and

Lady Howard was obliged to wait before she could cross the pavement, whilst one carriage after another entered the court. Lady Howard held her veil tightly over her face, lest she should be recognised by any of the persons within them. Many of the equipages were known to her, as belonging to persons whom she had formerly known.





" Ah! if they did but recognise me," she thought, " even those careless persons would pity me." But Lady Howard scorned pity: it was what she most dreaded, especially from the world; and she hurried on as quickly as she could through the crowd assembled to look at the arrival of guests, and walked on without raising her head till she reached an alley leading out of the Strand, where the private entrance to the pawnbroker's shop was situated.

Lady Howard knocked, and on being recognized, was immediately admitted, and shewn into a small room set apart for the reception of the higher order of persons who were in the habit of coming to that place.

It was now dark, — the shop-boy lighted the candles which stood on the mantel-piece — placed one of the black horse-hair chairs for Lady Howard, and then went to announce to his master that the lady in mourning was waiting for him.





As she looked around those walls in which she had lately often been, and every time with a heavier heart, she saw no appearance of those immense riches which are said to be hoarded in similar places. A shabby side-board, with a few glasses placed on it, a dirty mirror, with a black and gold frame, and golden balls depending from it, with pieces of spar, and shells on the chimney-piece. A table in the middle of the room, covered with a green cloth, and four chairs around the walls, constituted the furniture and decorations of one of the greatest pawn-brokers in London.

The only circumstance which conveyed any idea of its being a deposit for wealth, was the window being carefully screwed down, and double bars of iron placed across the shutters.

Lady Howard had often come there with a pang of such a nature as those alone know who have been bound on the same errand, as one by one she had parted with some gift that Lord Howard had bestowed upon her,—with some inanimate pledge of love, but not inanimate to her, from the associations which were attached to it. But this time she came with another feeling. True, it was a fine gem she was about to sacrifice ; but what were gems to her ? The means of procuring bread was all she thought of; besides, it was Lord Vernon's gift, not Lord Howard's, and she half reproached herself for the little value she placed on it.





But though the actions are to be commanded, the affections are not. It is in vain to say, love one person—do not love another; as well might we pretend to control the winds.

The pawnbroker entered, made a slight inclination of the head towards Lady Howard, which could not be called a mark of positive respect, but which escaped rudeness.





Lady Howard opened her bag, took out the ring, and presented it in silence.

Drawing down his spectacles to their place from his forehead, where they had been pushed up, he took the candle, placed the gem before the light, and examined the stone narrowly. A few moments passed of great suspense to Lady Howard, lest he should refuse to give h«r money upon it.

At length he asked, " May I know, Madam, how this stone came into your possession 1"

" If you will not advance me money, Mr. Jones, upon this ring, without my answering your question, I must do so; but it will be painful to me. On my word, it is lawfully mine. It came into my hands by no foul means," she reiterated earnestly, as the keen eye of the pawnbroker rested on her countenance in doubtful scrutiny, and with an expression of disbelief.

It might have been imagined that Lady

VOL. II. L





Howard was used to scrutiny,—that she had become proof to all examination; but the lengthened gaze of the pawnbroker brought the colour into her pale cheeks, giving her face a transient glow of its former beauty.

" Madam, I can hardly doubt you; but this gem is of so high a value, it is a stone so well known for its price, that I must confess, I hesitate to give money upon it till I am informed how it came into your hands, lest others should have not acted fairly respecting it; and, above all, lest, if traced as being deposited with me, I should be brought into trouble upon its account. This ring, Madam, belonged to the

late Princess of ■. It was a crown jewel.

I knew it well. Her Royal Highness had no right to dispose of it; and if it was stolen from her, the persons who committed the theft, had they been discovered, or should they ever be so, will pay the forfeit of their crime ; but every endeavour to trace them has





hitherto proved unavailing. At the time of her Royal Highness's death, there was a considerable stir made about the business; but since then, the circumstance was hushed up, and is now, I dare say, forgotten. Still, Madam, I would not receive this ring into my keeping, or advance money upon it, unless I can be made acquainted with the manner in which it came into your possession, and also your real name, and that of the persons who gave it you."

" Is this the only condition on which you will serve me on this occasion ? I have already said it will be very painful to me to tell you who I am, and in what manner the ring became mine.''

This time Mr. Jones felt more convinced than ever of her honesty, and he replied in a gentler tone,

" I am sorry, Madam, to force you to disclose any circumstances of a private nature which it is unpleasant to you to speak of;, but I am really anxious to oblige you ; at the same time that I must consider my own interests, and my character, which are at stake, and therefore I am compelled to abide by my terms, and to request the explanation I seek. I will promise secrecy respecting anything you tell me ; it is merely that I may be able to answer, in the event of this ring's being ever found among my goods, from whose hands I received it, in which case alone it would be necessary that I should declare your name."





" I am in very great want of the money, Mr. Jones," said Lady Howard, " or I could not bring myself to disclose my name ; but first tell me what is the highest sum you would advance on that jewel?"

Mr. Jones again examined the stone.

" Yes," he said, " it is the stone; undoubtedly it is ;" then laying his fore finger on his lip, and considering for a moment in silence, he answered, " Of course, Madam, you must not expect the full value to be lent on it. If you do not esteem it highly, I should advise your selling this ring to some jeweller, I speak disinterestedly ; he will give you a much larger amount than I can give you. One hundred pounds is the highest price at which you will be able to pawn \t, and the utmost I would advance."





"One hundred pounds,"thought Lady Howard, " wouldmakeme comfortable for a length of time. One hundred pounds to the houseless and destitute seems a large sum; to the great and rich, those who have never known penury, nothing."

Lady Howard replied, " Very well, Mr. Jones, I am willing to pawn it for that price; and to tell you "—(she hesitated)— What! humble herself before a stranger—tell her sin and her shame, and her poverty to the pawnbroker ! — "Or starve,"—sounded in her ears —and as the scarlet blush covered her face, she said, quickly gasping for breath, " That ring was purchased by Lord Vernon,—the Marquis of Vernon,—more than twenty years ago, and he gave it to me;—is that sufficient, Sir?" she asked eagerly.





" Why, Madam, I should like to know your own name.'

" I was Lord Vernon's wife at the time when he gave me that ring. You will find his son's, Lord Stuart's name, and the date of his birth, engraved on the gold of the ring. I am now the late Lord Howard's widow, and very poor :" and the blush forsook her countenance and she turned deadly pale, for she felt sick at heart. i

The pawnbroker found the initials. " Yes," he said,—W. S. 18—, and the Marquis's coronet above. It is sufficient, Madam," he replied. I could, if necessary, refer to Lord Vernon for the truth of the statement. I will fetch you the money, and have a ticket made out immediately."





Mr. Jones took one of the candles with him, and left Lady Howard alone.

" And is it come to this ? Is the envied Laura Vernon,—the worshipped Lady Howard brought thus low ? Oh, Howard—-Howard ! — how could you leave me thus !—Me on whom you once lavished so much love—me on whom you were so prodigal of riches !"

Lady Howard had writhed under the humiliation she was compelled to endure before a pawnbroker; but the severest pang—that which had wounded her to the heart's core, was the knowledge that Lord Howard had proved he cared not for her, —that he had, to use a commonplace expression, but there is none which suits the meaning so well, grown tired of her,—that he had left her totally destitute. Yes, the man for whom she had forsaken her first husband had failed of being what she hoped he would have been, not only the lover of her youth and beauty, but the stay and the prop of her age. How had his passionate asseverations been fulfilled, of " though all the world should forsake you, yet would not I." But the bond between them was an unhallowed one,—it was rendered null and void.





Mr. Jones returned. Lady Howard received the money and the ticket, curtseyed, and prepared to quit the house oy the same entrance as that at which she had been admitted ; but the pawnbroker, contrary to his usual custom, said, " This way, Madam, if you please—this way ; that entrance is locked ; it is past the hour of admittance the private way; have the goodness to pass through the shop.

Lady Howard obeyed, she knew the reason of it, and bowed meekly to the order. It was Saturday night, the shop was filled by several women of the lower order—some who had come to pledge their clothing, or other goods, to obtain bread for the morrow's Sab





bath—others to redeem their decent garments, to wear on that sacred day.

How curious is the life of many! With how much pain and toil is it ordained for some portion of human beings to exist. A pawnbroker's shop is replete with melancholy. There some long-treasured token of love is deposited, perhaps never to be redeemed. There the drunkard sells his coat, to enable him to pass the Sunday in an alehouse ; and there the thief secretes the stolen property.

Lady Howard hurried out of this painful scene. The streets of London, at that hour of night, present a pitiable view of the idleness and depravity of many of its inhabitants ; and as Lady Howard passed these wretched objects, seeking sin and shame, some of them yet young, and new to vice, others hardened to their degradation, she drew a comparison, involuntarily, between their sinfulness and her own, and thought, what though exempt from open degradation, yet how much more was I to blame, than those made prostitutes for bread,— I, who had an indulgent husband, a child, a happy splendid home, and yet forsook all, for my unhallowed love!"





Lady Howard returned to her desolate lodgings that night with money—she was relieved from the terrors of staring want. For a time she might be at rest—she had wherewithal to give her food and shelter; but was she one jot less miserable when she laid her head down to endeavour to find rest in sleep? Was her conscience lightened of its heavy burthen? Was her heart less sore ? Was she less despised by herself or others? No. And still she was alone—alone in her misery. Oh that word—aloue; those who have endured its full sense of woe—those only can understand its meaning.





CHAPTER VIL



My task is done—my song hath ceased—ray theme Has died into an echo ; it is fit

The spell should break of this protracted dream. The torch shall be extinguished which hath lit

My midnight lamp—and what is writ, is writ,—

Would it were worthier ! but I am not now



That which I have been—and my visions flit

Less palpably before me—and the glow

Which in my spirit dwelt, is fluttering, faint and low.



Farewell! a word that must be, and hath been—

A sound which makes us linger ; yet—farewell!



Ye! who have traced the pilgrim to the scene Which is his last, if in your memories dwell

A thought which once was his, if on ye swell

A single recollection, not in vain



He moves his sandal shoon and scallop shell;

Farewell! with him alone may rest the pain,

If such there were—with you the moral of his strain."



Byron.



One afternoon, as Lady Howard was engaged in needlework, her mind entirely abstracted from





the scene around, and brooding over images of the past, the landlady entered with a letter for her, saying, the servant would return for an answer that evening.

The last months had passed in such a monotonous state of wretchedness, such a dead hopelessness and indifference to every thing in this life, that Lady Howard took the letter, and was going to cast it aside, when her eyes rested on the seal, bearing the Vernon arms. She started, and breaking it hastily, she scarcely knew why, read as follows :—

" Will you allow your child to become known to you ? Will you grant him the happiness of endeavouring, in as far as he may do so, to console you for those who are gone? I do not ask the same portion of your love, as was bestowed on those happy ones; but I crave for that affection, which I have never forfeited by any deed of my own. Since th





time that I discovered you were still in life, dearest mother, I have never ceased to long for some portion of your affection. I have prayed for you, I have felt for you. I was the friend of your Henry—my brother. Above all, I plead to be heard as your own offspring, your first-born. You have none now but me. You will not refuse me the happiness of receiving my offering of love, although it is not that which you most valued. There is yet one other who entreats you to listen to my pleadings, she is not wholly unknown to you, as Fanny Harcourt, the playfellow and friend of your lost ones: she is become my wife, and, as such, she joins her entreaties to mine, that you will not withhold your affection from us. We will be all we can to you, dearest mother. Let us meet to part no more in this world. I would not force myself into your presence, unbidden. I could not endure a cold reception.



i





" My dearest mother, believe that I am for ever your dutiful and affectionate son,

Vernon.

squar,e, Tuesday Evening.

Lady Howard read this letter with the tears blinding her eyes, and yet a mixed feeling of inexplicable, unamiable, but not unnatural sentiment of a different nature, blended with the softer sentiments it inspired. Why was the one she did not love, spared ? and those she did, taken away ? She murmured at the decree of Heaven.

" Poor Vernon !" she exclaimed. " Yes, you are my child. I feel a yearning toward you; but love you as I loved them, never !—it is impossible ! Yet this kindness on your part is far more than I deserve, and it must not be cast aside as worthless. I will receive you— will love you as much as I can love anything; and Fanny Harcourt, too,—she loved Henry."—





Once, the first dreadful interview over — Lord and Lady Vernon visited their unhappy relative daily. They did not leave one kind office undone, not a mark of respectful affection was wanting on their parts towards Lady Howard.

Lord Vernon's first and last waking thought was of his parent. He remembered only, that his was now the privilege of ministering to her comfort—that it was his blessed calling to make her latter days, days of comparative pleasantness and peace. His wish had been granted—his mother became an inmate in his family. Nor was Fanny Vernon—the Fanny Harcourt of former days, less busied about and attentive to Lady Howard than her son. There are many ties which make us love others besides the existing ones. There are things and circumstances gone by, which make us serve them with the servitude of the heart—and such was the case with Lady Vernon. Her motherin-law was endeared to her, not only because she was her husband's mother, but because she was the mother of her playfellows, Alice and Henry Talbot.





At last, Lady Howard was grateful for her children's kindness. She thanked them and said, she had not deserved their affection.

It was evident to Lady Vernon, that Lady Howard had exhausted all the powerful feelings of her heart; that with Lord Howard and his children, she had buried all deep-rooted and ardent love; that her only wish now was to rest by them in the tomb.

In Lady Howard's youth, in the days even" when she forsook the path of duty, and subsequently through all the years of humiliation and sorrow she had endured, religion had not altogether been a stranger to her. In her most trying hours, she had found refuge in prayer — she had sued for forgiveness — she had bowed down to the punishment of sin;





but now it seemed as if that consolation was denied her. A melancholy hardness had crept over all her feelings, and she avoided making any mention of her sorrows. She never would allude to her children or allow any one to do so in her presence ; she had succeeded in casing herself in adamant; she would sit for hours with her eyes fixed on the same page; then forgetting Lady Vernon's presence, she would clasp her hands suddenly together, and shake her head with that peculiar significance of inward grief which denote so much speechless misery;—at another, the low groan of a recollected moment of horror or of sorrow burst from her, and told more forcibly than words, of that anguish which has its own peculiar language.

And so her days went by. Thus they are passed by the wretched and the dying. No posture was easy to her; every gleam of sunhine rendered the invalid (for such.she was now become) too hot or too cold. The food which tempted the appetite yesterday, was distasteful to-day. The favourite exotic was placed before her; its sweet odour was now turned from, with disgust. Nothing could give pleasure or afford rest; and still Lady Howard seemed insensible to the only source of comfort; still she turned from the consolations of heavenly things; gradually her bodily strength forsook her, till at last she was confined to her bed. Yet no disease, properly so called, eat away her strength. It was the unseen hand that worked its sure slow work.





Lady Vernon tried to prepare her husband for his mother's death. She endeavoured to interpose a softening medium through which to view the decree of heaven, but he would not receive the warning; he could not endure to think that one so lately given, would be so abruptly snatched away. And he turned aside from his wife, displeased when she touched upon the subject.





The house to which Lord Vernon had removed his mother, at the time when he became acquainted with her miserable condition, was one of those villas which are so thickly studded on the banks of the Thames.

Beauchamp Villa was in the neighbourhood of Twickenham, that beautiful country, which is so fertile and so gentle in its sylvan scenery; that on a cursory glance, it seems an unfit residence for the sick and the dying. But there is a melancholy impresssed in the interior of the outwardly gay looking villas, which tells of the sad scenes that have taken place within them.

One almost might fancy, in their gloomy apartments, that one heard the moan of the sufferer and the careful footfall of the attendant; neither is the view from their windows calculated to dissipate such imaginations.

The velvet lawn is sometimes decorated with a splendid cedar or a luxuriant willow leading



i





down to the Thames. The myrtles and ilexes that grow in those mild sites to an unusual height in England, and remind those who have been in Italy of its never to be forgotten beauties,—all these beauties do not lessen the superstitious feeling of gloom which pervades those dwellings; but the persons who have sojourned in such a villa, witnessing the decay of those dear to them, will recognise the reflection of their own feelings at that time in this remark.

Lady Vernon now remained constantly with Lady Howard; she dreaded being a moment absent from her, lest she might possibly pass suddenly away; above all, lest she might express a wish for prayer; but during the last week of her existence, Lady Howard was nearly insensible.

If ever intercessory prayers could avail, those of her son and Lady Vernon, it is hoped, may have done so; but the fountain of her soul was dried up.





Lady Howard prayed not for herself, but she thanked her son for his kindness, and with those grateful thanks she must have mingled prayer, for she must have thought of the hand that guided Lord Stuart to love her and to take her to his home. Shortly after she relapsed into stupor and never spoke again. Her earthly woes were ended.

" Fanny dearest, come away," said Lord Vernon, as his wife bent over her corpse, to ascertain if she were indeed gone.

" You have done all for my sake, all for her own; and he now became the comforter in his turn—much as he himself needed comfort."

" Not one word of prayer," murmured Lady Vernon, and she shuddered convulsively. It was a terrible thought to both ; but justice and mercy are reconciled, and in that consideration, they found consolation.





One week after Lady Howard's decease,

her remains were deposited in church-.

yard among strangers' graves. Her son could not lay her beside the object of her unhallowed love; indeed, she had expressed no wish concerning the place of her interment.

It would have been a mockery to have laid her by his father; so she was buried in the land of strangers, far from all those with whom she lived or whom she had loved. What matters where Our bodies are laid when the spirit is gone 1 True; yet who shall say that it is not gratifying to the survivors, to show all respect to the loved and lost.

Since the days of Abraham, mankind have honoured their dead in sepulture. Lady Howard's remains were not followed by a pompous funeral, but they were followed by a dutiful though a forsaken child; she was wept by him and by his wife. He remembered not that she had left him—he remembered not that she had other children whom she loved far better than himself—he mourned her loss with unqualified grief—his heart ached at the thought of all she had endured—and not one reference to the past—not one expression of reproach or blame ever came from his lips.





When some person in Hyde Park, leaning over the door of the carriage of the courted beauty of the day, announced, to those within, " So Lady Howard is dead, Vernon's mother;" the persons who heard the news (as such intelligence is called) asked, " What! is she dead ? She has resided with her son of late, has she not ? Monstrous good-natured in him !"

" Yes, ever since that madman, her last husband, Howard, shot himself."

" How rapidly in succession all that family have gone off,—quite like Tom Thumb, one after the other. First, there was poor foolish Talbot, a maudlin sort of fellow, went moping about with a face as long as my arm, because, forsooth, his mother was divorced; and then that pretty creature Alice,—she was the next that died,—it was consumption carried them off. The father, you know, shot himself;—and last of all, Lady Howard."





" She was a beautiful woman," said an elderly man, who remembered her as Laura de Lacy. " How can I get at the present man's—the

miser's vote for shire, Willoughby 1 You,

who know every thing, tell me that." " I cannot," was the reply. Mr. Willoughby remembered, at that moment, the drive in his cab seven years ago, in that same scene—the young man was dead,—he verging to age was left. Mr. Willoughby remembered Lord Talbot's anger, when he alluded to his mother's disgrace, — he remembered his admiration of Fanny Harcourt,—the same pantomime was before him;—now he himself was still one of the old beaux of the drive,—he still sat in judgment on the women, and still led the





same trivial life,—but Mr. Willoughby was not altogether a bad-hearted man, and he felt sorry at the moment, as he heard these idle, harsh remarks on the Howard family.

For a few moments—a very few, he was reflective. The gay, facetious Willoughby thought upon the vanity and the briefness of life; but the famous gastronome of his time, dissipated such unusual thoughts, by inviting him to dine with him that day.

Mr. Willoughby turned round with a vivacity of expression, and answered, " Yes," and looked forward to the hour of eight with eager expectation.

The Howards, and their unhappy history, was forgotten. Each went his way out of Hyde Park,—that scene where once Laura de Lacy had attracted every eye, — where the courted Lady Vernon had commanded atten tion,—where the divorced Lady Howard had drawn down remarks,—where the poor heart

VOL. II. M





broken widow hurried along on her way to the pawnbroker's, and where now her death was thus unfeelingly announced.

It mattered not to the Howards what was said of them,—they were all dead,—every trace of their existence was done away. The miser had sold Howard House,—the roof under which they lived< and suffered. He had shut up the greater part of Howard Castle, living only in two rooms.

Beauchamp Villa was, soon after Lady Howard's death, pulled down to make room for the erection of a brewhouse. The cedar, with one or two myrtles and ilexes, alone remain by which its site can be remembered.

Never were the words of Scripture more fearfully, more fully realized than in the complete uprooting of the Howard family. Well might those terrific words be applied to them, and to their dwelling, " The place thereof shall know it no more."





When Lady Margaret and Colonel Leicester returned, to England, after many years of absence, they still remembered, they still mourned those whom the world had long since committed to oblivion.

Lady Margaret lived on to extreme old age— always pursued by remorse and sorrow, as she recalled Lady Alice's words to mind—" Too late; dearest mama, too late:" and when it was too late, Lady Margaret regretted that unbending prejudice which had made her sacrifice her son's happiness, and that of the Howards : but still she laid the flattering unction to her soul that she had acted right, and that Miss Agar had been the instrument of evil.

Colonel Leicester, who never perhaps loved Lady Alice as she deserved, nevertheless appreciated her virtues, and lamented her fate with a discrimination of the first, and a deep sense of the latter, which precluded him from ever forming another attachment.





Thus were Lady Margaret's hopes of family honours cut off, and her old age was sterile and joyless.

Let it not be imagined that-this history is a fiction, or an exaggerated description of the consequences which accrued from Lady Howard's crime. The events here recorded, cannot be entirely effaced from the remembrance of the present generation.

Lady Howard's history affords a fearful example to those whose affections, like hers, are unhallowed,—to those who stand on the brink of the precipice. Oh ! may all such take warning from this melancholy statement; but who ever profited by the experience of others ?

How weak and inadequate our own strength is to uphold us in the path of duty, — how terrible are the consequences of the guilty joy of those who buy it at the price of virtue,—how sure the punishment even in this world,—how





far short such attachments fall of giving the felicity which they promise; and that years of penitent humiliation, of sorrow and of trial, would be insufficient to atone for sin, was there not a higher power, willing and able to save even to the uttermost.



THE END.
