TALES OF A TOURIST.



INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.

But as he fondly snatch'd the wreath of fame,

The spectre, Poverty, unnerv'd his frame.

Cold was her grasp, a withering scowl she wore;

And Hope's soft energies were felt no more.



Pleasures of Memory.

L HE bells of the village of Llanvair, in Merionethshire, had been ringing from early morning; the villagers were dressed in their holiday clothes, and preparations for old English hospitality, on the most festive and extensive plan, were seen at the park and castle, for the double purpose of eelebrating the coming of age of its lovely mistress, and her recent marriage Vol. i. B with with sir Herbert Montgomery. Great was the joy with which her arrival was anticipated; for though it was many years since she had been permitted to visit her native domains, the numerous objects of her bounty remembered well the fascinating manners and benevolent mind of their young and lovely lady. Her equipage was now distinguished winding down the steep descent, that, between two rugged mountains, turned towards the ancient and picturesquely-situated Castle of Llanvair. Instantly three distinct shouts of welcome and heartfelt triumph resounded through hill and valley. The multitude pressed forward to meet her, while the ancient harper of the castle, Cerdic ap Howytl, ij^ntained big station at the gate, to welcome i& mistness in the genuine strains of Cambro-.- British melody. The fair and blushing bride, however gratified, was t»o io.uch oppressed by the ardent and turnup tuous zeal of her faithful- dependants not to see-k, as soop as possjbjte, the- privacy of -'- *'' r • . i" fter





her own apartment. Leaving it therefore to sir Herbert to express the sense she entertained of their enthusiastic attachment, she withdrew from the general gaze, to pour forth, in strains to which her young and innocent heart was early accustomed, her gratitude to the Giver of all good, who had thus crowned her days with prosperity, and blessed them with the husband of her choice.

Rosamond countess of Llanvair possessed that high rank, and the estates annexed to it, by inheritance, and, though apparently distinguished by the possession of every worldly blessing, had been made acquainted with that best tutor, Adversity, and had many a domestic difficulty to struggle with, before she arrived at that haven of peace and rest which an union with one of the best and most amiable of beings seemed to promise her.

Having early lost her parents, and being

left under the guardianship of a relative of

supposed integrity, the lovely orphan dis

B 2 tinguished





tinguished sir Herbert Montgomery, for his personal merit, above all the numerous pretenders to her hand; but unexpected difficulties opposed her choice, and the lovers were obliged to wait till the law declared the young countess at liberty to act for herself, before they could seal for ever the union of their hearts. That blissful period was at length arrived. Conscious of the purity and disinterestedness of his attachment, sir Herbert Montgomery, though lady Llanvair's inferior in rank and fortune, did not experience that repugnance to owe an obligation to the hand of Love, which, if it sometimes marks an independent spirit, proceeds as often from a proud and ungrateful heart; while the lovely countess, when surveying the varied riches of her wide domain, and the happy countenances of the dependants on her bounty, would softly sigh—" Pardon, oh Heaven! the error of a heart attached too fondly, if, while thus chosen by thy favour to be the instrument of fe





licity to hundreds, still my greatest joy in riches is, that they enable me to repair the injustice of fortune to the man I love!"

The neighbourhood of the Castle of Llanvair abounded with beautiful plantations; and the countess, from childhood, an "enthusiast of the woods," delighted in enjoying, with Herbert, the refreshing solitude of those shades, where every object tends to tranquillize the sense and soothe the mind; and where the dancing, chequered light—the different, yet blended tints of green—nay, the very freshness and sweetness of the air itself, as it gently agitates the leaves, impart a sense of gladness and enjoyment to existence peculiar to those woodland scenes alone.

"Now labyrinths, which but themselves can pierce,

Methinks conduct them to some pleasant ground,

Where welcome hills shut out the universe,

And pines their lawny walk encompass round;

There, if a pause delicious converse found,

Twas but when o'er each heart the idea stole

(Perchance a while in joy's oblivion drown'd),

That, come what may, while life's glad pulses roll,

Indissolubly thus should soul be knit to soul."



B 8 Perhaps





Perhaps it was in the indulgence of contemplations like these, that Herbert and his countess had unconsciously penetrated deeper into the recesses of the forest than was their custom, when his watchful tenderness was alarmed by an appearance of blackness and heaviness in the air, that threatened thunder. Solicitous for the safety of his Rosamond, sir Herbert bitterly reproached himself for the imprudence that exposed her tender frame to the possibility of such a danger. Shelter he despaired of obtaining; and to retrace their steps back to the mansion before the storm began, seemed impossible.

In the midst of this distress, how great was his relief, on proceeding a few steps further, to discover a hut, rudely constructed indeed, but such as would fully answer the purpose of sheltering his beloved bride from the impending storm! He knocked at the door of this woodman's hut, as he naturally concluded it to be, but received no answer. Growing impa





tient, and the danger increasing, the baronet made little difficulty to lift the humble wicket, and discovered a clean, though rustic apartment, which was empty, although there were evident signs of its having been recently inhabited. Herbert pressed his bride to dry her clothes, which he Feared were already penetrated by the wet, at the blaze of a cheerful fire, piled up of wood; and when the lovely countess felt eased of her transient alarm, and safe from the impending storm, she began rallying her husband on hi6 burglary, although the tremulous solicitude he had displayed was, in fact, highly gratifying to her feelings.-—" I do not think it is a common woodhian you have to deal with," she said, glartcihg her eye arotihd the rustic, but singulftry-furnished apartment. "Look what a Variety of materials for employment are here !-—a fowling-piece, a basket of differently formed and coloured flies for angling, a German flute, and books in English; French, Italian—Mercy, HerB 4 bert! bert! this woodman is a wizard! for here is a book I can make nothing of, though you can probably tell me whether it is written in Hebrew or Greek."





In making out the inventory of this curious apartment, the countess did not omit to notice a small round table, surcharged with a pile of manuscripts, that reached to such a height as might have scared the experienced eye of the most intrepid bookseller, so that it was no wonder they excited the astonishment of a young and fashionable lady.

"I wish the hermit would return before we set out," observed the countess, "that we might implore his forgiveness, and at the same time get a peep at him."

Vain however were her wishes. The storm passed over, without that violence they had apprehended; and Herbert became anxious to conduct.her back in safety to the Castle of Llanvair. The countess was obliged to content herself with taking a slight minute of the singular habitation bitation that had afforded her shelter, and promising herself to visit it again.





This hut or cottage consisted of only two apartments: the one, a sleeping-room; the other, which the countess and sir Herbert had occupied, and which might be said to answer the double purpose of an eating-room and a study, was also the most airy and spacious.

During the day, the woodman's hut ran strangely in the imagination of the youthful countess; and at night, when her women were undressing her, she could not forbear making it the subject of her discourse.

"As sure as I live," said Gyneth ap Gryflydd, "it belongs to the wild melancholy man of the mountains."

"The man of the mountains! whom do you mean?" said the lovely countess, whose mind was quite in the vein for a romantic adventure.

"Why, my lady, there came here, about

a twelvemonth agone, a mild, melancholy

B 5 sort sort of a young man, but very much the air of a gentleman; for I can know a gentleman any day from a scrub, let his clothes be ever so poor. So, ma'am, this gentleman, that was so poor, built himself a sort of a hut, by the side of the mountain that sweeps down towards the castle; and neighbours said as how he didn't live as other folks do, but that he wrote buiks, and printed them. However that might be, people went to see him in his house by the mountain, and he could have no peace, ma'am, in rambling by the springs and valleys, as he liked to do, for they made a sort of cake-house of it, ma'am. So* one fine day, he set fire to bis house by the side of the mountain, and wandered into the woods, and got leave to build himself a small hut there, and never is seen but when he goes to the market, town for provisions; and' whether he writes buiks, or cuts wood now, 1 can't rightly tell."





Such an account did not fail to excite

the





the curiosity of the countess; and accompanied by sir Herbert, she took the earliest opportunity of invading the solitude of the mysterious woodman. He was just returning homeward with a bundle of wood sufficient for fuel for his fire, and testified some surprise at seeing his hut occupied by two strangers, whose appearance evidently denoted them to be of a superior class of life; but when the parties met, an exclamation of recognition, on the part of the countess, was followed by a respectful salutation from the solitary owner of the hut, and the words, " Trevallyn!" " Lady Lfanvair!" burst simultaneously from the lips of each. The countess, assuming the privilege of her sex, began an apology for her intrusion, and informed the recluse of the adventure that had brought her, on another day, td his cottage in his absence.—"' We owe you hospitality," she said, "although ydttM&efeised it unconsciously; and you B 6 must must inform us, in return, how we can serve you."'





This was said with a frank amenity, that at once melted away the fastidiousness and reserve with which the poor recluse in general armed himself. He could not mistake the sincerity and sweetness that beamed from the fair Rosamond's eyes.— "This is unlike the world, lovely countes!" he said; " but your looks are an earnest of a mind that cannot be misunderstood. Few blessed with rank and affluence would stoop to acknowledge an acquaintance sunk in the vale of wretchedness, as I am." '-

"Ever the same Trevallyn," replied the countess, with energy, " whether caressed and flattered by the great, or courting the muse in solitude and silence! A gentleman, and therefore entitled to respect—a man of talents, and therefore deserving of, encouragement." , . ,.

"And ever the same matchless Rosamond," mond," returned Trevallyn, with enthusiasm, " whether dignifying retirement, or gracing the circles of a court, the friend —the woman in ten thousand, before whom misfortune need not blush, if not incurred by guilt!"





"Come, this is idle," replied the countess; ",I spoke not to hear my own praises, but to learn what uncommon accident has transformed the elegant, accomplished Trevallyn into a hermit of the woods. Sir Herbert is known to you as well as myself; therefore I need not add that he feels in your concerns an equal interest."

"My story is singular, I trust," resumed the benevolent Trevallyn; " for, though few men are unacquainted with disappointment, few also have experienced it in the severe extreme that I have. Five years are scarcely gone by, since lady Llanvair remembers me distinguished by the most eminent Statesman of the age. Flushed with youth, gaiety, and the conscious possession of talent, the world seemed ed to open to me a boundless prospect of delight: he died, and with his death closed my prospect of political advancement. To have been honoured with the confidence of the earl was to be obnoxious to his successor.





"At that juncture an advantageous offer to travel presented itself; I eagerly embraced it, visited the principal courts of Europe, and, on my return, hastened to avail myself of my extended knowledge of men and manners, by communicating the result of my observations to the public. My work was at first most favourably re^ ceived; but an unexpected blow levelled all my hopes to the earth. Ridicule overtook my labours; those who had never moved in the circles in which I had been received, nor seen the relics of antiquity which I had carefully investigated, boldly questioned the veracity of my descriptions,' and the accuracy of my details. A witty but unfaithful parody completed the rum-of my literary reputation, and the TotneiST'

and





and his labours were condemned to oblivion or to scorn, which, to the generous mind, is more fatal still.

"I had contracted debts while abroad, for the payment of which I had relied on the success of my literary undertakings. Disappointed in tbis, I found, after rigourously discharging the demands: of my creditors, I had not money left to support me in what the world calls the style of a gentleman, and I retired to this solitude. The curiosity I at first excited obliged me to shift my abode. Some vague and romantic associations—some reminiscences of the elegance and splendour I had abjured for ever, induced me to fix myself in the vicinity of the countess of Llanvair. I obtained permission to construct this hut of two apartments. Here, confining my wants to the bare necessaries of life, and my pleasures to those studies which my scanty means still left me the power of pursuing, I trusted to be able to still the tumults of disappointed, but honourable able ambition; and not seeing my misery reflected from the altered eyes of men, to cheat myself out of the consciousness of its existence, I beguiled the time by the composition of works of fancy. I called to mind the scenes that I had witnessed, and the legends I had collected, either abroad or in my own country, to which it was possible to give the animated, though chaste colouring of moral romance. They were all that remained to me





'Of love that was tender,

And yet could decay;

Of visions, whose splendour



Time wither'd away.'

Yet they were much—yes," continued Trevallyn, with rising enthusiasm, " the cultivation of literature is its own ' exceeding great reward.'

* ' Let the man of genius love his muse, and his muie shall reward him with sweet sensations, with pictures and images of beautiful nature, and with a noble genero. sity of spirit, which can look down with pity or indifference on patrons, who have often as little sense to understand, as liberality to reward him." • Knox.

Hearing





Hearing our tourist quote verse and prose alternately at this rate, the fair countess would certainly have concluded he was mad, as Mrs. Gyneth had darkly hinted, but for the serious and sad coherence of the story he had previously related. This excited in her benevolent mind an ardent wish to serve him, and she demanded, with an air of the most flattering interest, the subject and scene of Trevallyn's tales.

"I have as yet completed only two," he replied; " the scene of the first of which is laid in Ireland, and the second is an English story; but I have a Spanish, a French, and a German novel seething in my brain; or, to vary the metaphor, each is now like the statue, said, by some fanciful theorist, to exist in the marble block, and only waits my clearing-chisel to start into existence."

"Ere you call them forth," replied the countess, gaily, " I wish you would write my history, and



'Quest,





'Questi che m:ii da me non fi;t diviso."

As she spoke, she turned her dovelike eyes on Herbert, with the chastened rapture of a blessed and virtuous bride.—" We have experienced difficulties that would make no contemptible figure in romance! Had I had as many suitors as Penelope, my guardian would never have been brought to yield his approbation to any of them: but take your own time; I am not ambitious of acting the heroine.—To return to your affairs. I am impatient that your tales should see the light; Suppose you call them Tales Of A Tourist?" .

"With all my heart, lovely counted, although one of the objects of the first of my tales is to expose the pretensions of the most absurd of the brotherhood."

Lady Llanvair resumed-—" I mean to write to our trusty and well-beloved counsellor, the duchess of duchesses. Yori are not become such a rustic, Mr- Trevallyn, as not to know who that lady, preeminent for friendliness and taste, must

be;





be; and we will join forces, and maintain against all gainsayers, that the Tales Of A Tourist deserve a reading. You may then publish without dread of satire.— Ah, Trevallyn!" pursued the countess, after interrupting herself, " I know what that flushed brow and indignant look would say< What! shall I owe my safety or success to patronage, and female patronage too! And why not? The highest rank requires at court some introduction; and would you present yourself, unpatronized, unintroduced, at the awful court of criticism? For a work of fancy, a lady is a better protector than a professor—a coronet, a more persuasive recommendation than a doctor's cap. In exchange for our more dazzling triumphs in days of yore, 'ladies bright' are allowed to wield the sceptre of fashion over the fairy regions of light literature: we no longer award the prize to the victor in the ring; but we adjust the merits of you ' writers of Utopia;' and since we so often bestow lustre on a

name, name, we trust you will, on this occasion, allow us to receive credit from yours."





Trevallyn could not remain inflexible to offers of service so kindly and gracefully made. He promised the countess to consider of her proposal; and the recluse and his noble guests parted mutually pleased and interested with each other.

"How every new quality you unfold, my Rosamond, delights me!" sir Herbert exclaimed. "It is thus female influence should indeed be exerted. When you boast the privilege of rank and fashion to shield the oppressed, and defend merit insulted, it is then we cheerfully acknowledge its power, and subscribe to the assertion, ' that there is no friendliness like the friendliness of a warmhearted and generous woman."

"Oh, Herbert!" said the countess, while she listened, with moistened eyes, to a beloved husband's praises, "what a usurper is that passion which possesses me i for I fear that my strongest incitement ment to good actions is the hope of your applause."





The interest the countess expressed for Trevallyn did not evaporate in words: she felt sincerely for the unmerited distresses of an ingenious man, whom she had known in the brilliant circles of fashion, and who, though gay, openhearted, and sanguine, had never been immoral or ill-conducted.

By degrees the hospitable owners of the Castle of Llanvair drew the solitary recluse from his cell, while the ingenious delicacy of the countess discovered, with the art an amiable woman only possesses, the means, without wounding his jealous love of independence, to add various comforts to his solitary abode.

Trevallyn at length produced his manuscript ready for publication; it was entitled, " Tales Of A Tourist," and, at the suggestion of the lovely countess, had undergone some trifling alterations and amendments. In presenting it, he addressed ed her a few words, in which he spoke the peculiarities of a mind a little shaken from its balance by misfortune.—" I have obeyed you," he said—" by your desire I again go forth to face the severity of the world, to dare the mildew of neglect, or the chilling gales of criticism. May my present venture be successful! may that public I have tried to please, without corrupting, accord a smile of approbation to my labours! If so, I may produce a sequel to them, more animated and worthy of their notice—if not, it is the last they shall ever hear of the unfortunate Trevallyn."





THE OUTLAW.



To lascerai ogni cosa diletta

Più caramente: e questo e quello strale

Che l'arco dell' esilio pria saetta

Tn proverai.



DANTE—.Paradiso.





THE OUTLAW.



CHAPTER I.



Who seeks the better land? The wretched one

Who has no hope—to whom all change is gain—

He seeks the better land. Southey's Madoc.



X OWARDS the close of a summer evening, in the year 1814, two travellers of an unusual description arrived at the inn of a small village in the county of Limerick. The elder gentleman had scarcely alighted from his chaise, when he inquired the distance from Meadowscourt, the seat of sir Charles Southwell, a baronet of large property in the neighbourhood. Having procured the necessary information and a messenger, he called for pen, Vol. i. c ink, ink, and paper, and in a few minutes produced the following billet:—





"Mr. Pendennis presents his compliments to sir Charles and lady Louisa Southwell, and begs to inform them that he is arrived, after a most interesting and delightful tour, at the King's Arms, Glenartrey; but before he has the gratification of paying his personal respects at Meadowscourt, thinks it right to apprise them that a gentleman is his companion, whom he would not presume to introduce without previous, permission, as he might not prove so agreeable as Mr. Pendennis tCLsi* Charles and lady Louisa Southwell."



Now it happened that this curious note was delivered at the moment the fashionafele party assembled at Meadowscourt wane.ate the wry acme of ennui, apd ready tf> welcome any novelty which promised ..'. :i -> to to rescue them from this calamitous condition. Sir Charles Southwell looked in; the eyes of his daughter, and of Miss Dora O'Reilly, a good-humoured Irish girl of forty, whose business, pro tempore, it was to keep Miss Southwell in spirits. He read in both the liveliest satisfaction at the anticipation of a break in the circle.— "Bravo, Pendennis!" he exclaimed; " asr original as ever!"





"Do, lady Louisa," cried Miss O'Reilly, eagerly, "let us have the 'disagreeable gentleman;' he may prove a pleasant addition to the party."

Her ladyship, who seemed the only person indifferent to the event, having dispatched the expected invitation, the two young ladies attacked sir Charles Southwell at once with the important question —" Who is Mr. Pendennis?"

"One of that valuable class of men," he

replied, " who heroically devote their lives

to the united miseries of an author and a

special messenger, that no part of his ma

c 2 jesty's jesty's dominions may remain unvisited or undescribed—a tourist, in short, with whom lady Louisa, in one of her ' angel visits' to London, renewed an acquaintance of long standing. Her ladyship was pleased to request, that if ever Mr. Pendennis honoured Ireland with his particular notice, he would not forget in what part of the island Meadowscourt was situated. The fatal hour is come; and, much as I detest notoriety, I already see my name embalmed in a well-turned period, commemorative of the ' munificence, patriotism, and elegant hospitality, of sir Charles Southwell, baronet, of Meadowscourt, county of Limerick."





As the moment approached, when the travellers might be expected, the ladies could not forbear anticipating what might be their probable appearance.—" Pendennis!" said Miss Southwell, with an air of recollection; "is not that the man lady Clancarras met in the Isle of Staffa, and whom she nicknamed,' Red Roquelaure,' ,"-',.' « j from from an enormous scarlet boat-cloak which he had very nearly been drowned in?"





'' I long to see his ' disagreeable companion," added Miss O'Reilly. "Men almost always praise and dispraise one another in an inverse ratio to their merits."

"Order, order, Miss Dora O'Reilly!" cried sir Charles; "I protest I hear somebody coming."

By this time the guests were on the stairs.—" Now don't, for your life, talk of embalming and tourists," whispered Miss Southwell.

''- And not a word more," said Miss O'Reilly, "about the ' red roquelaure."

The folding-doors flew open.—" Mr. Pendennis and Mr. Montfort" were announced. At sight of the former gentleman, the two ladies felt all their inclination to tittering return. Mr. Pendennis's features, coarse and irregular, were intersected in every direction by the deep seams and scars of the smallpox, which cruel disorder had hardly spared his eyes, that c 3 glimmered,





glimmered, like two red sparks, in then* sunken sockets. His gaunt and bony -figure was enveloped in the identical red roquelaure, or wide wrapping cloak, of which lady Clancarras had made such honourable mention; and, as he put aside its ample folds, both his pockets were discovered to be stuffed with bundles of papers. An ill-combed wig, half pushed off his head by a crop of grizzled hair beginning to grow under dt, completed the igrotesqueness of his appearance. His companion, Mr. Montfort, of whom we shafl speak more hereafter, was, in his person and address, every thing that was elegant and gentlemanlike. Mr. Pendennis introduced him a6 a gentleman, to whose ingenuity and research he bad been much indebted since they had travelled together, and whose graphic talents promised to enrich his forthcoming work upon Ireland with the most beautiful features of Ibhe scenery they had passed through. Mr. Pendennis and Mr. Montfort had





first met in the Tyrol, and after pursuing their journey through Switzerland, and along part of the Rhine, had liked each other's company so well, that they agreed to visit Ireland together. Lady Louisa Southwell, who had herself travelled in the Tyrolese, addressed to our travellers, with her accustomed urbanity, some observations respecting the history and character of the country and its inhabitants. Mr. Montfort's replies completed the favourable impression his appearance had begun; while the countenance of Pendennis, notwithstanding his personal disadvantages, brightened into good-humour and intelligence the moment he began to speak. The conversation was kept up, with unabated spirit, till the summons to supper, which soon took place, as, in the country, sir Charles and lady Louisa still adhered to this somewhat-antiquated custom. Pendennis, by the manner in which he did honour to the feast, did not seem to consider it as a custom " more honoured in the breach than the observance." One unlucky retrospection appeared to give more pain than pleasure. After taking wine with lady Louisa and Miss Southwell, our tourist asked her ladyship's permission to propose a toast, with which, he said, it was his custom to begin or close every repast.—" I mean," he added, with solemnity, "The memory of my first patron, the excellent earl of Desborough."





At the mention of her father, tears rushed into the eyes of lady Louisa, and the venerable parent, who had closed his life full of years and honours, seemed still mourned by his daughter with all the poignancy of unexpected and recent affliction. Sir Charles Southwell too appeared disturbed; but his emotion was of no ten-' der kind. Unconscious of the effect he had produced, Pendennis resumed—" In all my wanderings I have never forgot the kindness extended to my unprotected youth, from the hour that chance introduced





duced me to the worthiest and most generous of men. An accident, which at first appeared of a serious and alarming nature, was the cause of his lordship's becoming, for a few days, an inmate beneath the humble roof of my father, a curate at East Looe, in Cornwall. The earl found me a ' wild and wayward boy,' and thought he discovered the germ of talent in me. He distinguished me by his notice, and his goodwill did not end with the trifling service that called it forth. My kind patron enabled me to pursue the line of studies most congenial to my taste; and had I continued to be guided by his counsels, instead of an eccentric meteor on the horizon of literature, I might, by this time, have been a shining light in the church."

There was a mixture of feeling, absurdity, and latent vanity, in this profession of regret, which, at another time, lady Louisa would have found highly amusing. As it was, bitter recollections repressed the rising smile. Her ladyship tried to c 5 turn turn the conversation from lord Desborough, by addressing herself .mare particularly to Mr. Moutfort; but she started at the sound of his voice, and often, when she could do it without being observed, would fix her penetrating eyes on his face, as if trying to disentangle the idea6 that bis presence awakened in her mind. The dexterity of Miss O'Reilly at length succeeded in once more directing the discourse into a safe channel. She spoke to Pendennis of his tour—raised his curiosity, by describing the most interesting objects in the vicinity of Meadowscourt—and at length set him talking, or rather ror maneing, so pleasantly, about his forthcoming work, that sir Charles was really, entertained, and even lady Louisa was cheated into a smile.





When Pendennis's stock of marvellous stories nearly failed, Miss O'Reilly supplied him with new ones that were natives of the soil; and they thus continued, as if inspired by each other, till every dis- r> agreeable





agreeable reflection was banished by mirth. —" Now we have got Mr. Pendennis among us," this good-natured lady continued, " it will be a shame if we let him go away without seeing all the lions. In the first place, he should visit those beautiful falls on the Shannon, and the SalmonLeap: it is a pleasant morning's excursion, and I would undertake to be his cicerone, and name the gentlemen's seats as we went along."

This motion was received with unanimous consent, and the little circle broke up to take the repose requisite to enable them to prepare with alacrity for the projected party of pleasure.

The morrow brought an influx of visitors. The report that the celebrated Pendennis, the tourist, was at Meadowscourt, spread like wildfire, and every one was eager to hear and see the " foreign wonder." The morning was fine. Sir Charles Southwell's eight-oared barge, with its painted streamers, rested on the blue waves of the Shannon. The company at Meadowscourt, increased by the addition of several ladies and gentlemen of the country, and officers quartered in the neighbourhood, began, with the gaiety usual on such occasions, to make arrangements for their departure. All at once Pendennis found himself the centre of attraction to the fair, the witty, and the young. To be a stranger is, in itself, a powerful recommendation to the hospitable inhabitants of Erin; but when that stranger is possessed, or even is but supposed to be possessed, of talents, oh! how much warmer is the enthusiasm with which he is welcomed by those open hearts and elegant minds, which add the glow of native goodness to the graces of French vivacity, tempered by Athenian taste!





Such is the momentary power of fashion, that the ladies discovered Mr. Pendennis was not only an amazingly sensible, clever, pleasant creature, but that his features, though certainly plain, were by no : means means ugly—that he had a tall, elegant figure, a remarkably-genteel English air, and something uncommonly agreeable both in his eyes and voice. His red roquelaure, too, which he had assumed as a boat-cloak, to guard against cold on the water, came in for its share of commendation, and, though an unusual article of dress, was pronounced, upon the whole, to be both a convenient and becoming one. If the ladies were thus captivated by Pendennis, it is but justice to add, Pendennis was equally delighted with them. The easy vivacity and fascinating manners of the far-famed beauties of Limerick—the politeness, cheerfulness, and good sense of the gentlemen who were introduced to him, and who all seemed anxious to gratify the tourist with every information in theirpower—the general good-humour and hilarity which prevailed around, and the enchanting beauty of the scenery along which they passed—all conspired to fill him with the most exhilarating sensations.





He He had a little note-book in his hand, in which he occasionally set down his remarks as they occurred. Montfort also took out his pencil and sketch-book, but his attention was often distracted by the glowing lustre of the living beauties that surrounded him.





Our tourist, ever anxious to collect valuable and authentic information, was eagerly listening to a description given by Mr. Preston, a reverend gentleman on his left hand, of a very curious species of trout, said to be found in the Shannon, when his attention was called off by Miss O'Reilly requesting him to take notice of the remains of an ancient castellated mansion that gave a picturesque interest to a bend of the river..—" That ruined fortalice," she said, " once formed a part of the vast possessions of an ancestor of the Southwell family—Glesnagh, surnamed the Munificent. In the days of queen Elizabeth, he lived in all the barbarous splendour of a chieftain in those rude times."

"Glesnagh





"Glesnagh the Munificent! and why 'tihe Munificent,'Miss O'Reilly?" asked Pendennis, eager to set down an authentic anecdote of the Southwell family.

Miss O'Reilly was, for a moment, at a loss for a case in point, illustrative of the chieftain's generosity; but soon recollecting one, she said—" One of the English lord-deputies—lord Grey, or the earl of Sussex (I am not clear as to that point), lay dangerously ill at the Castle of Dublin, and was ordered by his physicians to taste nothing but mutton-broth made of sheep's heads. This reaching the ears of the liberal Glesnagh, he immediately ordered a whole flock of sheep to be slaughtered, and sent their heads up in cart-loads all the way to Dublin, that the viceregal kitchen might never want a supply."

This instance of Glesnagh's loyalty and liberality had nearly produced a laugh at Miss O'Reilly's expence, when a burst of fine voices, joining in that beautiful native melody, "The harp that once through

Tara's





Tara's halls," left her hearers no further leisure to be critical. Miss Southwell's voice, united to Montfort's, which was a rich tenor, sounded to uncommon advantage. The echoes of the river reverberated the strain; and it was in the midst of all this confusion that our author, taking up his pencil, began making memorandums of what he had seen and heard.

"What charming remark are you writing now, Mr. Pendennis?" said Mrs. Adair, a pretty young widow, who had angled successfully for some portion of the tourist's envied attention.

"I want to look in Warner and O'Halloran when I get home," Mr. Pendennis replied, " to see if they make any mention of' the liberal Glesnagh;' and in order to remember the names of those authors, I have composed, according to mnemonical rule, the following little easy, natural, well-imagined sentence:—' O Hal was low in cash; he therefore ran a race for a wager, and neglected to Warn others not

to to err_ as he had done.' The underlined monosyllabic words, you perceive, are chosen for their analogy in sound to the names I wish to commemorate; as, when united, you will find they make OHalloran and Warner (we don't mind a trifling difference in spelling). Any grotesque assimilation would be found wonderfully efficacious in fixing the syllables in the memory. We might suppose, for instance, that the Hal here mentioned, was Shakespeare's * Wild Prince,' who, being robbed in a frolic, by Falstaff, or some of his companions, might well be said to be low in cash. When you wish to think of a name, you must keep the mnemonical symbol steadily in mind; then, for the date of a transaction, the





technical word"

"Oh, botheration!" interrupted Miss O'Reilly, burlesquing, as she often did, for the entertainment of the company, her own inaptitude for these refinements, "I

had



r





had rather by half take the trouble of remembering the original subject."

"Miss O'Reilly," said Pendennis, with solemnity, "I must make you a convert to the utility of my system. Once habituated to localize your ideas, nothing is more simple and easy. Imagine this barge, par exemple, a room; then, having transformed it into a room, divide the floor, walls, and ceiling, into fifty-four compartments; cover these compartments well with symbols or mental pictures.— What need I say more? The advantages --4E this plan were acknowledged so long ago as by the renowned sir Philip Sidney, in his ' Defence of Poesie;' but it was reserved for Peter Pendennis to reduce to a perfect system the invaluable Art of Memory!"

"Your talents had been far better employed in teaching us the ' art of forgetting," muttered the ' disagreeable gentleman;' but the gay party heard not the sound, and the exclamation that had burst,

unawares, unawares, from the soul of Montfort, was borne away on the rolling waves.





"Mr. Pendennis," said Miss O'Reilly, "you are now passing by one of the greatest curiosities in the province. That large white house, there, to your right, with showy verandas in front, and awkward wings, like a flying eagle; it is called Opium's Folly; built by the great tobacconist, sir F.elix Opium: all the rest of his appointments are on a par with this. When first he sported his new chariot, he bad painted, instead of arms, his own initials, ' F. O.' Felix Opium, in very conspicuous characters. It was afterwards changed, in consequence of an observation of his particular friend, counsellor MacCalembourg—' That it was a pity the worthy knight should absolutely announce himself on his equipage as half'a fool."

"Ha! ha!' F. O.' half a fool! very good—very true!" exclaimed Pendennis, analysing the four letters that composed

the





the word, and entering the anecdote in his book.

* Look, Mr. Montfort," said Miss Southwell: "that mansion situated on an eminence, embowered in trees, and gently sloping to the river's side, offers a subject worthy of your pencil: it is Mount Amaranth, the seat of Mr. Stratford Gore."

"The site is indeed romantic," replied Montfort. "In such a scene, one can hardly help fancying the inhabitants too must be interesting."

"There, I am sorry to say, you are mistaken. Mrs. Gore is a horrid creature."

"Oh, a horrid creature decidedly!" echoed Miss O'Brien, an intimate friend of Miss Southwell's—" goes to the Castle in dyed crapes and paste earrings."

"All her real diamonds," added Mrs. Adair, " she has divided between Mrs. Arthur Gore and her own tall daughter, Arethusa, to set off the native beauty of her piony cheeks, and full trimmings of scarlet geraniums."





"Miss Arethusa Gore and Miss Southwell," continued Miss O'Reilly, " used to be called the rose and the hollyhock, till Miss Gore, in a quarrel with her maid, sent her from top to bottom of the stairs, from which period she has obtained, by universal suffrage, the appellation of the Knock-me-down Beauty."

"The son, Mr. Arthur Gore," said captain Aimworth, " married an odd sort of person, did he not?"

"Yes," replied Mrs. Adair, who had herself vainly tried for the heir-apparent of Mount Amaranth. "That tall, foolish young man married, about three years ago, a young woman as tall and as foolish. Gawky and Mawkin they were named, when they first appeared in public together. Mrs. Arthur Gore was a dependant of some sort or other—quite an unpresentable person but for her musical talents -"

"Of which her husband understands about as much," interrupted sir Charles,.

"as





"as lady Louisa's gold fishes. When madame begins to play or sing, monsieur composes himself to sleep, which circumstance has latterly obtained for the somniferous husband, and his tuneful spouse, the more appropriate surnames of Jingle and Noddy."

"Mr. Pendennis," said lady Louisa, "I hope, in your sketches of character, you will not omit the commendable imr partiality with which we point out to the attention of the inquiring stranger, any little defeets. we may happen to perceive in our dear and particular friends."

The party were now arrived within the neighbourhood of the Falls. The barge was moored to a little wooded island, that commanded the finest view of this trulysfraking object. Beneath the shade of s»sne fine old trees our gay travellers spread their rural repast. Montfort called Miss Southwell's attention to the wild beauties that burst upon her sight. The impetuous waves- of the Shannon dashed, in tumultuous conflict, over the opposing rocks; then swept along, glittering in a thousand rainbow hues, while the foam whitened in the rays of the sun. At a distance, the peaceful anglers were casting their long lines, and added a living interest to the already-beautiful scene. The woods, the lawns, the hills around, lent the magic of their smiling and peaceful aspect, to contrast with the brown rocks covered with foaming spray. Miss Southwell had never been a worshipper of the charms of Nature; but she internally acknowledgedj that when taught to view them with a painter's eye, they were susceptible of some degree of interest.





¥ How fresh the foliage looks near this magnificent river!" Pendennis exclaimed. "I am fortunate in not being obliged to delay my tour till winter would have deprived the scene of its loveliest features."

"What is it Mr. Pendennis says?" inquired several female voices at once. "Do, for Heaven's sake! give us the sweet remark





mark dear Mr. Pendennis has just been making."

"Mr. Pendennis observes," said Miss O'Reilly, with great solemnity, " that trees are apt not to be so full of leaves in winter as in summer."

The observations of our tourist were suspended for a space by the necessity of helping himself to refreshments. While some light French wines were circulating around, he requested, in preference, a glass of cyder, saying, at the same time, with a smile, " I am still so much of an ancient Briton, that I should prefer a glass of old mead even to cyder or perry."

"What is it Mr. Pendennis says?" again demanded Mrs. Adair of Miss O'Reilly, who sat on one side of him. "What good thing was Mr. Pendennis saying just now?"

"Do tell me, Mrs. Adair," said Miss O'Brien, who was placed still further off, "what that wonderful clever creature was saying?"





"Will nobody tell me," cried Mr. Preston, putting up his ear-trumpet (for he was, unfortunately, at times, extremely deaf)—" will nobody tell me what it was Mr. Pendennis said last?"

Miss O'Reilly again took upon herself the office of speaker. Applying her mouth to the ear-trumpet of Mr. Preston, she called out, in a voice at which every one started—" Mr. Pendennis says, he prefers old mead, as a beverage, to either cyder or perry."

Flattered with the universal attention his most insignificant remarks excited, Pendennis thought it high time to assume somewhat of the traveller's importance. Wrapping himself up in his unfashionable cloak, or rather red roquelaure, he once more pulled his memorandum-book out of his pocket, and began to run his eye over its miscellaneous contents:—" Irish settlers — Pelasgi—Strongbonians — Breton laws—Bon mots—Charter schools— Vol. i. D Kilkenny Kilkenny theatricals—Bertram—Beautiful women—Beef and butter—Rotunda —Irish jig—Irish wolfdogs— Saltworks —Fisheries."





Pendennis paused.—" Now this, ere it appears before the public, must be digested into a well-connected narrative. Aye me! that public little knows under what a variety of delightful difficulties and enchanting interruptions some of these hasty notes were taken. By the way, Miss O'Reilly, are there any venerable remains of antiquity—any ruined abbeys or monasteries, in this neighbourhood, worth seeing?"

"There are the moaastery and abbey church of Kilmallock; then there is the abbey of Quin, reekoned one of the finest ruins in Ireland j hut that is in the county of Clare."

"No matter. Thank ye—thank ye, Miss O'Reilly."

Down went" tlie Abbey of Quin," with

a blank





a blank for the insertion of a future description. Our traveller then went on with the perusal of his notes:—" Druidical circles—Round towers—Parallel between the sacred circular dances of the Irish Druids, and the dancing Dervises of Tophana—Castle balls — Salmon-leaps— Masquerades —- Mendicity — Linen and woollen trade—Marino—Irish patriots— Trouts in the Shannon—Bog of Allen— Curragh of Kildare — Sheeps' heads — Poems of Ossian—Charity sermons—Ana

creon Moore"

The barge was unmoored—the party began to collect to return. During the whole course of the little voyage, Pendennis was treated with the same marked and flattering attention by every person persent; and before he had left the barge, he had formed engagements for every day in the succeeding week. All appeared equally desirous of his company, and emulous of pointing out to him whatever was worthy of cariosity in the neighbourhood.





He was, in fashionable phraseology, " the rage," and no party was thought pleasant or complete without our tourist.



CHAPTER II.



La fiert6 dans les manieres est le vice des sots; et la fierte du cceur la vertu des honnctes gens. Racine.

Part of the time spent by Pendennis at Meadowscourt was devoted to visiting the various useful establishments and charitable institutions in the neighbouring village of Glenartrey, planned and executed by lady Louisa Southwell. His admiration was called to a rising manufactory of ribbons, and another of printed calicoes. Her ladyship had also begun to patronise a very pretty manufacture of hats made from the willow. Many other useful or ornamental improvements were

projected, projected, or partly put in execution by lady Louisa; and the active and enterprising mind of one noble and truly-public-spirited woman was fast converting an insignificant village into a trading town of some extent and opulence.





"Sir Charles Southwell," observed Pendennis, " is most fortunate in being united to a lady, who, to the more frivolous pursuits supposed to be justified by her rank, prefers the satisfactory reflection of being a friend and benefactress to numerous and grateful dependants—a lady who thus actively co-operates in all his plans for the advantage of his tenantry!"

Engrossed, as usual, by the speech he was making, Pendennis did not perceive the slight movement of impatience that contracted lady Louisa's brow at the word co-operates. She had time to recover herself, and replied—" Yes, to do him justice, he is liberal in allowing me the command of money: in fact," she added, after a pause, " it is money well laid out. InD 3 stead stead of ruining sir Charles by my whims, as some well-meaning persons foretold, I have already almost doubled his estate, and may do more, if health, leisure, and liberty, are granted me."





During the course of their little tour, lady Louisa took occasion to inquire, with an appearance of the most friendly interest, into the present situation and future prospects of this once-favoured object of her father's notice. She found that, with the unsettled spirit he candidly ascribed to himself, poor Pendennis had embarked in too many undertakings to have had great success in any of them. He had been, by turns, the master of an academy, a writer for the stage, a lecturer on mnemonics, and a traveller. With abilities barely respectable, it was Pendennis's foible to aim at the reputation of universal talent. It was this unfortunate error that "found him poor at first, and kept him so." It was this that made him, instead of steadily adhering to one pursuit, boldly

enter enter upon a variety of schemes, which he wanted either patience or ability to conduct to a favourable issue. Pendennis had just concluded his little history, when he found himself in front of a newly-finished building, of simple and not inelegant architecture, which overlooked a delightful extent of prospect.'—" This," said lady Louisa, "is destined for an academy. Well may you smile at such an expression for a school at Glenartrey; it js however my ambition to furnish the means of instruction, not only to the poor, but that the gentry of the neighbourhood may not be obliged to send their children to a distance, during their earlier years, for the rudiments of education. This building was completed after a plan entirely my own; and if I could meet with some intelligent and well-informed man to conduct the institution-——"





Pendennis had let lady Louisa proceed

thus far, while he was engrossed alter

D 4 nately nately with the delightful objects that presented themselves to his eye and imagination. To gratify the former, there was the simple, yet graceful, Doric structure—its airy wings and commodious offices—the portico, light, elegant, and unpretending—the pediment, modestly designed—the yet-blank entablature, on which Fancy whispered would appear, to such advantage, "Pendennis's Latin and English Grammar-School"—while the more comprehensive advertisement might announce that mnemonics and various other branches of knowledge were also taught. Imagination then hurried him away to the interior. The lofty and commanding desk—the drudging and obedient usher— prizes— exhibitions—half-yearly theatricals—the Sunday dinner at Meadowscourt —the monthly visit of the lady patroness —and, perhaps, outweighing all these considerations, came the prospect of a comfortable retreat for his advancing years,





and and an exemption from the cares and anxieties of his present precarious and unsatisfactory mode of life.





Lady Louisa, an accurate and minute observer of human nature, watched all these emotions as they successively arose on the countenance of her auditor, and was not in the least surprised, though Pendennis thought she would have been so, when he broke forth into the following proposal—" If, madam, my poor abilities were supposed adequate to the conducting such an establishment, how happy should I consider myself in assisting to promote your ladyship's truly-enlightened views!"

"Mr. Pendennis ! that would be an advantage indeed! But how can I ask you to give up your present agreeable and profitable pursuits to"

"Oh, never think of that!" interrupted Pendennis, with a sincerity that had something almost ludicrous in its expression. "My last tour in Switzerland hardly brought me home; and though I have D 5 better





better hopes of the work I am at present engaged upon, it need not be the least obstacle to the other plan. I have visited every part of Ireland, of which I propose giving the description, and will now pledge myself to complete the literary part of the undertaking in the leisure moments snatched from more arduous duties. Besides imparting the rudiments of the English and Latin tongues, as originally designed by your ladyship, I can conscientiously undertake to give instructions in five more languages; xndetket, the French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, and High Dutch—to teach the admirable and inappreciable science of mnemonics, natural history, botany, mathematics, mechanics, and the whole theory of wheel-carriages.'* Lady Louisa laughed.—" No, no, Mr. Pendennis," she said, "we shall not tax your intellects so high. I feel truly gra«. tified, however, by your approbation of my plan: to-morrow we will talk more of it. At present (looking at her watch), it is time to return and see what those idle people at home are doing."





The party in the drawing-room consisted of sir Charles Southwell, indolently stretched upon a sofa, and caressing a monstrous Spanish dog, the only being present of whose existence he appeared to be sensible; Mr. Preston, the curate of Glenar* trey, who was reading a newspaper; and Mr. Kilmory (sir Charles's land-steward), looking over a large map of the estate. Miss Dora O'Reilly was installed at a lit-tie work-table, covered with shreds and clippings of many-coloured worsteds, with which she was making Frogmore Garlands, or, in other words, ornamental wreaths for concealed flower-vases. At another table sat Miss Southwell, with a number of her own drawings before her, which she was submitting to the inspection of Mr. Montfort, who, with an air half-admiring, half-respectful, leant over her chair, and administered criticism and compliment in most judicious and flatterD 6 ing ing proportions. At lady Louisa's entrance, Miss Southwell slightly changed her position, and looked a little embarrassed—Mr. Montfort not in the least so. Pendennis, full of the occurrences of the morning, turned all attention from the circumstance, by immediately dashing into the history of the projected academy at Glenartrey, and recounting to Montfort the new impressions with which his mind was filled and delighted. All his old enthusiasm for mnemonics, languages, and the drama, had revived; and so anxious was he to arrange the plan of a life that promised such gratification to his favourite passions, that he had already, in idea, allotted the distribution of every branch of instruction.—" I myself," he observed, "take the grammatical and philological department: you, my dear Montfort, may have no objection to give lessons in drawing, and the use of the maps and globes;





while, as for the dancing-master"

Pendennis stopped, checked in his career reer by the sudden, the almost-petrifying expression the countenance of his companion assumed.—" Excuse me, Mr. Pendennis," he coldly replied; "I agreed to second your literary views, as far as was in my power, by my talent in painting; but never, that I recollect, to be your usher in a school." . ."





Pendennis was struck dumb, while Miss Southwell and her friend looked at each other in silent surprise, on discovering that features, which, like his predecessor Guido's, might have served as the model for angels *, were, if possible, still better calculated for the conveyance of expressions of the stern arid terrible kind.

This circumstance led them to consider the extraordinary stranger with more attention than they had hitherto bestowed on him. There was something in the air,

manner, manner, and accent of Mr. Montfort, which irresistibly conveyed the opposite and contradictory impressions, that he was a foreigner, and a native of these islands. But the astonishing variety and play of his ever-interesting countenance Avas what most fixed and rivetted the observer. There might, by turns, be read the determined expression of one early accustomed to be placed in trying and difficult situations—the suavity of a courtier—the fire of a hero, and the sweetness and benevolence of a naturally-amiable disposition, which the world had a little, and but a little, perverted. It expressed still more; but it was only for those who were permitted to read his heart, to declare all it expressed; and though his manner, to those he wished to please, was flattering and attaching in the extreme, a coat of impenetrable reserve defended the secret sentiments of that heart from the scrutiny of all but the few who had been the objects jects of its earliest and most unsophisticated emotions.



* Guido the painter was so handsome that Louis Caracchi requested him to be his model when he had to paint an angel. Seward's Biographiana.





When the family were retired to rest, he was still the subject of conversation be* tween the young ladies.—" I vow and protest," Miss O'Reilly began, " I believe Mr. Montfort is something that is not right—that he is a hero in disguise, I mean, who comes storming our castle, like Mortimer, in the Wild Irish Girl. How short he answered Red Roquelaure's civil offer of making him his assistant at the new school at Glenartrey! Oh, you may depend upon it, if we don't lose sight of him entirely, we shall see something more of the disagreeable gentleman yet"

"A most oracular conclusion," replied Miss Southwell, gaily: " for my part," she continued, with assumed indifference, "I wish to know no more of him than what his manners and appearance at once aartnounce—that he is an elegant and accomplished young man, and a great relief, in the country, from the eternal wooden

faces faces of my father's two insuflerables, Mr. Preston and Mr. Kilmory. It would not be unamusing to turn the head of a man in whom taste seems the prevailing principle, and beauty still more a passion than a study."





"Have a care!" resumed Miss O'Reilly; and taking up a book* of eastern verses and tales, that lay on the toilet, she read, in a voice of mock solemnity, the following sentence:—" Love is no trifling play: the ball of Love is not to be stricken by the mace of Vanity."

"What do you mean, Miss O'Reilly?" said Miss Southwell, colouring. "I don't comprehend your allusion."

"It means, I suppose," returned her companion, carelessly, " that the Persians understood the game of billiards, and that Miss Southwell may not understand Mr. Montfort."

"Nay, now you hurt my pride," exclaimed Matilda, tears starting in her eyes.

"Do

• The Bahar Danush, or Garden of Knowledge.





"Do you think so meanly of me, as to imagine that a few days intercourse with a stranger, totally unknown and unrecom

mended, could inspire"

"My dear Matilda," interrupted Miss O'Reilly, " far be it from me to impute to Mr. Montfort presumptuous designs, or to accuse you of undue encouragement; still do not start at the voice of a friend, a few years older and more experienced than yourself. Hitherto you have been happy—placed safe from the reach of danger, by your rank, your fortune, and the counsels of a fond and watchful mother; that you may still continue so, I only repeat to you the caution you so often gave me last summer, in the course of our perilous, though delightful, rambles among the mountains of Wicklow Take care!"



CHAP





CHAPTER III.

Glittering in beauty and in innocence,

A radiant vision, in her joy she moves,

More like a poet's dream, or form divine,

Heaven's prototype of perfect womanhood,

So lovely is the presence, than a thing

Of earth or perishable elements.



Southett's Roderic.

While such was the prudent advice of Miss O'Reilly, what were the reflections of Montfort, the unconscious object of it? The occurrences of the last few weeks had been highly favourable to his designs and wishes; but now he had advanced to a certain point, he was at a loss how to proceed.—" At length I revisit you," he cried, "Ireland! land of my nativity—land to which every wish of this beating heart so long has pointed! But how do I visit you ?—how long to remain undiscovered

and and unknown? Will the distressing thought eternally pursue me, of what I ought to be, and what I am?"





While these emotions passed rapidly through the mind of Montfort, other interests occupied sir Charles and lady Louisa Southwell.—" When are we to send for Geraldine?" the baronet demanded. "Her education must, by this time, be pretty nearly finished."

"Certainly," answered her ladyship; "and had not circumstances occurred to prevent me, it was my intention, two years ago, to have withdrawn her from Mrs. Melmoth's. Last winter I hoped to have seen Matilda brilliantly established, and then"

"Oh, doubtless the pretensions of my poor little Geraldine ought not to clash with those of Miss Southwell—I comprehend that maternal policy."

"There was no occasion for it," replied lady Louisa, angrily colouring, "if Matilda had been less difficult in her choice."

"A la





"Ala bonne heure, lady Louisa—you were of opinion that proper pride, as you term it, had not been sufficiently instilled in Miss Southwell's mind, and have therefore, of late, infused rather more than the necessary quantity of that ingredient. If that pride should happen to retard her establishment in life, we must' forgive the gods.' Doubtless, on meeting with her equal, it will yield to a more interesting sentiment;" and sir Charles bowed himself out of the room, humming,

Si le Phénix echappe au pouvoir de tes feux,

C'est qu'il n'est point d'autre phcuix au moode;

lis s'aimeroient s'ils étoient deux *."-



"Unfeeling man!" cried lady Louisa Southwell, bursting into a fit of tears she had with difficulty restrained in his presence; "it is thus that, under a mask of foreign levity, you conceal your indifference for the wife, the daughter you have injured: yet are you not this moment

demanding



* Belleveau.





demanding a new sacrifice of me? How many fruitless ones have I already made! Was it not to shield your family honour —to spare your feelings {you, who have no consideration for the anguish of mine), that I originally consented to receive and foster one who may indeed prove a rival to my own daughter—to protect and

countenance the child of But away

with idle retrospections! The sacrifice to be acceptable must be complete;" and, in obedience to sir Charles's intimated wish, lady Louisa prepared to recall, from the banishment of an English " finishing school," Miss Geraldine Southwell.

Now, reader, I fancy you feel a presentiment, that in these magical letters is contained the name of my real heroine, and that Matilda Southwell has only figured on the stage as a prelude to the introduction of the principal personage. Matilda is too uninformed and too heartless to be the heroine. For though wealth, rank, and beauty, are sufficient to command





cing some loved resemblance; and, for a moment, the gay man of the world was betrayed into a burst of genuine feeling. Recovering himself, he presented her to Matilda Southwell, and taking a hand of each, with that graceful cordiality and earnestness which, whenever he chose to assume it, so well became him, recommended to them the cultivation of a mutual and sisterlike friendship.

The hurry of engagements in which Geraldine had been kept during her week's stay in Dublin, the fatigue incidental to her journey and voyage, and perhaps her affectionate eagerness to join those relatives, towards whom she experienced the liveliest gratitude, had all contributed to produce a slight degree of fever and nervous agitation, for which Mr. Mar, the family apothecary, pronounced perfect quiet the only restorative. Accounts, however, stole forth from Meadowscourt, of the charms and talents of the new visitant; and it was currently reported, that a fair stranger was arrived, who, on her first appearance, would distance Matilda Southwell's claims as a toast and a beauty for ever.





Penderinis, who had at once accepted lady Louisa's proposal of being master of the academy, had taken up his abode at Mount Parnassus, as, on account of its elevated site and classical destination, he chose to denominate the new schooL He was now busily employed publishing his proposals, and putting the house in order —two things that for the present suspended the work on Ireland he had promised the public. Montfort remained at Meadowscourt, employed in reducing some paintings in the gallery to a cabinet size, at the request of sir Charles Southwell. The demon of curiosity did not respect even the classical institution at Mount Parnassus, and Pendennis overwhelmed Montfort with questions respecting the invisible lady. Montfort spoke of her in general terms of the highest praise. He

Vol. L E said said she possessed talents of the first order; but this would not satisfy our inquisitive schoolmaster.—" Talented I doubt not; but is she intellectual? You understand me," putting his finger to his head —" talents are a drug nowadays; but give me a woman who can do something beyond the reach of the automaton-painter, pianiste, or chess-player."





Montfort blushed, and answered he believed Geraldine Southwell to be very intellectual; and then began rallying his whimsical acquaintance upon those two favourite epithets of his own invention, "talented" and " intellectual," with one or other of which he always associated the name of the person he wished to compliment.

At length the day arrived, "the great, the important day," in which Geraldine Southwell, blooming in youth, and beaming in renovated loveliness, was to be presented by lady Louisa to the admiration of the Limerick world. A numerous

party party dined at Meadowscourt, and, from the moment Geraldine entered the drawing-room, she fascinated all eyes to herself. The effect was magical, resistless, and no one could say whether it was most produced by the attractions of mind or person. If ever female beauty might be said to realize the glowing vision of a princess of romance, it was that of Geraldine Southwell. Her person was at once elegant and majestic: her features, her eyes, her complexion, all equally admirable; but it was in the thousand fascinations that dwelt in her looks, the witchery that attended her eloquent smiles and dimples, that the superiority of her charms consisted to the many beautiful women by whom she was surrounded. Then she was just come from England! and, in those talismanic words, carried a letter of recommendation, before which the pretensions of homebred beauty or talents were forced to hide the diminished head. Every circumstance of her dress, manners, and E 2 appearance, appearance, was scrutinized with the most minute and anxious attention by the Limerick belles. When the ladies reassembled in the drawing-room after dinner, their admiration became still more undisguised and general. As all could not appreciate her heart and mind, but every body could judge of her dress, this last article became the subject of the most extravagant eulogy. Her fair tormentors examined it piece by piece—requested the pattern of every separate article, and unanimously agreed that nothing of such exquisite shape, kind, or manufacture, could be purchased in the whole kingdom of Ireland.—" Dear, how pretty !"—" Ah, me! how elegant!" was echoed in every tone, from the clear notes of wondering admiration, to the subdued sounds of tender despair.—" What beautiful flowers! one never gets such roses in Ireland!"





"I am sorry to call in question your penetration," said Geraldine, smiling. M Those roses I bought, during my short

stay stay in Dublin, from a milliner in Damestreet."





"Miss Southwell," asked another lady,

"may I request the pattern of those sleeves ?"—" Pray tell me, Miss Southwell, ought white gloves to be trimmed except at a ball?"—" Oh, Miss Southwell, what inimitable work is on that veil!"

"For my part," said Miss O'Reilly, "I have fallen in love with the beautiful, antique design of that comb: never did I see gems so tastefully disposed."

"My dear Geraldine," said lady Louisa, who felt the increasing ridicule of this scene, " could you not favour these young ladies at once with the pattern of your pocket-handkerchief?"



-" That handkerchief



Did an Egyptian to my mother give,"

a voice exclaimed; and, advancing, with this quaint, if not applicable quotation, appeared the tourist, dramatist, mnemonician, and rhetorician, Mr. Peter Pendennis. This was the first day, for a considerE 3 able able time past, of his dining at Meadowscourt. Enchanted to find himself within the circle of beauty and fashion once more, he hurried his departure from the gentlemen to enjoy the society of the fair. Approaching a balcony that commanded a fine view of the grounds, and the farwinding Shannon, he exclaimed—" Thank Heaven, me voila! escaped from heat, wine, and county politics, to the charming picture of cultivated nature without, and the conversation of elegant, talented, highly-gifted females within! What an exchange! I am all impatience to avail myself of it, and to forget, in the pleasures that await me, the exile of the last three hours."





But the smile of pleasure that used to greet every observation of Pendennis was now exchanged for the toss of the head, the well-bred sneer or killing frown. The eager attention that listened, breathless, to his slightest remark, existed no more. Our tourist's moment of fashion was past; he

was was no longer the rage; and the new and captivating stranger had unconsciously accelerated his downfall. He had the mortification to hear the pretty widow Adair whisper Mrs. Arthur Gore—" How provoking! Is there upon earth a creature more ridiculous, more unwelcome, or out of his place, than one miserable man, who wanders away from the dinner-party, just to interrupt the ladies when talking of dress, or any thing useful and interesting?"





"And then," added Matilda Southwell, * it is such a fright!—and his hideou red roquelaure"

"Ah, recreant!" interrupted Miss O'Reilly, "I remember the day when that very roquelaure was pronounced vastly becoming; while, as to the wearer, it was, who should monopolize hisattentions?"

"Oh, then he was Pendennis the tourist; and he talked about the—I forget what you call it—the memory, you know. E 4 But But now he is to be a schoolmaster—and he is so stiff and pedantic"





"And, in short," concluded Miss O'Reilly, in answer to the fair objector, "tourifications and mnemonics have had their day, and * du sublime au ridicule il rty a qu'un pas."

While these whispered observations were circulating, poor Pendennis would have been in torture, but for the benevolent politeness of Geraldine. Though so lately arrived, she seemed the only person who thought of doing the honours of the house to him. She addressed him in his character of a tourist—the character in which he still regarded himself with most complacency; and Pendennis found, to his delight and astonishment, that, instead of a superficial Miss, dont les talens lui lenient lieu d'esprit, he was conversing with an elegant and highly-informed woman, with abilities to discuss every topic, and modesty to know when to be silent on all.

The The two last years which, for family reasons, Geraldine had been suffered to spend at Mrs. Melmoth's, had been of the greatest service to her. In the course of that time, her education had received its highest finish. By its highest finish, I mean more than being taught to make a very elegant curtsey—to go in and out of a carriage at the word of command—to regulate the motions in walking by the eye of the drill-serjeant, and in dancing by the precepts of the figurante. In those two years Geraldine had attended lectures, exhibitions, concerts, and the theatres, sufficiently to gratify her thirst for knowledge, and to perfect her naturally-exquisite taste in literature and the fine arts; while the visits she made abroad, without being frequent enough to create a habit of dissipation, had answered the purpose of making the timidity of a recluse give place to the perfect polish and self-possession of a gentlewoman.





"Do, dear Mr. Pendennis," said GeralE 5 dine, dine, in a tone of playful pique that admirably became her beautiful mouth and voice of silver, " try to persuade these ladies they have been all day complimenting me in a way the least gratifying to my feelings, though the most honourable to the generosity and candour of theirs. They seem to think all merit comprised in my being from England, while it is the pride of my heart to think I was born in Ireland, and the hope of my existence never more to leave it."





As Geraldine pronounced these words, with an animated blush arising from the sensibility by which they were dictated, her eye caught that of another fixed in irrepressible admiration on her face. It was Montfort's, who, with the rest of the gentlemen, had, by this time, joined the female party, and who was surprised out of his habitual caution and reserve, by hearing the accents of patriotism breathed from the loveliest lips, and uttered in the most enchanting voice that ever penetrated





trated to the heart of man. Unconsciously she had touched a chord that ever found an answering vibration in his breast. He too was a native of Ireland—he too loved his country—with passion, with idolatry, loved her; but could he hope, like Geraldine, to close his days within her bosom? Ah, no! his lot more probably was, when known, to be rejected, and condemned once more to exile and to sorrow!

Influenced by the impressions of the moment, Montfort approached the place where Geraldine was seated, and, putting her harp in her hands, asked her, in a subdued tone, if such were her feelings, would she not give them utterance in one of those national melodies which speak so eloquently to every Irish heart? This harp was a proof of Geraldine's affectionate remembrance of her native land: it was a small one, constructed on the model of the Irish harp: round its frame, wreaths of ivy, convolvolus, and native shamrock, E 6 were





were twined, in a raised pattern of coloured enamel and gold. After a short prelude, her melodious voice was heard: she gave one of our finest native strains, with that exquisite taste and feeling which leave nothing for the ear or heart to desire.

"Charming!" whispered sir Charles Southwell; "but could you not give us something un peu plus recherchee?"

Advancing to the piano, Geraldine, with obliging readiness, immediately began one of those Portuguese airs termed Modinhas, and went through it with the characteristic graces of a native. At first the sounds were so low and murmuring, the accompaniment so monotonous, that the attention was scarcely excited; but, by degrees, the strain breathed such a plaintive sweetness, that every heart was touched, and every ear was thrilled. She then changed to a Modinha of a more lively description. The character of this air was one of such national, peculiar, and arch simplicity—such exhilarating, yet de





licate gaiety, that the effect was delightful as unexpected; and Geraldine rose, amid the modest triumph of being equally skilled in touching every chord of the human heart that vibrates to pleasure or to anguish. She was immediately surrounded by a bevy of female amateurs, requesting a copy.

"As sung, with unbounded applause, by Miss Geraldine Southwell, they ought to add," again whispered the courtly sir Charles. "Helas! I fear me much it will not be as sung by Geraldine!"

Our heroine. excused herself, on the ground of her not being possessed of a copy. She had retained the song from memory, after having heard it once or twice sung by a lady, a native of Portugal. The musical Mrs. Gore, who had been the most anxious for the Modinha, appeared neither delighted nor convinced by this apology; she did not recover her good-humour till the complaisant Mr. Preston, who could scarcely distinguish

one one note from another, declared that— "Though Miss Geraldine sung like a very nightingale, she was certainly not so great an executioner as Mrs. Arthur Gore."





Not to appear completely engrossed with the music of a rival songstress, this lady had, during part of Geraldine's performance, been employed contemplating a very beautiful group that was placed on a marble slab in her vicinity. The subject was Cephalus and Aurora,

"I am glad you like that composition," said lady Louisa: "my Geraldine has proved by it, that while at a distance, she dedicated to me the employment of her leisure hours. That piece of statuary is the production of her own talents. For an amateur, it is not amiss."

While lady Louisa's native generosity tempted her, perhaps injudiciously, to bring forward, in the most prominent point of view, the endowments of hey protSgie, the latter endeavoured, with equal eagerness, to turn the conversation from herself.

She





She appeared deeply engaged discussing with Matilda a disputed passage in a play that had lately been, in private, one of their evening amusements. Matilda was severely mortified with the superior attention Geraldine excited, but she concealed it under that well-acted show of sentimental friendship which every high-bred female knows how to get up for company. Thinking it would look well to be seen conversing together on a subject of taste, she put one fair arm round Geraldine, and looking up fondly in her face, said—" You must direct me, my sweet cousin, who are so much better informed on every subject than I am, to find that delightful passage. All 1 know is, it was either in Shakespeare's Venice Preserved, or some other of his comedies."

Judging, what was very near the truth, that this was Miss Southwell's first appearance in a literary character, and not wishing her cousin, who, in any contest of fashion, dress, or even accomplishments,





might have come off triumphant, to expose her little knowledge of books, Geraldine would have again quickly shifted the conversation, but for the unlucky Pendennis, who, of all men living, possessed the least tact, and who, on hearing the words, "plays, reading, and Shakespeare," pronounced, could not forbear joining in the discourse, and asking Geraldine if she had ever been present at any of those evening amusements technically termed "readings ?"—" I assure you, madam," he continued, "they are the most delightful things in the world. During my short stay in Dublin, I was present at two of them, given at the dowager lady Kilcrest's —a fine, intellectual, talented creature—a pupil of mine. I had the honour of giving her ladyship a few lessons in mnemonics. But to return to the readings: they took prodigiously !—never saw any thing give such universal satisfaction in my life— never, on my honour, since the run of Marius."





* I do love," whispered Matilda Southwell, " to hear Red Roquelaure make himself ridiculous—talking of ' a pupil of mine,' in which class he includes every title in the Court Guide, and the run of Marius, an unfortunate tragedy of his composition; the run of which, my father assures me, began and ended on the selfsame night. Now we shall have some amusement."

Geraldine was inclined to be of her opinion; but the indefatigable Pendennis returned to the charge, with—" Should you not like, lady Louisa, to have readings at Meadowscourt?"

Several different voices seconded the motion; and as Geraldine had acknowledged that she sometimes, to a private circle, read a play aloud, every one was anxious to judge whether she excelled as much in this as in every other accomplishment. Beset by importunities, and actuated for and against the proposal, by secret and conflicting motives, lady Louisa

left





left the determination to Geraldine. The fair applicants now thought themselves sure of success: a hundred plays were proposed, and the first evening almost specified; but though pressed, solicited, and flattered, Geraldine modestly, but firmly, declined bearing a part in any such arrangement. Through the mask of affected sentiment, she saw very well what passed in Matilda's mind. She had observed a cloud gather on her black and heavilydefined brow at the very mention of the word " readings;" and no prospect of gratification to her own vanity, by the display of an additional talent, could tempt her wilfully to hurt her cousin's feelings; for Geraldine valued love far more than admiration. Lady Louisa pressed her hand, in silent approval of her judicious forbearance; cards were introduced, and put a period to discussions that began to grow unpleasant.

Thus terminated Geraldine's presentation to the society of her Irish friends.





During the whole scene, sir Charles had enjoyed the admiration she excited with a politely-repressed, yet scarcely-repressed, feeling of pride and pleasure. He had, indeed, with a secret anxiety, of which no one, from his gay and nonchalant manners, would have believed him capable, weighed every expression, and scrutinized every opinion, uttered that day on the subject of the fair stranger; and on parting for the night, he could not forbear congratulating her, in his foreign and courtly manner, on having had tin succh complet.



CHAP



r





CHAPTER IV.



Io credo essere la calamita dei pazzi. In casa mia non ci piovono, ei tempestano.

Goldoni. La Donna di Maneggio.

Sir Charles Southwell was formed to strike at first sight. Though no longer young, his figure was elegant; and to fine features were united that ingenuous sweetness, that openness of countenance, generally supposed the surest index of an amiable mind, though, too often, alas! completely separated from it. Geraldine bore a marked, though feminine resemblance to him, which Matilda did not; and for this or some other reason, the partiality of the baronet towards his new and fair inmate became every day more apparent: yet, at the same time, she could not help observing, that his manner, which, to





every other woman was habitually what is termed philandering, was to her alone —to one of the most attractive and fascinating of her sex, ever delicately respectful as it was cordially kind. With this one exception, Geraldine could see in his conduct but little to praise, and much to disapprove. During the first years of his marriage, no one had been more talked of in the gay world than sir Charles Southwell; and it was not till he had considerably involved his estates, and spent a great part of the fortune lady Louisa brought him, that he began to think seriously of retrenching. The mind of lady Louisa seemed to rise with the exigencies of her circumstances, and she, at that period, displayed energy and resources, that, to a man of feeling and principle, would have endeared her for ever. Instead of idly repining at the deprivation of that gaiety and splendour to which she had been accustomed, this excellent woman acquiesced at once in a plan of retirement and digni





fied economy, the best calculated to retrieve the effects of her husband's ruinous extravagance. She did more; and, by pointing out to him the great improvements of which the estate was capable, was the means, in a few years, of greatly increasing the value of that property he had done his best to impair. Conscious of her superiority, sir Charles appeared to resign all power into her hands. While lady Louisa devoted the morning to active and personal superintendence of her many useful or benevolent plans, sir Charles, extended on a couch, listened to French novels, or played with his great Spanish dog Lara, or at other times recreated himself with the reverend Mr. Preston at a game of billiards. The state of his health, indeed, furnished him with some apology for this apparent supineness. For two years past, it had been visibly declining. The slightest cold was sure to bring on a dangerous inflammation of the chest; and country air, regular hours, and attention

to





to regimen, had been pronounced by bis physicians as necessary to his existence. In any attack of illness, lady Louisa was a most anxious and attentive nurse; but at other times she and sir Charles did not appear to live happily together. On the baronet's side, it was a state of polite indifference—on lady Louisa's, it seemed something more complicated and painful: it was the death of the heart—the disappointment of all its finer affections—it was esteem, admiration, love, " to hatred turned," or rather, not to calm hatred, but to the irritating grief that preys on the proud and susceptible spirit, from the perpetual recurrence of injuries that wring its tenderest feelings. With the greater number of superficial observers who visited at Meadowscourt, sir Charles was the favourite; for the exchange of characters which had taken place between the lord and lady of the mansion extended to the most trifling particulars. While lady Louisa's mind, intent on important objects, was some





times unable to unbend with that facility and grace which so well become a female, sir Charles, who literally interfered with nothing, delighted his guests by his perfect urbanity, and the charms of a conversation in which an extensive knowledge of the world was mingled with the most correct taste in light and general literature. Geraldine saw, in the plenitude of power with which lady Louisa was invested, that deserving woman was far from happy —that some secret sources of grief corroded her mind, and caused occasional starts of passion, and asperities of temper, which cast a cloud, while they lasted, over the virtues of one of the most excellent of human hearts. Geraldine respected, without knowing her sorrows: she even feared to inquire into them, lest a more open disclosure might compel her to withdraw the small portion of esteem she still retained for the man she was obliged to consider as -her protector.

. Our heroine rather tried to turn lady

Louisa's Louisa's mind from irritating reflections, by seconding her, to the utmost of her abilities, in her interesting and praiseworthy pursuits.





In this number the comfortable establishment of Pendennis was not forgot. Pendennis had a nephew, the son of a brother who died in very distressed circumstances, and the establishment of this nephew was often the subject of his most serious cogitations. He had three nieces, too, sisters of the above-mentioned nephew; but he was not uneasy on their account—Olivia Pendennis, as he informed lady Louisa, being on the eve of marriage with a beneficed clergyman, who had agreed, for the first year, to take her sister Bridget to live with them. Diana, the other sister, had a prospect of being engaged as governess at the house of a genr tleman of fortune near Exeter. But, as for Cobham Pendennis, it was easy to see which way his uncle's wishes pointed.— "How delighted Cobham would be with Vol. I. F the the sight of the academy at Mount Parnassus! Exactly to my nephew's taste."





Lady Louisa plainly perceived that the imagination of Pendennis pictured his nephew, Cobham, on a seat, a little less elevated than his own, administering instruction and reproof to the docile tyroes of Glenartrey. She put the finishing stroke to Pendennis's felicity, by empowering him to send for this much-boasted relative, who, her ladyship added, she doubted not would supersede the necessity of any other instructor. Transported with this concession, Pendennis lost not another post in writing to his valued nephew, from whom he quickly received an answer, containing the following, rather unexpected, if not unwelcome intelligence.



"HONOURED UNCLE,

"Your inquiries respecting the health and welfare of my sisters and self are highly gratifying to us. In return, I

am





am sorry to be obliged to inform you, that the marriage of my sister Olivia with the reverend Dr. Godfrey is no longer likely to take place. I fancy the reverend doctor took offence at my sister's frequent excursions in the curricle of captain Vane, of

the Hussars. Just as I hoped to have

succeeded with the worthy doctor, in explaining to him that Olivia's indiscreet conduct was only the effect of a little harmless love of admiration, a fresh offence was given, by my sister Bridget's preaching a sermon to a very numerous and genteel congregation in the new Ebenezer chapel, lately opened by the excellent Zachary Mudge. Though many competent judges were of opinion that my sister performed as well as the excellent Zachary himself, the reverend doctor Godfrey, I am sorry to relate, flew into a very unbecoming kind of a passion: he inveighed bitterly against false teachers creeping into the fold, and women venturing to preach, in open contradiction to F 2 the





the prohibition of St. Paul; and concluded by declaring he would have nothing to do with a family in which, he was pleased to say, the levity on the one side was only to be matched by the enthusiasm on the other. My sister Diana, who, I had hoped, would have obtained the situation of governess in squire Tremayne's family, lost it by divers of her wonted indiscretions. The first thing that indisposed the squire was hearing she had ridden a pony-race for a wager: instead of endeavouring, by decorous behaviour, to discredit this calumny, my freakish sister, as you, dear uncle, were wont facetiously to call her, next offended him grievously, by personating to the very life a fortune-telling gipsy, and afterwards a beadle in search of said gipsy. The squire found out her two disguises, and swore it was the last trick she should play on him; when, the next morning, she put the finishing stroke to his indignation, by shooting and bringing down some of his pheasants,





sants, which, you know, are most carefully preserved. She lost his patronage, and I my hopes. The thought is grievous—but the will of the Lord be done! We may yet have reason to say with Othello, ' 'Tis better as it is.' To sum up all—such being the state of the family—Olivia having suffered a disappointment of the heart— Diana and Bridget in their hopes of establishment, and your humble servant in more ways than one—of which more anon —we are all four, Providence permitting, quite in a disposition for a visit to Mount Parnassus, where we hope our several talents may be useful, and where, as we propose to begin our preparations without delay, we beg you, dear uncle, in the course of next week, to expect

"Your dutiful nephew and nieces, "Cobham Pendennis, "Bridget Pendennis, "Diana Pendennis, "Olivia Pendennis."





Of this production, which shewed rather too much of the characters of the persons mentioned in it, Pendennis only communicated such a portion to his patroness as he thought proper. He was certainly a little alarmed at the prospect of his three nieces volunteering to take up their abode with him; but he wisely considered that the academy was built upon the plan of accommodating a family, and that, as he had none of bis own., these young persons might be at once cheerful society, and useful in housekeeping. He therefore prepared, with alacrity, to make arrangements for this additional number of guests,; and in this task be was greatly assisted by the friendliness and activity of Miss O'Reilly, who hardly let a day pass without looking in at Mount Parnassus.

In this display of zeal, it cannot be supposed she was actuated solely by an interest in the comfort of her new and whimsical acquaintance. No; it was to pay off part of the debt of gratitude, incurred to sir Charles and lady Louisa Southwell, for many years of hospitality and protection, that she thus interested herself in the welfare of a person patronised by her ladyship; Gay, frank, good-humoured, and obliging, without a particle of discontent or detraction in her disposition, Miss O'Reilly, at the age of forty, afforded a favourable specimen of a character known perhaps only in Ireland. In her youth, pretty and attractive, she had, though nearly portionless, not been without admirers; but during her father's lifetime, her attachment to a very happy home, and, after has death, an increased reluctance to leave a beloved and widowed mother, prevented Miss O'Reilly from listening to any offer of marriage. At length the widow died; but Dora O'Reilly was no longer young nor pretty. Lovers had ceased to present themselves; but still, with her talents and resources, Miss O'Reilly would, in another country, have immediately adopted some plan for increasing her very limited inF 4 come, come, and insuring to herself a respectable independence. In Ireland this was impossible. Could the third cousin of sir Charles Southwell be so ungenteel as to think of doing any thing for herself? Forbid it, pride of family! On the contrary, she gladly accepted an invitation to take up her abode at Meadowscourt, where she requited, by a thousand little services, the kindness of relatives on whom she was not ashamed to depend, and where her inexhaustible flow of spirits, and invincible good-humour, made her really an acquisition to her less happy, though more fortunate friends.





One evening, Miss O'Reilly had so far worked upon the indolent curiosity of Miss Southwell, as to induce her to accompany her on a visit to Mount Parnassus, to look in upon Pendennis, as she phrased it, and see what he was doing. They found the pedagogue, assisted by the reverend Mr. Preston, busily engaged in questioning a youth, the grotesqueness

of





of whose appearance far exceeded any thing they had ever beheld. It seemed as if he had had a recent fall from some vehicle, for part of his garments were covered with mud: one leg was tightly bound with a red handkerchief, and the opposite arm hung useless in a sling. A green shade to defend his eyes, contrasted with a face the colour of the autumnal leaf, completed the effect of his unique costume.

"Miss O'Reilly, I am beatified !—Miss Southwell, I stand astounded at this excess of unexpected goodness!" exclaimed Pendennis, rising in some confusion. "Allow me to present my nephew, just arrived within these few minutes: an unlucky fall from the top of the coach has unfortunately rendered Cobham less neat in his habiliments than he would wish to be on a first introduction to such distinguished ladies."

Miss Southwell, in whom the gratification of her turn for ridicule assumed the appearance of good-humour, begged she F 5 might might be no interruption to what was going forward-,- and, thus encouraged, Pendennis resumed his examination, which was on the subject of mnemonics.—" I trust, my dear nephew," he said, " that, as you are to be my assistant, and, as it were, second self, in an institution so superior to any thing that has been known here, you have not neglected a science so useful in its application, whether to history, geography, poetry, or the drama. I will suppose now that you had a class to examine —how would you imprint on the memories of your pupils the names of the five Scythian colonies—the Partholan, the Ne* median, the Firbolgian, the Danan, and the Milesian, that are said successively to have possessed themselves of Ireland?" "How!" replied Cobham, in a startling voice. "Why, after fixing in mind an hundred and fifty mnemonical symbols, and taking care to localize each in its proper compartment, I would form associations- with these hieroglyphics, and with





the the technical words, to enable myself to synchronize—I mean to localize, my ideas* so as to reply with chronological precision to any question respecting a date or a name, by means of their respective technicalities, localities, and symbols: and now, having proved myself an adept in the science of mnemonics, we will, with your good leave, uncle, as there are ladies present, turn to metal more attractive. You propose to act plays, I presume, at Mount Parnassus. Shall I give a specimen of my talents.in recitation? To begin with—' My name is Norval .. - No, that is an unpromising commencement— an ' uphill speech,' as the players call it. We will have something more dashing and brilliant: the famous addresa of Alex* ander the Great, for instance;" and, without taking breath, our dramatic tyro began—' Can none remember? Yes, I know





all must 'Beg pardon, ladies—protest

J cannot remember another word, for one. F 6 There





There is something about—' Stemm'd the

Granic flood' Oh, now I have it—



'When Fortune's self my standard trembling bore,

And the pale Fates stood frighted on the shore;

When each immortal through the billows rode,

And I myself appear'd"



"And you yourself appeared! No, it was I myself appeared," a voice exclaimed, "to assert my name and character."

Advancing towards his uncle, in manifest perturbation of spirits, a sallow awkwardlooking young man presented himself, and exclaimed, in a tone of ludicrous dismay —" Oh, uncle! did not I warn you of Diana's tricks?" At the same moment, approaching the daring impostor, he dextrously raised, with his finger and thumb, a light wig that covered the head of his most unworthy representative, and discovered the crop of black ringlets that shaded the countenance of Diana Pendennis. Her naturally-fresh complexion she had stained of a yellow colour, and when the

green





green shade was removed, her features bore a striking similitude to those of her brother Cobham, whom, in size and stature, she also resembled.

Pendennis, who had felt heartily ashamed of the apparent vanity and incapacity of his nephew, was inclined, on account of the relief given to his mind, to forgive the trick, which, on being surrounded and questioned, Diana explained, briefly, as follows:—They had embarked for Ireland at the time specified in Cobham's letter; and during their journey down to Limerick, she had been so tired with her brother's boasts respecting the important character he was to sustain at the classical institution, that she was tempted, on arriving at Glenartrey, to procure him a mortification, by giving her uncle an unfavourable impression of him. Chance seconded her plan, by enabling her to proceed to Mount Parnassus, unaccompanied, yet unsuspected. Her youngest sister, Olivia, was so overcome with the fa





tigue of her journey, that she was forced to lie down at the inn at Glenartrey. Bridget sat by, to take care of her, while Cobham was engaged in a dispute with the landlord, and in ordering supper—a meal which he always considered of firstrate importance. Thus favoured by circumstances, Diana took from her trunk an old suit of her brother's clothes, which she always kept among her various grotesque disguises; and having altered her complexion, as above described, tied up one leg in a red handkerchief, and one arm in a sling, she sallied forth to inquire for Mount Parnassus, where she appeared with the success and eclat that have been already related. Cobham Pendennis was inclined to exhibit great resentment against his sister, but was prevented by Miss Southwell, who interposed, with an air of playful authority, and insisted on a complete forgiveness of the truant. Diana had, in fact, made herself an interest with Miss Southwell, by this extraordinary "first appearance." Matilda was extremely fond of that good-natured amusement, termed, among our foreign neighbours, "mystification," and among ourselves, "quizzing." In the ready address and aptitude at disguise of Diana Pendennis, she saw materials for a fund of future entertainment.





Miss Southwell and Miss O'Reilly now rose to depart, and Pendennis set off to the inn to welcome his two other nieces. But before the ladies took leave, Matilda directed a very gracious look towards Diana Pendennis, and gave her a warm invitation to take the earliest opportunity of making a visit at Meadowscourt.



CHAP





CHAPTER V.



-For he had left



The wearying place of his unrest, that morn,

With its cold dews, might bathe his throbbing brow,

And with its breath allay the feverish heat

That burnt within. Alas! the gales of morn

Reach not the fever of a wounded heart!



Socthey's Roderie.

The morning after these occurrences had taken place at Mount Parnassus, Mr. Montfort was amusing the ladies with reading them the papers, which had just arrived, when he stopped at the following paragraph :—" Whereas a considerable reward has been proclaimed for the immediate apprehension of"

Who the person thus announced might be, his auditors were not destined to learn; for Mr. Montfort, taking advantage of the entrance of a person on business, who conducted ducted one of lady Louisa's manufactories at Glenartrey, rose, put the paper in his pocket, and, in a degree of agitation he in vain endeavoured to suppress, abruptly quitted the room.





Immersed in the mysteries of calicostamps, and a dispute as to the compare tive merit of foreign and home manufactures, her ladyship scarcely noticed his departure. Miss Southwell vainly tried to discover, in the other papers, an article similar to that of which Montfort had made a seizure; while Geraldine, perceiving her presence no longer wanted at the breakfast-table, rose to follow her accustomed occupation of superintending the out-of-door improvements. This was a pursuit that Geraldine Southwell had lately taken up, and in the prosecution of which she experienced singular satisfaction. Lady Louisa had discovered that she possessed a most correct taste in rural architecture and landscape-gardening. Having no time to devote to such objects

herself,





herself the demesne erf Meadowscourt was immediately submitted to Geraldine's improving hand, and the delighted inmates soon beheld a paradise arise beneath, the magic wand of the Armida, at whose creative touch fresh beauties sprung up on every side. In planning new embellishments, Geraldine more than once had occasion to appeal tothe judgment of Montfort, whose peculiar studies rendered his taste a most desirable reference in any question relative to landscape-scenery, and the art of producing picturesque effect.

This morning, rather to her surprise and embarrassment, she found herself followed by him. The place where they met was one of the sweetest spots in the spacious pleasure-grounds: it was almost surrounded by artificial rocks, whose rugged sides were enlivened with a tapestry of the greenest moss* intermingled with a thousand gaily-coloured and sweetly-scented creepers. The silvery plumage of the swans that sailed on the unruffled bosom

of





of a fairy lake, completed the miniature beauty of this placid scene. At a distance, the blue waves of the Shannon caught the rays of the sun. A wooded island, on which stood the ruins of s venerable tower, rose, like an emerald, from its azure breast Amid the groves and meadows which crowned its banks, the moss-grown cottage, the mouldering chapel, the gray and half-ruined castle, contrasted well with the splendid Gothic mansion, or the light modern villa, which spoke the triumph of a different taste. The mountains of Clare, stretching as far as the eye could reach, formed, with their waving line, a graceful boundary to the prospect.—'' Beautiful country!" exclaimed Montfort.

'' Beawtiful indeed!" repeated Geraldine. "How does my heart expand when I contemplate the advantages so lavishly bestowed upon my beloved native land! I firmly beKeve that absence only increases, in good hearts, the fond devotion with which we all regard the place which gave us birth. While in England, no study, however fascinating, could win me from those mouldering records that tell of our ancient intellectual superiority—that describe Ireland, in language dear to the feeling mind, however repugnant to pure taste, as a ' verdant paradise stocked with flocks of scholars'—as ' another milky-way, studded with innumerable lights of learning, sparkling as the constellations round the polar star."





Montfort looked in silent surprise, at one who, blooming in youth and beauty, appeared, in every sentiment she expressed, so superior to all that was girlish and trifling. Led on by the subject, which possessed an equal interest in the feelings of both, they pursued their walk along a romantic path, overhung with copsewood, conversing earnestly on the never-wearying theme.—" After such retrospects," continued Geraldine, "it is never but with a throb of painful emotion, that I recur to

more more recent times, and reflect that the same lovely scene has been defaced by strife—has been made the theatre of dissension, guilt, rebellion!"





"Will you not allow," inquired Montfort, " in some instances at least, the merit of good intentions to those unhappy men who suffered death or exile in consequence of their share in the rebellion of 1798, or the partial disturbances that have since afflicted the country? Might they not have been guided by a sincere, though mistaken zeal for the redress of injuries— for"

"Suspicious knight-errantry!" interrupted Geraldine, with a serious smile. "I can never think with charity of those who, to gratify a love of change, or to revenge imaginary grievances, plunged their country into all the miseries of civil war. To you, who have witnessed abroad scenes of far greater suffering, our domestic commotions may, I acknowledge, appear comparatively unimportant."

"I have





"I have indeed," replied Montfort, "observed but too much of the misery resulting from unprincipled ambition—have visited Dresden before we invested it—have traversed Silesia when the whole country was one beautiful garden: I returned after the French invader had passed through ^4iow changed was every spot! Everywhere the spoiler had left traces of his progress: the environs of Nieumarck were laid waste—the town itself was a desert— one solitary nightingale *, heard all night long among the tombs, mourned, like the spirit of some lovely female, bereft, by war, of parents, friends, and country. Never shall I lose the impression of that scene—vainly would I try to convey it with equal vividness to you; but, had you been present, to a heart like yours, what a tale would have been told by the nightingale of Nieumarck!"

There was something wild and uncommon in this address, unlike the calm, respectful

• Odeleben's Campaign of 1813.





speotful composure of Montforfs usual manner. If he had ever deviated from it before, it was to address some flattering observation to Matilda. The expressions that had fallen from him last conveyed to Geraldine two facts, of which she had entertained no suspicion—that Montfort had served in the career of arms; and that it was to the sensibility of her heart, the expansiveness of her understanding, that he would address himself, in preference, to relate a tale of interest or sorrow. Still the implied apology, which, in the beginning of their conversation, he had offered for rebellion, recurred disagreeably to her memory; and anxious to know more of this -extraordinary person, whose prolonged stay at Meadowscourt, and favour with lady Louisa, were circumstances enigmatical to the surrounding little world, she drew from him some of those particulars of his former life to which he had alluded in the words—" I visited Dresden before we invested it." Geraldine learnt from

Montfort,





Montfort, that he had held a command in the service of the emperor of Austria, at the period that the combined forces marched to the attack of Dresden, which was defended by the French.

"At the close of the Saxon campaign," he continued, " I obtained leave to travel; and the accidental meeting with an Englishman, who expressed his intention of making the tour of Ireland, revived in my mind a most ardent desire to revisit my native country."

"Your native country!" Geraldine repeated.

"Even so!" replied Montfort, with an accent of deep emotion. "Am I the first Irishman who has served a foreign, but a friendly power?"

"And Mr. Pendennis"

"Could not inform you of the circumstance, because he was ignorant of it himself. I found him an original—pleasant, but prejudiced in the extreme. Among other whims, the military profession was

at





at once the object of his fear and aversion. I wished to gain his confidence, and to benefit by his information; so I humoured him in a mistake which he had made, with his usual precipitancy, and, by offering him the assistance of the talent he had discovered in me, and which, from my earliest years, I had cultivated for amusement, I completely fixed myself in his good opinion."

There was something in this whole statement which appeared to Geraldine rather plausible than satisfactory. Still willing to obtain farther light into a character which, in one respect, assimilated with her own—" I can fully enter into the feeling," she resumed, " that makes you prefer the place of your birth to any other. The love of country is a sentiment so intimately interwoven with our being, that not even the enjoyment of prosperity, however great—the possession of friends, however dear, can root it from our minds, or make us prefer another to our native land."

Vol- i. G "Most





"-Most true," replied Montfort. "What must then be the condition of the exile, who, without those alleviations, is condemned, through life, to hear a different language, to see different countenances, to Kve under different laws, from those his youth has cherished?"

Startled by the vehemence of his manner, Geraldine paused for a reply; but Montfort had disappeared. He had struck into a thick hanging wood that shaded one side of their walk. Musing upon this singular dialogue, Geraldine turned towards the house. She found lady Louisa engaged in examining the series of cabinet pictures which Montfort had completed. She spoke of them in terms of high commendation, and concluded by observing— "The merit of these paintings is the greater, as Mr. Montfort is not a professor of the art."

"No—I know he is not," replied Geratdine.

M You know he is not!" repeated lady

Louisa,





Louisa, with an anxious and curious air; "and how so?"

"Because he told me so himself."

"And how long is it, Miss Southwell, since you have begun to hold confidential conversations with Mr. Montfort?"

"Dear lady Louisa, this did not amount to a confidential conversation—Mr. Montfort mentioned it incidentally."

Lady Louisa seemed much disturbed. She continued to repeat—" Confidential conversations, and with Mr. Montfort!— Geraldine!" she resumed, with an air and countenance of more severity than she ever yet had worn, " this is the first time I have seen the necessity of any admonition to you! You have talents—brilliant, diversified talents; nothing is so likely to attract an admiring circle around you, and for that reason you must be doubly cautious. Your welfare is one of the first wishes of my heart; but you must be aware how much success in life depends on your own conduct. Aware, did I say? No, it is impossible you can be thoroughly sensible of what momentous importance, in your individual instance, is the observance of the strictest discretion and decorum. A young woman who is a paintress, a statuary—who declaims—who understands languages, and possesses so highly all the principles of general taste as you do, necessarily becomes the theme of praise alike among men distinguished by rank, or for personal merit; but learn to dread rather than to court the dangerous pre-eminence; and, above all things, let not the enthusiasm of talent ever lead you to treat with unguarded confidence persons of whom your knowledge is but slight, and with whom your acquaintance is still recent."





Lady Louisa left Geraldine at once humbled, mortified, and apprehensive. In all her former vexations, it had been her consolation to feel herself in the right—to be conscious that she had not, by any inconsiderate step, compromised that delicacy and dignity of character which she * ;i valued valued as her dearest possession; but lady Louisa's words had robbed her of this last resource, and she experienced, for the first time, the painful and humiliating feeling of self-condemnation.





Early in life cut off from all her natural connexions, Geraldine had acquired from necessity a degree of self-possession and firmness of character not usual at her age. Soon wiping the tears from her eyes, she at once determined on the course to pursue. Lady Louisa had left a painful impression on her mind, and revived certain anxious doubts and misgivings which had never wholly left her. There was one person in the house who alone could eonfirm or dispel these impressions, and to that person she resolved, without delay, to apply. She was prevented from the necessity of seeking her, by the appearance, at this moment, of the woman in question.

This was Katherine Lawless, an ancient

gentlewoman, whom I shall take this op

G 3 portunity





portunity of introducing to the reader. She might be said to be of the class well known in Ireland by the name of " ould followers," and enjoyed a sort of sinecure place in the Southwell family, which she contrived to render not absolutely insignicant, by censuring freely, and exercising a great control over, the conduct of the other domestics. Katherine Lawless (or, as she was more respectfully styled, Mrs. Lawless) had been originally the nurse, and afterwards the attendant, of Geraldine's mother, in whose service she had afterwards lived three years, as the nurse of Geraldine herself, and had finally been transferred to the household of lady Louisa Southwell, at the period that the little girl was consigned wholly to her ladyship's care. The particulars of the death of Geraldine's parents, which was said to have taken place within so short a period of each other, and the cause of sir Charles and lady Louisa's adoption of the little orphan, were circumstances well known, but never alluded to, by Katherine Lawless. This silence was the more extraordinary, •when we consider the pretensions to rank and antiquity she claimed for " the family," and the pleasure she took in talking of all the other brandies of it. Perhaps she thought Geraldine too young to be trusted with the secret, as she never seemed to remember that her darling child was grown a year older since the time she was, at seven years of age, sent from her hospitable home at Meadowscourt, to the almost as hospitable care of Mrs. Melmoth. —" What ails my darling?" exclaimed Lawless, observing the traces of tears on Geraldine's eyes: "has any of them been after vexing my jewel?"





"It is something in which you can relieve me, Katherine," answered Geraldine; "for which reason I am desirous of some serious conversation with you."

The light blue eyes of Katherine Lawless rolled with a look of wild inquiry at this exordium, while an expression of earG 4 nest nest and eager solicitude was visible in her furrowed face.





Geraldine, now she had obtained her wish, felt at a loss how to begin. She , strengthened herself with recalling to mind how often she had anticipated and earnestly desired this now-dreaded explanation. She mentally repeated lady Louisa's painfully-remembered words.—" It is impossible you can be thoroughly sensible of what momentous importance, in your individual instance, is the observance of the strictest discretion and decorum." These seemed to allude to some fatally-remembered error on her side of the family, which must ever put her own propriety of conduct in doubt, and to which she might, perhaps with truth, ascribe several petty slights and mortifications she received in private from Miss Southwell.—" My good Lawless," at length she said, "if I have been weeping, it was because I could not forbear reflecting on my singular, my unexampled situation. I am of good family

and





and fortune, yet I live among my relations as among strangers, and never hear my lost parents mentioned or lamented. After having the misfortune to lose those parents, instead of being permitted to pass my childhood with my friends and relatives, I was sent, after four years nurture at Meadowscourt, to a school in another kingdom, from which period I knew nothing of home but occasional letters, and I was kept there, at a distance from my family connexions, for nearly twelve years. Katherine, you nursed not only me, but my mother. I could now bear to hear, and wish to be acquainted with, every particular relating to her. Do, nurse Lawless," continued Geraldine, putting one lovely arm round her neck, and speaking with that caressing tone and manner which, in her, was generally irresistible, * tell me the true story of' the family:' I have longed—oh, how anxiously longed, to hear it!" ..

She paused, terrified at the effect of G 5 her her ill-advised request. The unhappy old woman seemed ready to sink to the earth; her eyes wandered, her countenance became haggard, and, for a few moments, she was deprived of utterance; at length, in a low, inward voice, she said—" Who calls me? Did I not do my master's bidding? God knows I am a poor simple woman, not fit to be trusted with them dark deeds!" i





-'?- Dear Katherine," said Geraldine, with a voice 4n which compassion struggled with alarm, " no one would distress you— look up^-I will drop the subject."

Katherine Lawless gazed around, as if awaking from a trance; then wildly said —" What subject, dearest? Ah, no! I knew you'd nat be the one to vex me; but I bad a horrid dream, and methought them Spanish priests (inquisitioners, I believe you call them) was come, with their Madonna della pend, to clasp me in, her arms of iron, and tear me to pieces. But, question or no question, they could get

nothing





nothing out of me. God knows, I done for the best, and yet the fiery worm has never let me know a quiet hour!"

"Compose yourself," cried Geraldine, inexpressibly shocked; "and tell me, is there any thing I can do to relieve you?"

"I would wish to speak to father Gargan," answered Katherine Lawless, in a faint voice.

Father Gargan was the parish priest: he was accordingly sent for, and, for about an hour after this extraordinary conference, remained closeted with his aged penitent.





gant quadrille-dress, trimmed at the bottom with roses, in the French manner, with a corresponding wreath of full-blown roses for her head. Matilda was now impressing upon her willing pupil the necessity of taking a few lessons to qualify her for a " first appearance," as quadrilles were but recently introduced by some people of distinction at Limerick, and had never made a part of Olivia's education.

"We can practise in the great hall every day," observed Miss Southwell. "There will be Geraldine—you, Miss Diana Pendennis, and Olivia, Mr. Cobham

Pendennis, Mr. How provoking Mr.

Montfort should have set off for Dublin this very morning! Then there is Miss O'Reilly," she continued, resuming her enumeration, " Miss Pendennis"

"Not me," said Bridget Pendennis, drawing back with a gentle shake of the head. "There was a time that I thought it indeed no sin to dance, or sing, or join in any plan of social merriment; but now,"

she she added, devoutly casting up her eyes, "thanks to the instructions of the excellent Zachary Mudge, and the precious Zephaniah Toplofty! I am put in a far better way, and would not for the world





"Contribute to the life and joy of the company," interrupted Olivia. "Truly, my good sister saint Bridget, you do honour to your reverend guides!"

Bridget shewed that at least she had learned a lesson of meekness, for she made her lively sister no reply. Geraldine looked at her, and thought that, though her words were those of fanaticism, she had seldom seen a more benevolent and even cheerful countenance. In forming this conclusion, our heroine was certainly not bribed by the power of beauty, as poor Bridget was gifted with so little of that bewitching quality, that her features might be styled the softened image of those of her uncle Pendennis,..-,..

"Those are right to stay away from balls

who who are not ball-room figures," resumed the beautiful Olivia; and, as with pert, pointless malice, she made this ungracious remark, Geraldine thought she looked plainer than her sister.





"And are you too, Mr. Cobham Pendennis," asked Matilda Southwell, " a follower after Mr. Zachary Mudge and Eleazer 1 forget the name."

"I was, madam," Pendennis replied, bowing his head, obsequiously, " until converted by a new light." As he spoke, he directed his large hollow eyes, with as much tenderness as they could assume, towards the bewitching dark gray ones of Miss Southwell, which, more brilliant than those that are called either blue or brown, literally threw out bright sparkles from beneath the black brows and lashes that shaded them.

"Since then I am to succeed those worthy gentlemen as your spiritual director," she resumed, with one of her most coquettish smiles, "I suppose I must be

reckoned





reckoned competent to decide in any case of casuistry that may stand between you and a Limerick assembly."

"Assuredly," answered Cobham; "and you must permit me, in return, like the scholiasts of old, to give to the divine expounder of my duties the name of the Seraphic Doctor!" v

"Bravo!" thought Diana Pendennis: "this pedantic gallantry takes!"

Geraldine, on her side, when she compared the present favourite with him whom last she had seen occupying that place, could scarcely conceive how the indiscriminate love of admiration could reconcile her cousin to the change. Left early to the guidance of his own discretion, Cobham Pendennis had already, during the course of his short life, successively aspired to the characters of a tutor, an actor, and a Methodist preacher; and this mixture of pursuits was apparent in every word he uttered. To a slight, ungainly, insignificant person, he united no other recommendation mendation of countenance than the language of a pair of large, heavy, dull, black eyes, rendered still larger and more hollow by the excessive spareness of his features and sallowness of his complexion: but those hollow eyes rolled in admiration on Miss Southwell—that far-fetched and pedantic language was employed in exaggerated compliments to her charms; and, with Matilda, that was always a sufficient recommendation. Sir Charles Southwell sipped his chocolate in silence. Lady Louisa, generally employed in revolving some plan of benefit or aggrandizement, which she did not communicate, was, this morning, more than usually absent and meditative.





Geraldine could not forbear thinking their ideas had taken a similar direction, and that there was something in the sudden disappearance of Mr. Montfort in which lady Louisa bore a part.

The arrival of some young friends, who frequently visited at Meadowscourt, and

who





who were now doubly welcome to Miss Southwell, as they completed the set for her quadrille, broke up the breakfast-party. Lady Louisa retired to her dressing-room, taking the arm of Geraldine; and Bridget Pendennis, who had already announced her intention of being a seceder, requested sir Charles Southwell to lend her a volume of Fletcher's works to take home with her.

"You will find all Beaumont and Fletcher, Ben Johnson, Ford, Massinger, Marlowe, and the rest of the fine old dramatists, at the right hand, as you enter the library," sir Charles replied: " they are the books in the red morocco binding."

"The Lord be good unto me!" exclaimed Bridget Pendennis, with a gesture of horror: "those are stage-plays, I fear. Have you none of the sermons, sir, of Fletcher the divine?"

"Oh, probably," sir Charles, with one of his usual courtly smiles, replied; "all the best divines are on the top-shelves: you have only to get Nichols to mount the

steps





steps and wipe the'dust off, and there is not a doubt you will find the author you are seeking." Sir Charles then resumed the perusal of the morning paper, while poor Bridget prepared to follow her guide, much wondering that any one should allot to a dramatic author a more conspicuous place in his library, than to one of the most distinguished champions of Methodism.

Meanwhile lady Louisa was communicating, in part, to Geraldine, the perplexities that, for some time past, had agitated her mind. After a pause of some moments, in which she seemed to have been following the train of her own reflections, her ladyship suddenly exclaimed —'' Well, you see our friend is gone at last."

Geraldine looked up, and, making perhaps her first essay in a little disingenuousness, simply asked—" What friend?"

"Why Montfort: you cannot but have observed that I have long regarded him with a degree of interest beyond what our relative situations appeared to warrant. But Montfort is not what he at first announced himself. Considered in his real character, I am perhaps the only person in Ireland who knows at this moment of his existence. By the most fortunate combination of circumstances he was thrown into my society, and induced to confide his story to me; and I discovered in him the son of my dearest friend, and that in serving him I should honour the memory of the woman whose virtues inspired my earliest and most lasting attachment.— "And what is the service he requires?" asked Geraldine.





Lady Louisa paused, looked stedfastly at her, and replied—" My dear young friend, you must undergo a longer probation before I can confide it to you; but every day you gain something on me. I wish to make you the companion of my mind; and how admit you to my most private hours, and not communicate to

you you a part of the reflections that engross and occupy my thoughts."





Geraldine had heard lady Louisa universally praised for her benevolence of heart and expansiveness of mind, but at the same time represented as a woman of a restless, scheming disposition, undaunted by difficulties, unawed by opinion, and entering, with equal readiness, into concerns of a public or private nature. She therefore was silent, awaiting with patience that this singular and energetic character should gradually unfold itself.

Lady Louisa resumed—" I have said enough to convince you that the interest I take in this young man is not one of those flights of which my well-meaning neighbours are so ready to accuse me; suffice it to say, Montfort's immediate presence in Dublin was absolutely necessary. I have assisted him to the best of my power; the rest is rather the secret of another than my own. He plays a deep game. On the one hand, fame, honours,

fortune;





fortune; on the other But we will

look only to the bright side," continued her ladyship. "The worst, I trust, is past. All the misfortunes of Montfort's life originated in the unprincipled conduct of the man to whom, in early youth, his mother thoughtlessly united herself. Oh, Geraldine!" continued lady Louisa, led by a natural transition to reflect upon her own wayward fate, " how much is it to be regretted, that no young mind will ever benefit by the bitter experience of another! Could I hope to give a lesson calculated to moderate the ardour of passion, I should insist on the virtues of the heart as the only foundation for connubial happiness. If asked what was the quality essential in the chosen companion of our lives, I should answer, goodness; and if again demanded what farther excellence was required, should continue, like the ancient orator's thrice-repeated precept, to echo, goodness. And yet," she continued, with increasing animation, "I de





served a happier lot. In making choice of sir Charles Southwell, I was not caught by commonplace attractions. Neither the beauty of his person, though at that time unequalled, nor the elegance of his manners, though unsurpassed, would have proved sufficient to interest me, if to those had not been united the lustre of talents the most distinguished—the fascinations of taste, and powers of conversation, such as I have never seen united in any other man, and such as, I fondly flattered myself, could never inhabit a mind devoid of the nobler virtues. He has destroyed the sweet illusion—that I could forgive; but what I cannot forgive is, that it has been one of the unworthy objects of his life to alienate my daughter's affections from me, by forming Miss Southwell after the model of himself. In all that was bad he has but too fatally succeeded: without his fascinating suavity of manners, Matilda has imbibed his principles; and the seeds of vanity, levity, and scepticism, have ; ..., taken taken firm root in a mind but too well calculated to receive them. Thus disappointed in my dearest affections, in what have I found consolation? A coquette would have sought it in laying snares for general admiration—a mere fine lady, in distinguishing herself by the superior elegance of her house, dress, and equipage— J discover it in administering to the more urgent distresses of others—in increasing my usefulness, in multiplying the objects of my interest. I am aware that, by such conduct, I incur the imputation of a masculine and decided character; but those censures are indifferent to me. I know that I do good—I know that my exertions ultimately benefit my family, while they interest and employ my mind. I appeal to you, my generous and amiable young friend, from the occasional injustice of the world. This disclosure is no thoughtless burst of peevish passion: pure, and yet firm and distinguishing, I have discovered Toi,. i. H in in yours a mind worthy to be united to my own. Say, will you be my friend?"





Surprised, yet gratified, Geraldine accepted lady Louisa's confidence, with the frankness and sensibility with which it was offered.

"You must have often thought me a strange creature," her ladyship resumed; "but the fact is, I have received an education very different from the rest of my sex. Sole heiress to the large property of my father, the best and most honourable of men, it was his wish that I should know how to defend my rights from injustice, and (contrary to the fate of many heiresses) preserve, whether married or single, a degree of independence and respectability. For this reason, I was carefully instructed in the laws of my country, and early made familiar with all the ordinary forms of transacting business. Had I equally followed his counsel in other instances, all would have been well. Lord

Desborough Desborough warned me, with the agonizing solicitude a parent can only know— warned me against the dangerous character of sir Charles Southwell. But what will not a woman hope who loves? I anticipated every thing from the apparently-ingenuous disposition and fine understanding of my lover. Could I foresee that so many good qualities should be rendered utterly nugatory by a total wajit of principle? for sir Charles certainly possesses liberality, spirit, and one of the sweetest tempers ever man was blessed with."





"Who shall dare hope for happiness in marriage, if you have missed it?" Geraldine replied. "May I never be tempted by another sir Charles to risk my present tranquil felicity! How far preferable to be possessed of an independent will—to associate myself to the charities of my beloved, my respected friend—like her, to devote a part of my fortune to doing good, H 2 and and to find my reward in the gratitude and affection I inspire V





Lady Louisa smiled, sighed, and shook her head; then, in a more lively tone, resumed—" No, no, my little friend, I do not aim to be the foundress of a nunnery; nor have I, on account of my own individual disappointment, despaired of domestic happiness; for many is the match I have promoted. Nay, don't start—it is in a sphere a little below yours, yet far above those commonly considered the only subjects for benevolence. How many struggling, professional young men—how many well-brought-up, but portionless young women, might, were the dread of actual difficulties removed, ratify engagements formed in happier days, before time and adversity have chilled the genial current of affection! It has been my pleasure to remove such difficulties. In Ireland a small sum will often do it. That vain, silly creature, Olivia Pendennis, gives

me





me some uneasiness: I once had hopes Mr. Kilmory would have taken a liking to her; but I verily believe the men are as much frightened by her folly as attracted by her coquetry. The creature is a flippant idiot; but she has beauty, and beauty—beauty, from the Castle to the cottage, has ever been the object of sir Charles's pursuit. You will perhaps imagine that jealousy dictates ray fears; but it is many years since I have suffered the tortures of that heart-corroding passion. The calm contempt into which my feelings towards him have subsided does not, however, exonerate me from the duty of watching over the young females thrown within the sphere of my influence."

Here the conversation ended; and Geraldine, though flattered by the demi-confidence reposed in her by lady Louisa, experienced an inexplicable feeling of disappointment that it had not been more complete. The discourse had suddenly changed, she knew not exactly how, from H 3 the the subject of Montfort's departure, to lady Louisa's secret wrongs. Geraldine would rather her ladyship had been more explicit on the former topic; but she had reason afterwards to believe that, little as lady Louisa had said upon it, she would hereafter be still more guarded. She observed her ladyship receiving letters that she conjectured to be from Montfort, and concluded, from the increased reserve of lady Louisa, that the turn his affairs had taken demanded increased circumspection and caution. The friendship with which she treated her could not, however, but be highly gratifying to Geraldine. She felt as if life was invested with an additional interest, and, in contemplating the workings of this extraordinary character, experienced how much more attachment depends upon the qualities of the heart and mind than on similarity of age.





To return to the scene in which we left Miss Southwell presiding, and where Cobham Pendennis, labouring to acquire those

graces





graces that he trusted would please his mistress, might literally be said to realize the expression, " moved, native awkwardness, on two left legs." In executing the Lancer's set, a paper dropped out of his pocket, which lay on the floor unobserved till the quadrille was over, and then was picked up by Miss O'Reilly. Some persons would have thought there was nothing to be done with such a document but to return it, on the first opportunity, to its rightful owner; but such scrupulosity never entered into the catalogue of Miss Dora O'Reilly's virtues. Delighted, on the contrary, to have found a moment's amusement for Miss Southwell, she locked herself in with her friend, and hastily proceeded to unfold the paper. It proved to be an unfinished letter, addressed to a friend.—" Come now, we will see what he says of us all," said Miss O'Reilly.

"For shame!—nonsense!—I will not look at it!" exclaimed Miss Southwell.

"No, to be sure, Matilda; listening is H 4 not not looking, I hope;" and, well satisfied with her casuistry, Miss O'Reilly read aloud the following paragraph:—





"I have already compared Miss Geraldine Southwell to a princess of romance; but, oh, my dear Harley! to what shall I liken Matilda? Imagine, my friend, a figure, noble, lofty, and commanding—a Medici lip, a Napoleon nose, and, oh! the most distracting, most soul-bewitching eyes! Lady Louisa Southwell is a fine woman, with features strongly marked, apparently more from care than age. To describe the ladies in short—were I to avail myself of an architectural comparison, 1 should assimilate Geraldine to the romantic Aihambra of Grenada; Miss Southwell, to the all-perfect Maison Carree at Nismes; and lady Louisa—I think she shall be the awful, yet still-interesting Ruins of Palmyra."

"Upon my word! and what am J to be ?—a smoke-dried cabin, 1 suppose! That is a pretty how-d'ye-do, Mr. Cobham Pen

dennis!" dennis!" exclaimed Miss O'Reilly, using, in affected pique, a cant phrase she was very fond of. "I shall never forgive you, dear Matilda, if you don't, some way or other, contrive to avenge such an affrontive omission for me."





To this Miss Southwell had not the least objection. Once certain of her power, she used it in the most unmerciful manner. Sometimes it was by keeping her devoted victim practising the intricacies of a new quadrille, when she knew he would be severely reprimanded by his uncle for absenting himself from his post in the school. Sometimes she would accord him the supreme felicity of driving her, during school-hours, in a low phaeton, constructed under her direction, anticipating, with well-concealed malice, the re* proof that awaited him for nonattendance at Mount Parnassus. But these were his moments of happiness. When Matilda had thus exalted him to the highest pitch of delight, suddenly she would assume all H 5 the the pride of a daughter of sir Charles Southwell, and turn on the presumptuous youth some of those cold, forbidding looks that dash the intoxicating hopes raised by a smile of encouragement. Still Cobham continued the most devoted of her slaves. Anxious to anticipate her slightest wish, he flew to the neighbouring libraries to procure books and music for her, carried her messages to the milliner, and gave his opinion on her lapdog when he was sick. The elder Pendennis, or, if the reader chooses, Pendennis the Great, still continued, at intervals, his work on Ireland. Was Miss Southwell tempted to accompany him on an excursion, to visit some new object of curiosity, Cobham carried her sketchbook, fell into ecstacies at every scrawl she made, or extolled the new graces which the attitude of drawing imparted to her already-elegant form. Did lady Louisa and Geraldine Southwell set out on a benevolent ramble, in which case Matilda never accompanied them—or was '>:' . - Miss Miss O'Reilly engaged in the superintendence of domestic concerns—instantly, unless there was other company at Meadowscourt, Cobham ran over to Mount Parnassus, in an agony of obsequiousness, to summon one or other of his sisters to preserve Miss Southwell from herself!—" Diana! sister! Miss Southwell has already been a quarter of an hour alone! Lay by your stitchery, and come along with me. —Olivia! give me that novel you are reading—I have promised it to Miss Southwell; you can finish it another time.— Bridget, you would oblige me greatly not to talk of religion before Miss Southwell; it is excessively shocking, and annoys her horribly!"





To such devoted attachment Matilda could not remain quite insensible. She had been several winters at the Castle, and, though called a fine woman by successive lord-lieutenants, admired by the aid-de-camps, and followed for the two or three first winters, had reason to fear she H 6 was





was classed in that number of ladies " who can make nets, but cannot make cages." The languid attentions too of a lounger of fashion, who thinks he confers as much honour as he receives, were very different from the respectful, yet unremitting assiduities of a Cobham.

As it is impossible to calculate upon the actions of a character in which the passions are strong and the judgment weak, there is no saying how this unequal flirtation might have ended, had it been permitted to live out the term of its natural life; but this was prevented by an incident sufficiently ridiculous, and in which Miss Southwell's pride, as she called it, was too much compromised, to permit her readily to forgive.

Miss Southwell, attended by her faithful esquire Cobham, and the merry damsel Diana, mounted on her palfrey, was, one morning, taking an airing, on horseback, in the direction of Mount Parnassus, when Diana observed, as if accidentally, that, as this was a holiday, it would he a favourable opportunity for Miss Southwell to view the interior of the school. This Matilda had never completely done; and her vacant mind caught with eagerness at the novelty. Alighting accordingly, without giving herself much trouble about Mr. Peter Pendennis, Miss Southwell ran up stairs, guided by Cobham, who began expatiating fluently upon eating-rooms and dormitories, when a new object caught Matilda's eye, and she eagerly demanded its destination.





"That, madam," said Cobham, with his usual solemnity, "is a shower-bath: my uncle has just had it placed here, and a most useful addition it is to the health and comfort of the pupils."

"A shower-bath!" exclaimed Miss Southwell. "Dear me! I never saw one before."

"I shall be most happy to explain the mechanism of it to you, madam," said the

delighted delighted Cobham. "The cistern is now fortunately empty. The contrivance is among the most simple. You see this plug fastened to a string: you just pull out the plug."





"What, so?" cried Miss Southwell, following the direction of Cobham's hand. She pulled the string, and had no sooner done so than a deluge of water flowed, in a resistless torrent, over her high-plumed head and hussar riding-habit. In an instant she was wet through, and the habit, being of a colour that does not endure damp, completely spoiled.

Unfortunately the cistern had been replenished without Cobham's knowledge, and he stood, the image of blank despair, awaiting the storm which he felt assured was not far distant.—" Heavens, Mr. Cobham Pendennis! was ever any thing so intensely awkward?" were Miss Southwell's first words, as she shook her dripping garments; and, regardless that she

was





was the author of her own misfortune, she poured a torrent of reproaches on the illfated youth. .... .1

"Come, come, Cobham! don't stand like a water-god that has forgot himself to stone," said Diana Pendennis; "let us make haste to see what can be done for Miss Southwell."

Miss Southwell's "pride" was obliged to submit to the mortification of borrowing a complete change of raiment from the Misses Pendennis; and she long afterwards declared, she did not know which was most disagreeable to her—this circumstance, or the wearisome condolences of Bridget and Olivia Pendennis. As it was impossible her change of dress should not be remarked, she deputed Diana Pendennis, on her return, to explain the matter to sir Charles. This she did with the best eloquence she was mistress of, and then continued, as was often her custom, tq amuse the baronet with a recital of common occurrences, which she could always

render





render humourous, as, lounging in his usual indolent way, he enjoyed his favourite recreation of caressing his faithful friend Lara.—" Well, what mischief have you been doing last, ma belle espiegle tp said sir Charles. "Confess—has it been powdering its uncle's wig with sawdust, or acting ghost among the villagers? Whatever the story is, I long to hear it."

La belie espiegle, as sir Charles had surnamed Diana, was really a favourite with him. Her drollery reanimated his exhausted spirits.—" I would not exchange the whimsical humour of Diana," be would say, "for the elegant sameness of half the misses of fashion who come to the house."

Miss Southwell too was fond of Diana's company, in her own selfish way: her attachment resembled that attributed to Napoleon, for his confidante colonel Bacler d'Albe. She had Diana often with her, "pour pouvoir la tourmenter tout a son aise."





Diana was sometimes revenged, as in the instance of the shower-bath; but she took very good care not to confess that it was a trick of her own preparing. She purposely directed Miss Southwell's curiosity towards the academy, and determined, if she had overlooked the showerbath, to turn her attention to it. The prospect of spoiling, at one stroke, Miss Southwell's new riding-habit and Cobham's flirtation, had proved to Diana temptation irresistible.



CHAP





CHAPTER VII.



Pride, of all others, the most dangerous fault,

Proceeds from want of sense, or want of thought.



Roscommon.

The day fixed for the Limerick Assembly arrived. Lady Louisa's English maid, Mrs. Dillon, vied with her still more fashionable French attendant, Mrs. Le Merrier, in doing ample justice to the gifts Geraldine had so lavishly received from nature. Katherine Lawless, though nearly reduced to the rank of a supernumerary, still asserted her right to preside at the toilet of her darling, and maintained it by expressing her dissatisfaction at every thing that had been done, as soon as the other gentlewomen were withdrawn.— "Now, Miss, you fancy you look remarkably well; and, to my mind, you never

was was so ill-dressed in your life: your hair all hanging down your neck, like a mermaid, and your petticoat all trimmed and frenchified, and like I don't-know-what myself. 'Twas not the way your mother dressed, that I promise you! no, Miss Geraldine, nor any of the family."





Whether from a mind ill at ease with itself, or some other cause, Lawless was subject to fits of ill-humour, which nothing but a temper so unalterably sweet as Geraldine's could have endured, and which formed the strongest contrast with the acquired polish of the other domestics. Our heroine always mentally balanced this defect against the faithful, tried, and enthusiastic attachment of this half-savage, but affectionate creature; and though she regretted the present fit as ill-timed, took no further notice of it than by trying to smile it away. Her toilet was now completed; and having just given the " deux coupd'oeils au miroir" without which the French poet, Gresset, says, no female would quit

the the task of dress, not even a nun descending to the parlour, Gerakline said to her attendant, in a flow of youthful gaiety— "Dear nurse Lawless, would you not like to see us this evening?"





"What to do, ma'am? Is it to look on at the quality dancing? Why then, indeed, Miss, to tell you the rale truth, I would not. You know, Miss Geraldine, as you made it a point with me, I went to the gallery with lady Vesey's folks, whin you was all at the concert at Limerick; but, in troth, and the music so bothered the singing, myself couldn't extinguish the voices from the pianas and fiddles. To be sure, you was very genteel, and took care I paid nothing for getting in gratis; but it soon grew so hot, and so crowded, I'd have given a golden guinea, if I had it, to get out gratis, that I promise you. Then, Miss, that comical great coat, the silk pelisse, you give me, didnt become me at all at all."

n Say no more, nurse Lawless," exclaimed





ed Geraldine, hardly able to preserve her gravity; "another time I will not seek to force pleasure on you, that I promise you."

As, with arch gaiety, she repeated the favourite phrase of her old follower, Lawless looked a little confused; and, as if desirous, yet fearful, of satisfying her curiosity, by asking a question, remained a moment meditating how to introduce the subject she wished. At length she said— "May I make bould, Miss, to know whether the Miss Pendennises is to be with my lady's party at the ball?" On Geraidine's answering in the affirmative— "Well," resumed Lawless, with more spirit, "if there's any thing in this wide world I do hate (and she had the art of giving to the word haate, as she pronounced it, a force and breadth of expression peculiar to her disposition and country), it is the whole kit of them upstart Pendennises."

Geraldine had often observed her old favourite take unfounded and violent dis





likes to persons who had no other fault than that of being strangers; she therefore did not stop to inquire into this; and Katherine, having vented her ill-humour, condescended to look with more complacency on Geraldine's decorations, and to say—" Well, to be sure, fashions may be altered since my day, and you are a lovely figure, Miss Geraldine, there's no denying that, and couldn't look more iligant if my lady-lieutenant was in it itself. You are going where you will be admired by plenty and plenty of fine gentlemen; but have a care, dear child, and rimimber all is not gold that glitters: and, oh, Miss Geraldine, dear! there is but one thing would be after entirely making me die of grief—that you would marry a gentleman who couldn't keep you a coach! I look to your being an honour to the family

yet, in spite of the saying"

Here she stopped, and looked earnestly

at Geraldine, who was surprised to observe

tears fast coursing one another down her

. - . cheeks. cheeks. She had no time to ask any questions on the subject, for, at that moment, Miss Southwell tapped at her door, in all the animation of dress and beauty, and radiant as the finest jewels she possessed could make her. Linking her arm within that of Geraldine, she cried—" Come— come away; my father and mother have been waiting this half-hour."





This was not exactly true; yet still it answered the desired end of hurrying Geraldine, and drying up the tear of sympathy that had but just moistened her cheek. The young ladies tripped down stairs, laughing together, and were in a few minutes in the carriage, and on their way to Limerick. Sir Charles Southwell, who was very attentive to his duties as steward of the ball, thought it right to set out rather early. As the party entered .the assembly-room, their numbers were increased by the accession of Cobham, Olivia, and Diana Pendennis, to whom lady Louisa had graciously given permission to appear

under under her auspices. Shortly afterwards, a young man of most prepossessing appearance bowed, with an air of peculiar respect, to lady Louisa Southwell, and was, by her ladyship, presented to Matilda as lord Templemore. His lordship immediately requested the honour of her hand for the first country-dance and quadrille.





"Who is that tall, handsome young man?" asked a gentleman of his partner. "Look! lady Louisa is parading him up and down between herself and her beautiful daughter."

"Don't you know lord Templemore?" the young lady replied. "He is but lately come to his title. Surely you must have heard of lady Louisa Southwell's activity in the great Templemore cause!"

u A devilish clever woman that lady Louisa Southwell!" observed another gentleman: "as good a law opinion, they say, as any in Ireland. This may be almost called a lord of her creation."

"I am told," resumed the young lady

who who first spoke, "that it was quite a romantic story. Poor lady Templemore was cruelly wronged—disowned by her husband—forced to reside abroad, where she brought up this boy, in such ignorance, that, though he looks like a Milesian prince, he can hardly read or write. She was discovered by the indefatigable lady Louisa, assisted in recovering her rights on the death of lord Templemore, and"





"And the young lord Impromptu," added the gentleman, laughing, "will no doubt be assisted to a wife, in the person of one or other of the lovely Miss Southwells."

It seemed uncertain to which of the cousins this prophecy might refer. Amidst a profusion of native beauty of the most delicate and interesting style, Geraldine and Matilda were unanimously pointed out as the reigning belles of the assembly. Still, though the young lord paid Matilda every proper attention, he appeared so satisfied to be released, and so anxious for

Vol. i. I an





an introduction to her still-lovelier cousin, that Miss Southwell, whose experience taught her the first dances are those of compliment, and the ensuing ones those of choice, felt by no means secure of her new conquest. As lady Louisa and Miss Southwell both seemed to turn a deaf ear to his request that they would present him to Geraldine, lord Templemore applied to sir Charles Southwell, who instantly gratified him, with that polite and ready attention which characterized his manners. As steward of a ball, or conductor of a fete, sir Charles was in his element. He prepossessed every stranger the moment he appeared: his sweet, ingenuous, open countenance, on which no trace of any bad passion seemed ever to have rested—his noble figure, and his manners, at once dignified and pleasing, pointed him out as the object of attention equally to the young and the old. But not even the exertions of sir Charles Southwell could quiet the apprehensions, or sa





tisfy the demands, of all the mammas in the room.

"Arethusa, my love, whom are you engaged to? I hope you are engaged," said Mrs. Gore, of Mount Amaranth, to her blooming daughter.

"Yes, indeed, mamma, I am engaged for the whole evening, and have refused captain Aimworth and captain Rochford: I am going to dance the next quadrille with sir George Luttrell."

"But I don't see him, my dear: surely he cannot have forgot you; yet the sets are forming—it is time he should come and claim you—you will not have a place." And, unable to sit still any longer, the anxious mother took the arm of the fair Arethusa, and walked with her up the room, in order to catch the eye of the gay young baronet, to whom she shortly afterwards gladly resigned her charge. Very different were the feelings with which lady Opium, who had brought an awkward and ill-dressed daughter to the ball, * . 12 addressed addressed sir Henry de Vesci, who shared with sir Charles Southwell the duties of steward for the evening.—" I do beseech you, sir Henry, to consider," said the angry lady, thrusting her highly-rouged face, in an agony of maternal anxiety, close to the baronet—" I beseech you to consider that my daughter has had no dancing all night!"





"I can assure your ladyship," returned sir Henry, with solemnity, " I have exerted myself to the very utmost to procure a partner for Miss Opium; but some gentlemen come to the ball so fatigued with hunting, others so idle, and others so"

"I declare, if here isn't a reinforcement!" exclaimed the lady, applying her eyeglass in the direction of the door, and scrutinizing-a party that were just entering. They consisted of three young men, two of whom report soon announced to be English; the third, a lawyer upon circuit, was soon acknowledged as an acquaintance by Matilda, and joined the

Southwell Southwell party. Lady Opium, anxious to know if either of the two other gentlemen were proper partners for her daughter, addressed herself to Olivia Pendennis with—" They say, Miss Pendennis, those gentlemen are from England; perhaps they may be known to you."





But Olivia Pendennis, in a transport of grandeur at having been spoken to by lord Templemore, and being of the same party with lady Louisa Southwell and "all the Southwells," neither heard nor heeded her ladyship, but replied by a vacant glance, first at her tucker, and then at the brilliant chandelier depending from the ceiling. At this moment all doubts vqpre pleasantly removed by the approach of sir Henry de Vesci, conducting one of the gentlemen, whom he presented to Miss Opium, as Mr. Morgan, of Llangwyllien, in Caernarvonshire, while his companion desired, at the same time, to be introduced to Olivia Pendennis, by the name of Mr. Lambton. If squire Morgan I 8 was was as awkward and stupid almost as Miss Opium herself, Mr. Lambton, on the contrary, united to uncommon personal beauty a degree of agility and grace rarely witnessed. Praises of the handsome stranger quickly circulated around; and even Miss Southwell experienced a vague desire of adding him to the number of ber conquests.





At supper, Matilda sat between the barrister, who was no other than her old admirer, counsellor MacCalembourg, and lord Templemore; but the attentions of the latter were entirely devoted to Geraldine, who bad been his last partner, and who, little suspecting the envy which devoured her neighbour, was, every moment, more and more overpowered with ennui at the want of cultivation, intelligence, or taste, that too fatally betrayed itself in every sentence uttered by her noble partner. This was a state of mind Miss Southwell was unequal to conceive. She doubt. ed not that Geraldine was delighted with -- . her her new conquest, and it hurt her pride, as she would, in confidence, have phrased it, that Geraldine should be delighted at her expence. M. Necker has somewhere observed, that those who do not like the trouble of amending their faults, by an ingenious refinement of self-love, often convert them into good qualities. This was the case with Miss Southwell, who always pronounced the words " my pride," with as much complacency as if she had said, my generosity, my benevolence, my prudence, or any of





"Those numerous virtues, whii h the tribe

Of tedious moralists describe."



Such being the disposition in which she found herself, all the good things with which the counsellor's conversation abounded, even all his treasured hoard of latest Dublin news and scandal, were insufficient to raise a languid smile on the lips of his fair auditor. Not so Cobham Pendennis, who had been forgiven his involuntary i 4 share share in the unlucky adventure of the shower-bath, and who had hovered, all the evening, with distant and humble adoration, around the fair idol of his affections. He listened with open mouth and admiring eyes to all the counsellor's brilliant sallies, and secretly sighed that he could not exchange his own sheepish awkwardness, and ponderous gravity, for the-ease and vivacity of a Dublin barrister. One quadrille had been danced after supper, and symptoms of weariness began to appear in some of the elder part of the company, when the clear, fine-toned voice of sir Charles Southwell, exclaiming —" Make way for the waltzers!" gave a fresh impulse to every body's spirits. In an instant a space was cleared, and about eight couple advanced, linked two by two in the mazy round, which they traced with alternate slowness and spirit. Mr. Lambton and Miss Southwell were soon distinguished as by far the most graceful pair; and so conscious did the other dan-.:.. -- cers





cers become of this, that, overcome by envy or weariness, they gradually resigned their places, and seated themselves as spectators, till at length Matilda and her partner were left alone to the plaudits of the assembled circle. This' circumstance, which would have distressed a person of more timidity of character, only added fresh animation to Miss Southwell; and Mr. Lambton having commanded the strain to change from the slow German to the sprightly Russian waltz, they described the graceful and flying figure of that lively dance with equal lightness, vivacity, and spirit. The plaudits redoubled —" Surely nothing so elegant was ever seen off the opera stage! It is evident Mr. Lambton has been abroad!" was echoed around; and Miss Southwell was at length conducted to her seat in an intoxication of gratified vanity. One satisfaction yet awaited her: lord Templemore, appearing to have forgot Geraldine, who had declined waltzing, and being, like all I 5 persons





persons who have lived much abroad, extremely fond of the dance, approached Miss Southwell, and, with much more animation in his manner than before, requested the honour of her hand for another waltz.

"Oh, barbarian!" exclaimed Matilda, panting, fanning herself, yet smiling with acknowledged pleasure, "are you not afraid I shall drop down dead before I reach the top of the room?"

But she did reach it in perfect safety, and, in the renewed admiration she excited on every side, closed the evening in a manner the most gratifying to her feelings.



CHAP





CHAPTER VIII.



Se fecondo e vigoroso

Crescer vede un arboscello

Si affatica intorno a quello

Il geloso ngricoltor.

Ma da lui rivolge il piede

Se lo vede in su le sponde

Tutto rami e tutto fronde

Senza frutto e senza fior.



Metastasio. Demetrio.

After a triumph so decisive, who would have expected to see Miss Southwell in two days dissolved in tears and hysterics? Yet so it was. Lady Louisa's woman and old Lawless, directed by Miss O'Reilly, were busily employed in applying restoratives; and so taken up was the latter with the fainting fair one, that she had forgotten to give general orders that no one should be admitted to the boudoir. Coni 6 sequently, sequently, in walked Mr. Peter Pendennis, a sometime-welcome guest, and who thought he had a right to be doubly so on the present occasion, as he brought three copies, handsomely bound, of his Tour in Ireland, just published, as an offering to the ladies of the mansion. Miss O'Reilly was very desirous to conceal Miss Southwell's disorder from the prying curiosity of visitors, and deprived, by vexation, of her usual presence of mind, returned vague and confused answers to the eager inquiries of Pendennis, of " what had befallen his beautiful pupil?"





At length Miss Southwell herself furnished her friend with a reply. Catching a glimpse of Pendennis's physiognomy, her recollection seemed half to return, and, putting her hand before her eyes, she exclaimed—" Oh, take away the fright— the hideous red roquelaure!"

Though this was far from being the only cause of Miss Southwell's agitation, Miss O'Reilly gladly availed herself of the

expression,





expression, and said, in a hesitating voice —" Mr. Pendennis, 'tis your wig, your red roquelaure and your wig, that annoy Miss Southwell so much, when suffering under one of these nervous attacks, that perhaps you had better"

"Is that all, madam?" interrupted the obsequious schoolmaster, throwing aside his cloak, and pulling off his wig. "Rather than give pain to Miss Southwell, perish all the wigs that ever were created! Miss O'Reilly, I'll thank you for a pockethandkerchief to tie round my head, for it feels somewhat cold." And, seating himself quite to his satisfaction, Pendennis began to address his fair pupil with the gentlest soothings; but, as the wig was not in reality the cause of her disorder, " the wig removed, habitual woes remain."

At this moment the door was a second time opened, and lord Templemore entered, humbly followed by Cobham Pendennis. These two knight-errants, the one "of the lovely countenance," the other,

"de "de la triste figure? came on quests as different as their appearance announced. Lord Templemore called simply to pay his respects to the ladies; Cobham's business was with his uncle, to inform him that a visitor from the country waited at the academy, to speak about a son, whom he wished to place there as a pupil.





Seeing the sometime-formidable pedagogue, his grotesque features bound by a cambric handkerchief, and endeavouring to pacify his moody patroness, lord Templemore could scarcely restrain the inclination he felt to laugh; but Cobham, who saw nothing ridiculous when his angel suffered, exclaimed—" Celestial powers! she is dying, and no one will afford her relief!" Advancing towards Matilda, before any one could be aware of his pur» pose, he thrust a pinch of cephalic snuff, the only restorative he had at hand, up her nostrils. The effect was startling as sudden.

Miss Southwell, from languishing and

shedding shedding tears, burst into a violent fit of laughter, and, uttering some incoherent expressions, became, every moment, in consequence of this mistaken application, as alarmingly mirthful as she had before been desponding. Pointing to lord Templemore, she cried—" So—here again! You a gentleman! ha, ha, ha!' Born in Ireland, and bred nowhere,' like little Dominick*, till"





"This is worse than madness!" exclaimed the indignant young nobleman; the blood of twenty Irish kings rushing, in crimson suffusion, over his fine features.

Lord Templemore remembered, with shame, the poverty and obscurity in which he had been brought up, till unexpectedly acknowledged as heir to one of the most ancient baronies in the kingdom; and he did not doubt Miss Southwell alluded to that circumstance.

"For pity's sake, my lord, leave us, and excuse her!" said Miss O'Reilly, almost

ready

• See " Essay on Irish Bulls."





ready to cry with vexation. "'Tis not you she means; indeed, indeed she knows not what she says: since yesterday her spirits have been cruelly flurried, and she has had a wretched night."

"For my part, Mr. Cobham Pendennis," added Katherine Lawless, indignantly, " I wish you'd get out of the place, with your snuff and your nonsense! I don't know what business you ever had in it—so take yourself off, if you please!"

But Cobham had now caught the eye of Miss Southwell, who, changing suddenly from the excess of frightful laughter to angry violence, darted forward, seized the luckless wig, and, clapping it, the wrong side before, on the head of the unfortunate Cobham, completed his coeffure with such a scratch down his face, that the scar which forms the catastrophe of" Mandeville" was hardly to be compared with it . "Will you get out of the place now, Mr. Cobham Pendennis, or Glindinnis, or whatever your name is?" resumed Kathe





rine Lawless, with the air of a triumphant virago, and unmoved by seeing the blood flowing plentifully down our hero's cheek. "Will you now, Mr. Cobham Pendennis, be so very obliging as for to get out of the place? Take that, Mr. Cobham Pendennis, and that, and that"

She concluded her request with a very handsome box on each side of his head, for her own share, in addition to Miss Southwell's generosity ; and poor Cobham, blinded, stupified, and inwardly deprecating his own impertinent and awkward interference, slunk away with his uncle, secretly resolved, however he might feel himself attracted towards Miss Southwell, never again to face Mrs. Katherine Lawless.

Still the original cause of Miss Southwell's violent perturbation of spirits was as complete a secret as when lord Templemore entered the room; the whole scene was an enigma to him; and after inquiring politely for the other ladies, and being told that they were out taking an airing, his

lordship





lordship rung for his horses, and departed. Highly disgusted and offended at all he had witnessed, he proceeded straight to Mrs. Gore's, who, he remembered, had also a very pretty daughter. At Mount Amaranth, lord Teraplemore found a circle assembled to praise or criticise whatever appeared to them deserving of applause or censure in the last ball. His lordship's curiosity respecting the late occurrences was soon gratified by a little man, who was haranguing the company when he came in, and who exhibited a rare and (only therefore) valuable specimen of a genius almost extinct—the genuine tattling, prattling, family apothecary.—" Why, yes, ma'am," continued Mr. Mar, resuming the tale he had been relating, after the momentary interruption occasioned by lord Templeraore's entree, "'tis a bad case—a very bad case indeed. Miss Southwell, it seems, has danced with a miller! 1 was up all night with her, poor young lady! and could by no means tranquillize her by

the the strongest sedatives—a very awkward case, upon my honour! I'll tell you how the circumstance happened. This Lambton (whose real name, by-the-bye, is Humphreys) is the son of a jolly miller near Athlone, and worked, for several years, at his father's calling at the mill. Growing afterwards military mad, he enlisted in a regiment of cavalry quartered in the neighbourhood, which was ordered almost immediately upon service. He was a very handsome, plausible fellow, and had more tum for any thing than his original business—Spanish dances, for instance, and waltzing, he acquired to perfection— ha, ha, ha! He sung a good song too ; and Humphreys, though only a trooper, was often sent for, by the officers, to sing for them after dinner. Well, at the peace, the regiment was quartered near Llangwyllien, the seat of Mr. Morgan, a Welch squire, of ancient family, but as very a booby—the spoiled cub of a doating mother. I ask pardon, ladies—they gave him





the the name of Tony Lumpkin the Second. Not all the remonstrances of the dowager could ever induce squire Morgan to frequent good society, or to spend his time in any other circle than with a set of low fellows, whose reckoning he paid, satisfied if, in return, they acknowledged him king of the company. To these worthy gentlemen Humphreys easily got himself introduced, and soon became such a favourite, on account of his songs and his stories, that squire Morgan declared there was no living without him. Humphreys having obtained a furlough, to visit his friends in Ireland, nothing would serve the squire but that he must go to Ireland too; and he agreeably surprised Humphreys with the unprecedentedly - generous offer of bearing his travelling-expences, and passing him off for a friend of his, under the name of Mr. Lambton."





"And how came the two barbarians to fasten themselves upon the dear counsellor?" several ladies demanded at once.

"Oh,





"Oh, now, ladies, I am come to the worst of the story. Counsellor MacCalembourg had received some civilities from the father of squire Hopeful, when keeping his terms in London as a student at the Temple. On meeting with the young man in this part of the world, he thought he could not do less than return the former hospitality of the father, by introducing the son to his friends and acquaintances. We Irish are not naturally suspicious; but when he discovered the fun, as Mr. Morgan is pleased to call it, he was most indignant, I can assure you; and if the booby squire had not made a precipitate retreat, his conduct would, most certainly, have been followed by very, very unpleasant consequences."

"And how was it discovered?" inquired Mrs. Stratford Gore, earnestly.

"Why, how it happened exactly, I cannot take upon me to tell. The very conspicuous part the gentleman acted with Miss Southwell, and the admiration he

excited,





excited, induced some of the mortified figurantes, I believe, to inquire more narrowly into the stranger's pretensions than they might otherwise have done. Inquiries of—' Who is this Mr. Lambton?' 'To what Lambtons does he belong?' began, I am told, that very night, to circulate; but it was not till the afternoon of the following day, that an elderly maiden lady satisfactorily discovered and whispered to a particular friend, who whispered it to Miss O'Reilly, who indiscreetly betrayed it to Miss Southwell, that the elegant Lambton, and Humphreys the miller's son, were one and the same person."

Lord Templemore was now at no loss to discover the cause of Miss Southwell's hysterics. Every body joined in pitying the young lady, and condemning Mr. Morgan's conduct; yet amidst this profusion of pity, there was not one grain of genuine friendship. Miss Southwell had rendered herself hateful to all by the arrogance of her deportment, which was particularly





cularly conspicuous at the county assemblies. None could therefore sincerely deplore that her pride had received a severe mortification, and many a gentle belle would have started to be told how much she secretly rejoiced at the circumstance.

The story of Miss Southwell and the miller quickly spread; it was told in a thousand different ways, each way more mortifying than the last to the feelings of Matilda. "Scorned by the women, pitied by the men," she found her existence, like Calista's, indeed "insupportable." A slow fever preyed upon her spirits, for which the complaisant Mr. Mar pronounced amusement and change of scene the only remedies. It did not want much of the time in which the Southwell family usually quitted the country ; and as change of place was prescribed as being of vital importance to one of its branches, preparations were immediately begun for a speedy removal to Dublin.

i '.'-..' ;.

i-s« CHAP





CHAPTER IX.



Vorrei che almen per gioco

Fingendo il mio bel Nurae

Mi prometesse il cor,

Chi sa che a poco a poco

Di fingere il costume

Non tliventasse amor?



Metastasio. II Trionfo di Cldia.

If any thing was wanting to give Miss Southwell's pride an additional shock, it was supplied by the discovery, that, in the case of lord Templemore, it was one thing to waltz with her, and to fall in love with her was quite another. In spite of her coldness and discouragement, the young nobleman, in a -short time, declared himself the passionate admirer of Geraldine; and she, on her part, was alarmed and astonished at the eagerness with which lady Louisa pressed his suit. Every objection

that that she could urge against manners, habits, or education, was derided or overruled; and even the plea that he was totally indifferent to her was set aside as ridiculous.





Lady Louisa, the kind, humane, considerate lady Louisa, seemed, from the time this affair was brought forward, to be transformed into a different woman. Geraldine discovered in her, with sorrow, the turn for which she had never till lately given her credit, that of a matchmaker; and besides the usual impulses which agitate such characters, her ladyship seemed actuated by some latent motive, which it was equally difficult for Geraldine to oppose or fathom.—" You say lord Templemore's manners are deficient in elegance," she would observe; "a few months intercourse with the world will amend all that, and, in the meantime, it is really refreshing to see something different from the commonplace sameness of a modern fine gentleman. You do not find his conver

Vol. L K sation sation amusing; yet he possesses, I assure you, a fine, though uncultivated understanding—an understanding that it would be the glory of a wife to direct to objects of utility and praise."





Geraldine smiled at the ingenious sophistry with which lady Louisa defended even the defects of her favourite, and wondered at the zeal with which she appeared to desire to see her the wife of a young nobleman, who, in point of rank and fortune, would certainly be a fit match for Miss Southwell. The fact was, while lady Louisa had cherished a hope that Miss Southwell might be pleasing to lord Templemore, she had not wished that Geraldine should be particularly introduced to him; but when that was over, she was equally anxious, from other motives, to secure him for Geraldine.

Sometimes she carried on the argument with temper; but, as her ladyship found persuasion ineffectual, the disappointment led to a display of asperity, that was equally

new





new and painful to her young relative^ She was very anxious that Geraldine should give some decided answer before they left the country, and that this answer should be favourable.—" You feel eager to see that world which is new to you, Geraldine," she said; " you revel in anticipated conquests and pleasures—you wish, as the phrase is, to look about you before you decide. All young women do so, without considering how often this ' looking about' has terminated in seeing nothing. How happy would many be, at the end of a long suspense, in the offer of the support and affection of a man of honour, of principle, and, at the same time, of consequence to ensure that of the Woman he made his wife; and if you knew, Geraldine, of what importance such protection is to you——" Lady Louisa paused, unable, from the violence of her emotions, to continue the conversation.

Geraldine found herself, as she had frequently been before* distressed, affected, K 2 and





and perplexed, by her friend's inexplicable allusions; yet still she felt an unconquerable repugnance to contract so totallyheartless an engagement.

One evening that Geraldine called on lady Louisa in her dressing-room, to wish her a good-night, she renewed the argument with more earnestness than usual.— "You will meet few handsomer, more interesting men, as you young ladies phrase it, than lord Templemore. Why not give him a hearing? You surely do not experience a preference for any other person?" continued her ladyship; and as she spoke, she bent her eyes on her, with such an intense and painful scrutiny, that Geraldine, though conscious of innocence, felt herself blush like a person aware of secret guilt.

At this moment, greatly to her relief, Mrs. Dillon glided into the room, and began officiously trimming the wax-lights that burnt on each side of a large mirror. —f'. I just came in to see if there were lights in the branches, my lady,1' she replied, in an apologetic tone, in answer to an interrogative look of lady Louisa's.





Dillon departed; her ladyship resumed, —" I thought, Geraldine, you were above the puerile affectation of wishing to be esteemed a novel heroine, and to have the credit of refusing two or three lords without a single rational reason for doing so."

"Your ladyship did me but justice,'' replied Geraldine, still more deeply blushing. "I am no novel heroine; but I consider it as essential to my happiness in married life, that my husband be possessed of a character and talents, to which I could willingly look up as to my superior."

"Oh, Geraldine!" exclaimed lady Louisa, with a naivete that had its rise in heartrending recollections, " I married genius, wit, and talent; and was I therefore the happier?"

"Did you say you would have supper to-night, my lady?" said Dillon, again presenting herself unexpectedly before them. K 3 "No!





"No! you well know I never have sup* per here," lady Lousia replied, in an accent of displeasure, for she knew how to account for the officious waiting-woman's frequent intrusions. "I will dispense with your attendance till I ring."

Mrs. Dillon sighed, made up the fire, fidgeted round the room, and at length, but most reluctantly, withdrew.

Lady Louisa looked round, with an expression of great irritation in her counte* nance.—" On nous ecoute," she said in French, and continued the conversation in that language.

Geraldine observed that many circumr stances had combined that night to displease her, and marked the rising storm in the increasing petulance of her ladyship's voice, and the acrimony of her expressions. Still she defended herself, sometimes seriously, sometimes playfully ; and at last, on lady Louisa's desiring her to give an instance of what she called the defectiveness of lord Templemore's education, cited some -,'' anecdotes





anecdotes that Diana Pendennis had told her, which proved his lordship to be, indeed, in the rudiments of learning.

"Et vous la croyezdonc plutot que mot" interrupted her ladyship, with tremulous eagerness, " et vous ne songez pas a quel point elle est mdchant"

"Mechante, lady Louisa!" said a soft voice from the inner room. Sir Charles Southwell, who, in the country at least, always observed his physician's recommendation of early hours, had been already some time in his chamber, which was only separated from his lady's dressing-room by a partition. He took this mode at once of informing her, that he had overheard her obliging reflections upon " genius, wit, and talent," and of indulging, by a polite and gentle correction, his own partiality for the French language—a partiality which did not permit him to let an error in gender pass with impunity.

"This is too much!" exclaimed lady

Louisa, irritated out of all self-command





by the mildness and sang-froid with which her well-bred husband made his little verbal amendment, and then, if she might judge by the subsequent silence, betook himself to sleep. "Every body is combined to-night to distract me; and that man's insulting coolness, when I am most provoked, however it may make you smile, Miss Geraldine, is one among his many arts of giving pain." She then overwhelmed poor Geraldine with a torrent of reproaches, which, because undeserved, were not the less deeply felt. After such a scene, it may easily be imagined that she retired pale and trembling to her chamber, and that she spent a sleepless night.

Geraldine awoke in the morning, her mind full of confused impressions of the late disagreeable occurrences, and could not forbear asking herself the question— "Shall I risk my present tranquillity, by plunging into the great world, where so many more occasions for envy, anger, or solicitude, may present themselves, in the train, and wholly under the guidance, of a woman who has a heart to will the happiness of all around her, but a temper which often renders that goodness of heart of no avail?" But what alternative had Geraldine? Two years must elapse before she would come of age, and be put in possession of her fortune, which was about twelve thousand pounds. In the meantime she had no choice but to reside in the family of sir Charles Southwell, who was her guardian, or that of a wine-merchant in Dublin, who was joint trustee— a man to whose family, character, and manners, she was an utter stranger.





While ruminating on these unpleasant circumstances with all the deep thought and intense susceptibility of nineteen, a temporary relief was brought to her perplexity by the receipt of the following billet :—

'' Mount Amaranth.

*' MY DEAR AND LOVELY GERALDINE,

*' I am at this moment quite a K 5 forlorn, foiiora, deserted ordure- My own sweet A^athusa is gone with the dowager lady Tenaplemore on a tour to the Jakes of J£ilr lanjey; Mrs, Arthur Gore talks) of quitting us in a day or two, and then, I shall lae left quite alone with Mr. Gore, which is worse, as you well know, than no, company at all, You have frequently promised to give me your sweet society for a short time at Mount Amaranth. I should not take this, opportunity of reminding you of this engagement, did I nqt know of the approaching departure of the family at Meadowscourt, and, at the same time, that it is a month or two before the high gaiety of Dublin. I have therefore no remorse in taking you, for a short time, from lady Louisa, and beg you to consider, that, in making this, visit, you wijl confer a real obligation on your admiring friend, "Anne Arethusa Stratford Gore."





While Geraldine was thinking what answer swer to return to this invitation, she was startled by the entrance of lady Louisa Southwell; but it was no longer the lady Louisa of the night before.—" I sought you," said her ladyship, " because I have been unable to rest, in consequence of the unpleasant, though just impression you must have received of me last evening. This is the misery of my lot. Domestic anguish embitters a temper originally good, I flatter myself, though warm; and then that very asperity endangers the affections of the beings whom I most wish to oblige and attach. But will you not, Geraldine, bear with a frailty of which I have so fully disclosed to you the source? will you not say that you forgive me?"





The heart of Geraldine melted into the tenderest compassion at this appeal. All her preconceived projects and objections vanished. It seemed to her a kind of treaehery to talk of leaving her friend at the moment she leaned on her for pity and support, and, haughty as her general disK 6 position position was, frankly avowed and asked pardon for her failings.





As these thoughts passed rapidly through Geraldine's mind, her eye glanced, as quickly, from lady Louisa to the note of Mrs. Stratford Gore, which had for a moment shaken her resolution, and to which she now purposed to send a decided refusal. Lady Louisa's eye followed the direction of hers.—" A letter from the learned and sentimental Arethusa, I see," she said— "she thinks she excels in the eloquence du billet"

Geraldine briefly explained to lady Louisa the contents of the note.

Her ladyship appeared to muse a little, and then, to her great surprise, exclaimed —" Accept the invitation, by all means."

We are strangely-constituted creatures. A moment before, Geraldine had earnestly wished, yet hardly dared to hope for, such a permission; and now that it was given, she wished it retracted, and could not forbear thinking something more was

meant meant than met the ear in lady Louisa's sudden concession. She had at length discovered her to be a woman of warm feelings and strong passions, at the same time a complete woman of the world; in short, a good-hearted and generous intriguante, who employed the fine talents and ample means with which nature and fortune had endowed her, in pursuits that she ever meant to be productive of good; but at the same time Geraldine felt an inexpressible reluctance to be the unconscious object of some new scheme, suggested by the late circumstance to her ladyship's fertile genius. This repugnance was vain: the die was now cast. It was settled that she should go to Mount Amaranth, and lady Louisa stood for some time engaged in affectionate conversation with her, during which she arranged the manner of their reunion in Dublin, as soon as Geraldine's visit to Mrs. Gore





. should be terminated.

While Geraldine thus acquiesced, for

Jp.: the the present, in the plan of remaining in the country, there was a young lady, who, through rather less fitted to shine in the great world, was much more anxious to enter it. This was Olivia Pendennis. She had been persuaded by her last partner that she was not only a beauty, but a wit; and ambition now whispered a most extravagant dream—no less than, by flattering Miss Southwell, to receive an invitation to accompany the family to Dublin, and perhaps even to get introduced at the Castle.





"I desire, Olivia," said Diana Pendennis, in the tone of amiability usually adopted by sisters who have the advantage rather in years than beauty, " I desire I may hear no more of this egregious nonsense. What! a girl without fortune, the niece of a petty country schoolmaster, to be presented at the Castle!"

M A man of letters, a celebrated traveller and tourist, you might more properly say, Diana; for our uncle is' better known in those characters than as a schoolmaster;

and and as to rank, didn't Miss O'Reilly tell us she was present when a snuffseller's and a china-merchant's wife were both presented? and didn't she observe, at the same time, that beauty was often a passport there to fortune?"





Olivia Pendennis was supported in her folly by other suggestions than those of Miss O'Reilly.—" I jist want to know, Miss, af it's right," said Katherine Lawless, in her singular dialect, as she was helping Geraldine to undress—" I jist want to know af it's right Miss Olivia Pendennis would be eoraing to Meadowscourt after sir Charless, instead of my lady—and af it's right they would be taking walks every day together in the pleasure-igrounds —and ajf it's right sir Cbarlese would be flattering up her beauty, which is no such great, sight in my eyes?"

« No, to be sure, 'tis not right," interrupted Geraldine, a little impatiently, "'tis not right Katherine* But bow do you know aufifo things take place?"

"Oh,





"Oh, Miss Geraldine, servants hear and see a great deal that other folks doesn't know; and so far back as the very morning Mr. Montfort was out of the place, and I see that yellow Christian {God forgive me !) Mr. Cobham Pendennis, with his ugly face, stuck opposite my lady, instead of him, I began for to make my remarks on them. You know, ma'am, Miss Southwell and the young ladies went practising steps in the great hall. WelL sir Charless came in to look at the dancing, which he never used to do.—' Will you let me in among you ?' says he, with his polite, noble, smiling air, looking so good-humoured and open like. Then he posted himself next this Miss Livia Pindinnis, or Glindinnis, or whatever else her ugly name may be, directing her all the time, and whispers her (flattering up all the family like)—' Your brother will soon do us credit; he's a pretty young man, 'pon my honour!' Pretty! humph! I take it pretty was never like him—as yellow





low as the divel's knotting-bag, and as lean as"

"Well, but, Lawless," again interrupted Geraldine, amused, in spite of herself, with the curious assortment of vituperative epithets Katherine had ever at command, "all this does not prove that Miss Olivia gives any encouragement."

"Encouragement! Didn't I hear her sister Mischief (I never can remember their hard names, they're not Christian-like), "didn't I hear the mischievous one (she was not mischievous at that same time) lecturing her, and saying—' Now, Olivia, don't make a fool of yourself about a married man, as you did about captain Vane, for this is too serious a matter.' And this Olivia Pindinnis, or Glindinnis, answered her very saucily—' I will make a fool of myself if I like, and I don't know any business you have, Di (now I remember me, she called the Mischief Di) to meddle in the matter. Sir Charles has twice as much taste as Mr. Montfort or lord Templemore,

and and he says it is a shame such beauty is not produced at the Castle."





Geraldine did not doubt Lawless had here, unconsciously, given the real clew to the conduct of this vain, weak girl, who, ignorant of sir Charles Southwell's real character, imagined his distinguishing her must be a certain passport to fashion. She would have spoken to lady Louisa, to prevent the silly plan of going to Dublin and the Castle; but it was now too late. Miss Southwell had made all her arrangements; Olivia was to be her companion; and Geraldine, on the same day that witnessed the departure of the family from Meadowscourt, was conveyed, in the carriage of Mrs. Stratford Gore, to the hospitable seat of Mount Amaranth.



CHAP





CHAPTER X.



You see tlie booby husband sit,

In admiration at her wit! Swift.

Mrs. Stratford Gore was a languid and literary fine lady, who thought her husband a dqlt, because he did not consider her odes, th^t appeared occasionally in a provincial magazine, 1;he highest efforts of human ge,nius. Mr. Gore was a good-humoured, hospitable, foxhunting country squire. The former did not possess the active worth of iady Louisa, nor the latter the polished elegance qf sir Charles Southwell; but a degree of easiness of temper in the one, and of frank good-nature in the other, rendered them, at least, equally agreeable to live with.

As it was lady Louisa's principal aim to be useful, so it was Mrs. Gore's first object

to to pass the time pleasantly; and Geraldine could not but remark that her own ideas of solitude, and those of her hostess, did not exactly correspond. The first day, at dinner, she found this " forlorn, deserted" lady surrounded by a large circle of friends; not to mention a number of young people, sufficient to fill an ample side-table. Her morning levee was scarcely less numerous.' It consisted of Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Gore, with their three children, who still remained for a day or two; Mr. Proby, the worthy and benevolent rector; father Lawrence, the priest of the parish, an architect, a landscapes-gardener, and Mr. O'Carolan, a gentleman who was writing a book on the antiquities of Ireland, and had succeeded Pendennis as the reigning lion of Limerick. Mrs. Gore, who liked to shew her versatility, was discoursing with O'Carolan on those celebrated and incomprehensible round towers, about which such a "medley of opinions," as honest Ephraim Jenkinson has it, have been broached.





The





The Roman Catholic priest thought they were belfries, constructed by the monks in the middle ages, and used also for the purpose of watch-towers; the clergyman was of opinion that the Medes had first erected them ; the architect maintained that they were temples of the Persian Magi; the landscape - gardener believed them to be Pyrathias, or fire-temples of the Druids, and regretted, that as so many were scattered over Ireland, there was not one on Mr. Gore's estate, which he could improve into an object of picturesque and romantic interest; Mrs. Stratford Gore contended for the African sea-champions, mentioned in ancient story, as the founders of them; while Mr. O'Carolan floated in uncertainty between the different claims of the Scythians, Carthaginians, Phoenicians, Medes, and Persians; and could only come to the conclusion, that, whoever had the honour of constructing them, they were unquestionable proofs of the high antiquity

of the Irish nation. .

In





In the midst of the strife of tongues, a sudden diversion was made by a servant announcing, much to Geraldine's surprise, Mr. Pendennis. He had not however been two minutes seated in the room, before he explained the cause of his intrusion. Cobham had eloped, absconded on the very day the Southwell family had quitted Meadowscourt. After vainly h> quiring for him in the immediate neighbourhood of Mount Parnassus, his uncle had extended his researches as far as Mount Amaranth, in hopes that Geraldine or Mrs. Stratford Gore had heard something of him. -"-" To leave me immersed in such a multiplicity of pursuits, without a line or a word!" continued Pendennis, indignantly. "What is to become, I wonder, of the rnnemonical class, which I had, in consequence of good conduct, entrusted to his care, and of the lyric class, and the pastoral classy boys of genius, whom I undertake, by a newly-invented mechanical process, to train into excellent poefe? An

ungrateful ungrateful boy! a creature whom I maintained like my son ever since the death of my poor brother, which happened in the hard winter during the run of Marius."





This allusion to the unfortunate and short-lived offspring of his brain, to which Pendennis (who was a great romancer) was in the habit of referring, as the date of the most distant and different transactions, checked the expressions of sympathy that would otherwise have been readily bestowed, and several of his younger auditors could hardly restrain their inclination to laugh.

Mrs. Gore saw it; and, to divert the attention, seized this opportunity of introducing the tourist to the antiquary.—" Mr. Pendennis, Mr. O'Carolan," she said, with that air by which fine ladies seem to add, "you two are of a species—try to entertain one another."

"If your nephew, sir, be a slender young man in a dark brown coat," said O'Carolan, adding a full description of

Cobham's





Cobham's usual attire, and addressing himself to Pendennis, " I think I saw him about two miles from Bruff. He was making speeches in the fields, near an ancient Druidical place of worship, one of those large circles of upright stones erected by our Pagan ancestors, from whom the Britons originally borrowed their religious rites."

"Pardon me, sir," interrupted Pendennis, his national enthusiasm for a while suspending all solicitude about his nephew; "if you allude to the erection of Stonehenge, it was the glory of Britain, ages before even the Romans set foot in the island."

"So," said Mr. O'Carolan, smiling, for he began to hold the argument partly in sport with Pendennis, as an original, " you make no account of the grave authorities of Giraldus and Geoffry of Monmouth, and deny the visit of the ' renowned Pendragon' to our isle?"

"As faithfully as I deny the authen





ticity of the Seanchas More, or the Royal Psalter of Tarah!"

"Sir," resumed O'Carolan, with more earnestness, " I believe it admits of as certain proof, that the rites and ceremonies of Druidism were first introduced by Merlin into Britain from this island, as that Christianity was established among us by the blessed St. Patrick."

"St. Patrick !" retorted Pendennis, contemptuously—

'St. Patrick of Ireland, which was Saint George's boy; Seven years he kept his horse, and then stole him away."

. This fragment of a very ancient Irish ballad, reflecting so severely on the moral character and rank in life of his favourite saint, nettled the venerable O'Carolan.— "Well, sir, I have formerly had the pleasure of conversing with colonel Vallancey."

"And I, sir, have had the honour of dining with a literary party in company with the enlightened doctor Campbell; it was during the run of Marius, and"

Vol. I. L "Peace,





"Peace, disputants!" cried Mrs. Arthur Gore, returning to the room which she had lately quitted: " behold he comes, .whose lays have almost power to 'turn suffering into transport, and make even misery delightful."

As she spoke, Mr. Moreville was announced.

"I am so glad he comes while you are here," continued Mrs. Arthur Gore, in a whisper to Geraldine; " it is some days since he has been expected. I do so long to introduce you to Moreville the poet."

A gentleman of most animated and prepossessing address advanced towards Mrs. Stratford Gore.

"Bard of Ovoca, a thousand welcomes!" exclaimed the lady;" how kind, amidst your numerous claimants, to 'remember me!' I am all impatience to hear the particulars of your pilgrimage, what shrines you last have visited, and what charms you have sung."

"Oh, it was a perfect' pilgrimage of

taste," taste," replied Moreville, answering his fair and poetical hostess in her own strain —" from the patriot shades of Tinnahinch to the now-deserted bower of Psyche!"





Moreville and Mrs. Gore continued to converse about their mutual friends, most of whom were persons distinguished in the literary, the political, or the fashionable world. At length the discourse turned on the lady to whom he had alluded, under the name of Psyche, from the circumstance of her being the author of the beautiful poem which bears that title. Her loss, though not very recent, continued to be lamented by all who had known her, and Moreville spoke of it with the unpremeditated eloquence of friendship and feeling. The countenance and voice of Moreville, like his music, could pass, in an instant, from the expression of the most exhilarating mirth to the most soul-subduing sadness. Mrs. Gore was affected by the subject, Mrs. Arthur Gore thought it necessary to appear so, and L 2 Moreville,





Moreville, as if willing to charm away the spirit of melancholy he had raised, exclaimed—" Come, shall I give you the last strain which I dedicated to the ' Nightingale of Rosanna?" Going over to the instrument, he then sung, with inimitable tenderness and grace



'' When Time, who steals our years away,

Shalt steal our pleasures too;"



and the fascination of his voice and manner was only interrupted by the entrance of an elegant collation, of which Geraldine assisted Mrs. Gore to do the honours.

The table was covered with a profusion of delicacies, the rarest fruits, and finest exotics. Every thing at Mrs. Gore's evinced not only taste and expence, but a degree of fanciful luxury. Amidst the flowering shrubs that filled the air with odours, iEolian harps were fixed at every window ; and she was at that moment engaged in explaining to Mortimer, the landscape-gardener, her intention of build





ing, by the side of a branch of the Shannon that took its course through her grounds, a temple like that in Italy dedicated to the river god Clitunanus, of which she had been recently reading an interesting description.

Moreville, still at the piano, pensively struck the first chords of " Here's the bower she loved so much."

"My sweet pretty Geraldine," said Mrs. Gore, turning quick round to her, "here's Mr. Mortimer says we must draw upon your taste and talents. It is not much I want of you," she continued, observing her auditor look alarmed ; " it is only just to make me a statue, in two or three days, of a dear little god, to recline in that temple of Clitumnus we were planning, and Mr. Moreville should write an inscription for me. Do now think of it; I am sure you could do it very quick, if once you began."

"An artist too!" exclaimed Moreville,

gazing on her attentively, and the bril

L 3 liant, liant, exhilarating smile passed over his features as he repeated, in a half-suppressed voice, from Voltaire—





"Avec tant de beauté, de grace naturelle,

Qu'a-t-'elle a faire de talens?'



Don't you think, Mrs. Gore," he playfully continued, " a figure of my old friend St. Senanus would be more in character with the scene?"

At this moment Mr. Stratford Gore, who had been trying a horse upon the lawn, came in.—" My dear," said he, "I am surprised you have not arranged any party for the morning."

"I thought," replied Mrs. Gore, who had assumed an additional dash of the precieuse, from being in company with an antiquary and a poet, " that you were taken up trying the paces of that new hunter, like the heroes of Homer, who, even in the shades, could find no recreation but in the exercises of war or the chase. I am quite ready for a change. What

say say you, Mr. Moreville and Mr. O'Carolan"—there was a time when Mr. Pendennis would have also been consulted—" shall we go visit that Danish fort Mr. Gore was talking about yesterday, or the more picturesquely-interesting Ruins of Kilmallock?"





"Oh, the Ruins of Kilmallock, by all

means!" exclaimed Moreville, not waiting

for the antiquary's slow reply. "You

know it is called the Palmyra or Balbec of

. Ireland."

Geraldine smiled, on recollecting a communication made by Miss Southwell and Miss O'Reilly, by which a ludicrous association was united in her mind with the name of the Ruins of Palmyra: at the same time she sighed to think how much it is in the power of such ill-timed associations to repress the indulgence of the most elevating and sublime emotions.

"Why that smile, and why that sigh?" demanded Moreville, with a voice of interest.

L4 "Now





"Now promise me, Geraldine," interrupted Mrs. Gore, laying a great emphasis on the word " promise," "that you will turn in your mind what I said to you about the river god Clitumnus."

"Oh, never heed the little god Columbus now!" exclaimed their good-humoured host. "If you mean to march to-day, good folks, it is time you should put yourselves into motion."

"Heigh'o!" said Mrs. Gore, "what a companion I have! This is the way, Mr. Moreville, that Mr. Gore always treats my classical allusions!"

"It is so difficult, in such company," replied the poet, bowing to Mrs. Gore, but looking at Geraldine, " to think of any fabled deity but one!"

Meanwhile Pendennis had been trying to gain from Mr. O'Carolan some further intelligence respecting Cobham; but all he could learn from the antiquary was, that he had seen him in a pedestrian costume, the day before, a few miles from Limerick.

He





He therefore rose with the rest, preparing to forget, as well as he could, in the promised pleasures of the morning, the defection of his graceless nephew, but could not forbear triumphantly humming, as he passed by O'Carolan—

"St. Patrick of Ireland, he was Saint George's boy."

The horses and carriages were soon brought round, the parties were arranged, and the joyous group in motion for the time-hallowed Ruins of Kilmallock.





CHAPTER XI.



Ah, luckless babe ! born under cruel star,

And in dead parents' baleful ashes bred,

Full little weenest thou what sorrows are

Left thee for portion of thy livelihed.

Poor orphan! in the wide world scattered,

As budding branch rent from the native tree,

And throwen forth 'till it be withered. Spenser.



During the course of their short journey, Geraldine was shocked to observe the appearance of want and wretchedness in the very neighbourhood of Mr. Gore's handsome residence, where every thing bespoke luxury and enjoyment. Half-starved peasants, and children scarcely clad, ran out from their smoky and mud-built hovels, to stare at the sumptuous equipage, as it rolled along, or rather, more probably, to catch at the passing boon of charity, which rarely was denied. Such contrasted scenes

of





of splendour and misery, it had never been her chance to witness within the circle of the judicious and benevolent influence of lady Louisa Southwell; they struck her, therefore, the more forcibly.

Want of work was the almost-constant complaint of these poor people, and formed the substance of many a melancholy tale of sufferings and privations, which ended in the determination of leaving their inhospitable home, in order to toil harder, with scanty pay, in the neighbouring kingdom.

Little as Geraldine had yet seen of the country or its inhabitants, still there was one family whose appearance interested her more than the rest, and in whose favour a plan suggested itself to her mind, by which she might render them permanent assistance, without interfering with, or offending Mrs. Stratford Gore.

She was still thinking of this benevolent

project, when the party, on horseback and

in the carriage, approached Kilmallock. The fragments of its numerous gateways, towers, and castles—its monastery and abbey-church, rising from amidst surrounding fields, groves, and streams, and viewed beneath the mellowing tints of a declining Sun, presented a scene of the most impressive interest. This then was the site of a once-powerful city, now reduced to the rank of an obscure and ruined village. Passing through an ancient gateway, which still preserved a very grand and picturesque appearance, the party proceeded, with the assistance of an intelligent inhabitant as guide, to explore this mingled mass of tombs and ruins. The abbey-church and monastery, which stand outside the walls of Kilmallock, were soon found to be the objects most worthy of examination. The pure Gothic displayed in the long and stately aisles, the towers, and roofing of those buildings, filled the mind with ideas of their former grandeur and utility; but nothing could long detain Geraldine from the tomb of the too-fatally-renowned white





knight,





knight, who, after a career marked at once by valour and cruelty, closed the life of a Tiberius with the death of a Gracchus. In a desperate engagement, in which fortune turned against him, he commanded one of his own followers to put him to death, that he might not fall into the hands of the enemy. Unhappy chieftain!

5' Nothing in his life

Became him like the leaving it *."



Reflecting on this strange eventful story,

in the very scene which bore record of his

exploits and fall, she felt that pleasing sad-

ness which rather invites than discourages

meditation. The Southwell family traced

their descent, in the female line, from this

powerful chieftain. He was one of the

Geraldines of Munster, and bore, as a pa-

tronymic, that name, which has since, like

some other appellations in Ireland, been

transferred to the other sex.

Geraldine Southwell had, from nature,



a great

* Shakespeare. Macbeth.



r





a great deal of that species of enthusiasm which is only objectionable when it is affected—an enthusiasm which owes its birth to a poetic turn of mind, but which is never, perhaps, kindled to such a height as when it catches an additional spark from pride of ancestry. Past ages rolled back to her melancholy and ardent imagination. She thought of the Dalgais, those warlike heroes of South Munster; then again, reverting to the ruined pile before her, contrasted its present desolation with the times when learning and the arts were successfully cultivated in those secure retreats, when poetry and song lent mutual aid to each other, and her country was the pride of islands, and the light of nations. With such feelings crowding on her mind, she had hung over the tomb of the oncedreaded Geraldine, neglectful of the fading light—neglectful of the summons of the antiquary, who had hurried away the other visitors to a different part of the building. Suddenly she looked up, and started at

finding





finding herself alone. She hastily rose to join her party, and stumbled over some misshapen and moss-grown pieces of stone.

The air began to grow damp and thick. Shuddering, and with a sharp sensation of pain, Geraldine sunk down on one of the rocky fragments, when a hollow, mournful voice, that seemed to issue from the tomb of the bloody white knight, uttered these words—" My penance is grievous! but does it equal mine offences?" Her imagination, already struck with the crimes and misfortunes of the white knight, this strange coincidence of circumstances had nearly overcome her. Geraldine tried to raise herself, and fly the horrid spot. At the same moment a gray figure arose from" above the tomb, and took its way along one of the side-aisles, till it seemed to fade with the fading light.

According to Geraldine's slight recollection of the disposition of the ruins, she must pass through this aisle, if she wished to rejoin her party. Rallying herself for

. ., a degree





a degree of momentary repugnance, she made a desperate effort to shake off this weakness, and advanced along the aisle, now half-shrouded in gloom, when she heard distinct sounds of persons talking and whispering, and even thought she felt lips breathing on her, and the near presence of invisible speakers. Struck with nameless, irresistible terror, her brow became chilled—her head swam round— she could proceed no farther. Closing her eyes, and applying her hand firmly to her throbbingtemples.Geraldine leaned against a pillar, and became the trembling and unwilling auditor of the following whispered conversation:—" Comfort! no comfort for me! 'Twas here she fell, and I could have prevented it! stabbed to the heart by the husband she adored! and look—look at those spots of blood all along the passage! 'twas there—there—oh, God! Can you forgive me, Isabel? he cried.— Forgive you! she said, and gave one look at her destroyer. Oh, 'twas a fearful tragedy!"





gedy!" The breath of Geraldine came tumultuously and thick—her heart died within her; yet she bent in agonizing curiosity to hear the remainder.—" And the child," asked a second voice, "does

she live? does she know "—" The

child," replied the first speaker, " Geraldine, has grown up to maturity, under the care of her natural protector—of Southwell."

A piercing shriek, which burst from the unhappy Geraldine, rung through the vaults and arches. She sprung forward, agitated with convulsive strength, from the operation of contending emotions—a dread of encountering the speaker, yet an ardent desire to force from him a clear elucidation of his mysterious tale. At this moment a face glared from amidst the ruins, a hand waved her away, and the apparition vanished; the countenance was such as to rob her of all power of recollection—it was wild, fiendish, and unearthly, and yet it was human—a face so horrid and fantastic, as nothing but the combination of feverish dreams had ever presented to mortal eye before. Powerless she sunk against the wall: a faint groan alone bespoke her sensible of existence, when she was roused again to full consciousness, by shouts of laughter that sounded discordantly in her ears.





Mrs. Stratford Gore was first in sight, followed by Moreville the poet; while Mr. O'Carolan, not of all men the thinnest, panting, blowing, and his face of a pompadour colour, brought up the rear.— "Ha, ha, ha! Mr. Moreville, you will make me die of laughing!" cried the lady. "What upon earth made you tempt our venerable antiquary to such a scramble up the spiral staircase of that tower, when you knew we should see nothing for our pains?"

"Upon my honour, madam," replied the poet, demurely, " there was an Irish inscription which I could plainly decipher with the naked eye, and which, if

my





my friend's optics were not quite so clear, he might easily have made out with the help of your quizzing- glass."

"Why, how now, Geraldine!" exclaimed Mrs. Gore, her attention directed to a new object, by the pale and affrighted countenance of her young friend; " one would swear you had been holding a ghostly colloquy with the phantom of your namesake, the white knight of Kilmallock. This expedition was planned rather too late in the day. Pray Heaven we have not all caught colds with it; and as the bel notturno gelo can do us no manner of good, I move that we return with all convenient speed."

Mr. Moreville took Geraldine's passive hand to conduct her to the carriage. He perceived how ill she looked, and how she trembled; but she persisted in refusing to assign any cause for her apparent dejection, although the agitation of her spirits was but too visible during the whole drive home. Neither the unwearied loquacity

of





of Mrs. Stratford, nor the soft attentions of Mrs. Arthur Gore, nor the inexhaustible store of anecdote possessed by Moreville, and the charm with which every subject became invested, when viewed through the prismatic medium of his enchanting imagination, could divert her mind from the tale of grief and horror that occupied her thoughts. As the shades of evening gathered in, the face was still before her; it glanced at the carriage windows—it met her at the portal as she alighted—that face, which was far from being ugly, though the whole semblance, taken together, was frightful—a countenance of which guilt constituted the mysterious horror—such a one as fancy would give to an embodied evil spirit.

Of all the travellers, Pendennis and the antiquary seemed best pleased with their excursion. During the course of the day, they found so many points of agreement, that they quite forgot their first dispute, and did not part without a cordial invita





tion from Pendennis to Mr. O'Carolan to come and see him at Mount Parnassus.

Geraldine passed a sleepless night, haunted by distracting thoughts of her parents' wretchedness, the guilt and ruin of her family. She could find no relief but in supposing that the whole, or part of what she had heard, was false, or that she had misunderstood the speaker. Towards morning she fell into a profound and heavy sleep, and awoke a little refreshed. On the following day, her dejection was not so much remarked.

Mrs. Arthur Gore, with her family, left Mount Amaranth, and Mrs. Gore, who was really a fond mother, lost all her brilliant and affected gaiety at the prospect of parting with her son. Geraldine thought it her first duty, as a guest who had received so much kindness, to set aside her own subjects of sorrow, and endeavour to support the spirits of Mrs. Gore. This praiseworthy conduct was its own reward, and she had ever found the conscientious

sense





sense she cherished of her relative and social duties the best preservative of her own peace of mind. The unassuming virtues shine brightest in a season of trial, and, >

"Like the plants that throw

Their fragrance from the wounded part,

Breathe sweetness out of woe."



When the family was restored to its usual routine, the scene at Kilmallock returned with fearful force to Geraldine's remembrance. The conclusion of the conversation, which she could recollect with a degree of painful distinctness, convinced her that the whole could only relate to her family and herself. She felt the most anxious desire to clear up the mystery, united to an unconquerable repugnance to communicating her painful difficulties. Such a state of mind had necessarily an influence on her health and spirits: she became also anxious to hear from her friends in Dublin, who had been some





time without writing. At length this source of solicitude was removed by the receipt of the following epistle.



CHAPTER XII.



Since from an ancient race descended,

You boast an unattainted blood,

By yours be their fair fame attended,



And claim, by birthright, to be good! Cowper.

Miss Dora OReiUy to Geraldine Southwell.

Dublin. "Who would have thought it? Are we not told, in some theatrical memoirs, that such was the motto chosen by the celebrated Mrs. Clive, when, by talents and successful industry, that admirable comic actress had arrived at the dramatic summum bonum—the honour of driving to and from the theatre in her own

carriage?





carriage? I was ready to make the same exclamation, on finding Mr. Montfort, whom I had been used to see studying the antique, or taking long solitary promenades in the gallery at Meadowscourt, transformed—hey, presto!—into an officer, an aid-de-camp, and a nobleman, under the name, style, and title of Ferdinand earl of O'Melvyl. There is a surprise for you, my beautiful Geraldine! What will you give me for such a piece of news to enliven a dull country party? To take it up from the beginning, this phoenix turns out to be only son and heir to the marquis of Beaudesert, by a German lady now dead, whom he married when a young man on his travels. This self-banished marquis, after spending his best days in Italy, returned home some months ago, with so little intention of acknowledging his early marriage, that he brought over a tall, dark-eyed Italian—a count di San Carlos, of whom more hereafter—to whose mother he professed to have some obliga





tions, and whom, in consequence, he meant to make the heir of his fortune and estates. But this was not to be: lady Louisa Southwell found out the whole of Montfort's story: she assembled proofs—she sent him with letters to the marquis—what they contained I know not: her ladyship must acquaint you with the particulars herself. We are all aware that her abilities and dexterity in conducting affairs of that sort are second to none but those of Warwick the king-maker. Let it suffice that she succeeded in inducing the marquis to acknowledge Ferdinand Montfort as his legitimate son, and that he is, at this instant, as fond and as proud of him as he was formerly averse from all domestic ties As lord O'Melvyl has already served in the military line, and lord Beau desert is a strong supporter of government, he has put him on the Irish staff for the present, that professional duties may not divide them. We never were acquainted with the half of lord O'Melvyl's character: not Vol. I. M thing thing certainly expands both our good and evil qualities like prosperity, and I fear he will have too much of it. In solitude and retirement he was interesting; but now his manners have acquired that confidence, that ' ease which marks security to please.'





They are oh, my dear! come, see, and

judge for yourself: we have had a sad busy time of it; not but that Dublin is still very thin. Last week lord O'Melvyl gave us a dijeund at lord Beaudesert's villa, within a few miles of Dublin. The banquetting-room was painted in the most beautiful style: the music!—such ravishing strains never were heard since the commencement of the Irish harp society, or the commemoration of Carolan. We were all national, you will observe; the dear creature would have it so: lady Louisa, Miss Southwell, and myself, in the sweetest lilac-spangled tabbinets. He had told Matilda, lilac was a colour he particularly preferred. A word to the wise— lady James Stawell and lady Louisa were

the the only women in town; but we had all the men in the world—all the fashionable men, I mean. There was dancing, and the charming Olivia Pendennis made herself more conspicuously ridiculous than ever. A-propos to the charming Olivia— Diana told me, in confidence, before we left Meadowscourt, that the foolish girl had appropriated a very pretty legacy, bequeathed to her by a doating grandmother, to the furtherance of her plan of being presented at the Castle. Was ever any thing in this world so absurd? What do you think of her brother Cobham? He has actually followed us up to town 'all the way from Limerick,' as we say, and declares that, whoever will may do the drudgery of the school for him; that he has done with it, as his genius points towards one of the liberal professions. He has contrived to fasten himself upon lord O'Melvyl, whose good-nature and old regard for Pendennis the Great will not permit him to shake off his nephew. M 2 Cobham Cobham has constituted himself his lordship's imitator, or polygraph—and, Heavens, what an imitator! When in presence of the goddess, or the Ruins of Palmyra, he is, if possible, still more ridiculous. Lady James Stawell calls him one of lady Louisa's martyrs, the name by which her ladyship designates those unfortunate and awkward youths who, on their first introduction into company, appear rather suffering the penance of some hidden sin, than sharing in the pleasures of society. I wish you could but have seen him the other night at the concert, twirling his opera-hat in his hand, like Kean, in the first scenes of Leon. Talking of the concert puts me in mind there is a whisper of a fancy-ball at the Rotunda, and a charming mendicity-ball, and some say there is to be an installation! And now, my lovely Geraldine, put your hand on your little heart, and tell me truly, have you not some curiosity to see le beau Fernand in all his glory? Lady Louisa . '' '-.... and





and Miss Southwell parade him about everywhere with them, and her ladyship has really some right to be proud of this last achievement. Lady Louisa and sir Charles Southwell are both comme a lor

dinaire—that is But they desire most

affectionate remembrances to you, and will write very soon. All our compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gore. She is a very absurd person, but a mighty good-natured, hospitable creature, I believe. I have scribbled half-a-volume of note paper, and must conclude, my lovely Geraldine's "Ever attached,

"Dora O'reilly. "P. S. Be sure you don't break open the seal of this letter—it is an Italian device— I had it from the count di San Carlos."



This epistle, with its impracticable concluding admonition, was delivered to Geraldine by lord Templemore. He was still our heroine's devoted admirer, and M 3 appeared appeared much improved by his very short intercourse with the world. Lady Louisa Southwell had planned his unexpected return before she quitted Limerick, and that was her real reason for catching with such eagerness at Mrs. Gore's invitation to Geraldine. Her ladyship flattered herself that his lordship's sudden reappearance in a comparatively-sequestered scene, of which Geraldine would by that time be, most probably, weary, might do more towards forwarding his suit, than if he met her surrounded by the incense her charms and connexions would draw around her in Dublin. This project, however skilfully arranged, failed of success. Lord Templemore found his fair one still inexorable. 'After having clearly explained to him, however, that he was not to consider her as the inducement of his stay, she did not think it necessary to render his residence at Mount Amaranth disagreeable by perverse or affected behaviour: on the contrary, she entered, with good-humour, into to any plan for the general amusement, and partook of many agreeable parties in his lordship's company, that might not have been proposed but for his being a visitor.





One morning lord Templemore expressed a desire to see the Ruins of Kilmallock. Geraldine started and shuddered, when first she heard this excursion suggested; but, upon recollection, considered that now was the opportunity perhaps to gain some information respecting the mysterious wanderer of the tombs—to have her worst doubts confirmed, or clear up her suspicions. But though she contrived to devote part of the time the other visitors employed in examining these venerable remains of antiquity, to making herself acquainted with the humble inhabitants of Kilmallock, and addressing them with every inquiry that might tend (without compromising herself) to gain some elucidation of a scene she could never look back upon without horror, the result of her atM 4 tempts





tempts was totally unsatisfactory. No pilgrim, of the singular appearance she described, was known to visit the time-ruined fanes and sepulchres of Kilmallock. In vain Geraldine conversed with the dark and sallow inmate of many a wretched hovel, hoping, yet dreading, to meet the countenance that was never absent from her memory. Disheartened at her total want of success, she returned from this ill-fated excursion, in spirits, if possible, still lower than the time before; and Mrs. Gore, who began to think some spell was cast over her fair guest the moment she entered those gates, declared this should be the last visit she would pay in her company to Kilmallock.

The departure of lord Templemore and other guests conduced, with the advancing season, to make Mrs. Gore desirous of the gaieties of Dublin. Geraldine too longed to join her first best friend, whose letters had latterly expressed a lively wish for her company, and whose many excellen





cies of heart and mind arose again to her memory, with that renovated warmth and freshness with which imagination paints the qualities of those we love, after a temporary separation. Such being the disposition of parties, a removal was quickly determined on; and Geraldine experienced a sensation almost resembling the bliss of home, on finding herself received in the maternal arms of lady Louisa, and settled in a delightful apartment in her ladyship's sumptuous residence. She had observed that, in her letters, lady Louisa had said very little about Montfort's splendid change of fortune, and concluded that her ladyship reserved her explanations for their first tite-a-tete. Nor was Geraldine mistaken; the day after her arrival, when Miss Southwell and Miss O'Reilly had driven out to make purchases, lady Louisa took the opportunity to converse unrestrainedly with Geraldine. Shutting the door of her boudoir, and drawing with her young friend towards the fire—" Now is M 5 the



r





the time," she said, "for a full disclosure of my motives and -actions; but, in the first place, I must warn you not to be frightened, or at least not to express any terror, if"

"Lady James Stawell, and my lord O'Melvyl, my lady," said a tall footman, throwing open the door of the boudoir.

Lady Louisa started up, while a momentary expression of high irritation passed over her features.

"They are below in the drawing-room, my lady."

"How provoking!" she muttered: "I am sure I had given orders to be denied to every one. But come, Geraldine," she added, turning to her companion, "two visitors happening to arrive at the same time are more than I can entertain." She hastily descended the stairs, and Geraldine, trying to persuade herself she was as much vexed at this interruption as lady Louisa, followed her example. Had Geraldine Southwell possessed as little self-command

as





as a sister heroine, Caroline de Lichtfield, she would certainly, like her, have screamed and run away at the sight that awaited her in the drawing-room. She entered, expecting to see the well-remembered form of O'Melvyl, when, instead of him, she beheld lady James Stawell, already engaged in conversation with a figure which bore more resemblance to the ghastly and unearthly inhabitants of a different world than to an inmate of this. The Venetian blinds were all closed, and the draperies drawn down, which contributed to cast a dim and greenish light over the almosttransparent apparition that held discourse with the lady. It was the figure of a man, originally tall, above the common height, but now bent almost double either by age or sickness. His sharp and pallid features were wrapt in a black silk coif; and when he turned his eyes, which were large and dark, upon the ladies, as they entered the room, they seemed to glare with a portentous and almost-unnatural lustre. La

dy dy Louisa immediately perceived the mistake committed by her footman Robert, who had an inveterate habit of substituting one name or title for another, and who, for a number of similar errors, had acquired in the family the more familiar and appropriate appellation of Blundering Bob. Fearful of its consequences on Geraldine, when prepared to meet so very different a person, she lost no time in announcing the stranger to her, as the marquis of Beaudesert, adding, as she turned to him—" We have at length, my lord, got the young lady among us, whose absence you heard us so often lament as the greatest break in our circle—this is Miss Geraldine Southwell."





Notwithstanding his apparent infirmities, the spectre rose and bowed; and Geraldine internally smiled at the effect of prepossession, when she caught herself almost fancying she could trace, in his wasted features, a likeness, of outline at least, to those of Montfort; while an indescribable

expression





expression of loftiness and dignity was still diffused over his shattered frame. Terror was quickly succeeded by curiosity to know what fatal cause had brought on such a wreck, which, as she examined the countenance of the marquis more attentively, she found reason to think was premature; and before the end of the visit, this curiosity was again converted into interest, by the taste, politeness, and information his lordship's conversation displayed. As these changes were rapidly passing through the mind of Geraldine, lord O'Melvyl and the count di San Carlos were announced; and this time she was not disappointed, for Montfort himself stood before her. The interesting appearance of the two young men, who seemed fondly united, was in advantageous contrast to that of the marquis. Though equally handsome, nothing could be more different than their style of countenance; that of San Carlos being decidedly Italian, while lord O'MelvyPs united much that

was





was peculiar to Germany, with the gay, frank, winning expression that distinguishes the sons of Erin. He wore the uniform of an aide-de-camp of the Castle, and looked in high spirits and remarkably handsome. On Geraldine Southwell's re-introduction to him under his new title, he bowed profoundly, and then, taking her hand, slightly touched it with his lips. Recovering immediately, as from a momentary abstraction, he, in seeming confusion, asked a thousand pardons for a liberty into which, he said, he had been betrayed, from having lived so much abroad, where the custom was pretty general on being presented to a lady.

Geraldine smiled, and accepted the apology, but could not help recollecting that such fits of absence had never seized him at Meadowscourt.—" This is one of the instances, I suppose," she said to herself, "of the 'ease which marks security to please;' respecting which Miss O'Reilly warned me."

Lord





Lord O'Melvyl now approached the marquis, to remind him of some appointment, and to express his readiness to accompany him. During their conversation Geraldine learnt from lady James, that O'Melvyl, gay and dissipated as he was reputed in some respects to be, would never join a party, or make an engagement that could interfere with the daily attentions he had accustomed himself to pay his only-surviving parent.—" A father's love is to him a new delight," thought Geraldine, "and he enjoys those feelings with all the relish of an untried luxury."

The visitors departed before Miss Southwell and Miss O'Reilly returned—a circumstance which was loudly deplored by the latter, and secretly regretted by the former lady.—" That was very ill-natured of them, I must say," cried Miss O'Reilly; "for lord O'Melvyl and the count di San Carlos have quite made a conquest of me; they are such dear young men—and the worst of it is, they both keep never-mind





ing! I love to see them so united—it is so generous of San Carlos, Who has lost such noble expectations by O'Melvyl. But tell me," she added, turning to Geraldine, "did lord O'Melvyl give himself any of the airs he is trying to bring into fashion?"

"He only kissed Geraldine's hand, and then begged pardon," said lady Louisa.

"And did not he blush most becomingly, and say it was a custom at all foreign courts? That is what he says to all the ladies, and is thus perpetually trespassing and begging pardon, upon the plea of early education. He did so the other day to me."

Geraldine had annexed no importance to this little incident, yet felt vexed to discover that she experienced a sort of mortification, on the good-humoured Miss O'Reilly's describing O'Melvyl's manner as being exactly the same to herself. Ashamed of this little femality, as " uncle Selby" would have called it, she determined carefully to conceal it.

Far





Far from suspecting the effect she had produced, Miss O'Reilly went on—" He has been in other scenes besides foreign courts, I believe, before he was acknowledged by his father. He seems to have had a strange, eventful life; and then he has some secret sorrow, some hidden source of regret unremoved, that he never communicates even to the marquis, and that makes him sad and wild by fits and starts. But I believe it is only one of his airs to be occasionally sublime and interesting."

Geraldine, though she had no good reason to allege, was inclined to be of the contrary opinion. Our heroine determined, however, to suspend her judgment till lady Ijouisa related to her the fatal circumstances that had reduced his father to the pale wounded spectre she beheld— till she knew the history of the injuring and injured marquis of Beaudesert.



END OF VOL. I.



Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London.





PBIKTED FOR

•d. K. JVEWM*dJV * CO.

AT THE

iJrlmeiva Uuw, LEADENHALL.STREET, LONDON.

£ s. d.

Love, Mystery, and Misery, by A. F. Holstein, 2 vols 0 10 0

The Modem Villa and Ancient Castle, or the Peer and

Alderman, by Miss Byron, Author of the English-

woman, &c. 3 vols 0 15 0



Festival of St. Jago, by the Author of the Private His-

tory of the Court of England, 2 vols 0 10 0



Arthur Fitz-Albini, 3d edition, 2 vols 0 9 0

Louisa, or the Cottage on the Moor, by Mrs. Helme,

8th edition, 2 vols 0 10 0

Woman, or Ida of Athens, by Miss Owenson, 4 vols.. 1 10

Nocturnal Minstrel, or the Spirit of the Wood, by Mrs.

Sleath, Author of the Bristol Heiress, Who's the Mur-

derer? &c. 2 vols 0 16 0



The Grey Friar and Black Spirit of the Wye, 2 vols.... 0 10 0

Euphronia, by Mrs. Norris, 3 vols 0 15 0

Houses of Osma and Almeria, or the Convent of St. IIdefonso, by the Author of the Children of the Abbey,

&c. 3 vols 0 18 0

The Beau Monde, or Scenes in High Life, 3 vols. 0 15 o

Caroline of Lichtfield, a new edition, translated by Thomas Holcroft, 3 vols 0 15 0

Memoirs of an American Lady, by the Author of Letters

from the Mountains, 3d edition, 2 vols 0 12 0

Love, Hatred, and Revenge, a Swiss Romance, by T. P.

Lathy, 2d edition, 3 vols 0 15 0

Devil upon Two Sticks in England, by the Author of Dr. Syntax's Tour in Search of the Picturesque, &c. 5th edition, 6 vols,, , 1 10 0

[9





TALES OF A TOURIST.



Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London.





CONTAINING

THE OUTLAW,

AND

FASHIONABLE CONNEXIONS.

In jf our Volumes.





BY MISS LEFANU,

AUTHOR OF

tTRATHALLAN, LEOLIN ABBEY, HELEN MOKTEAOLE, *c



From legend old, thai boar; Time supplies

To modern manners, changing as they rise,



The Wand'rer datra his keen, inquiring glance;

And, as the comic or the grave prevails,

With living portraits decks hU sportive Talea,



Or gorgeous colouring of wild Romance. Creation's Heir.



VOL. II.



LONDON:

PRINTED JOB

A. K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALL-STB EET.





TALES OF A TOURIST.



CONTINUATION OF

THE OUTLAW.



CHAPTER I.



Ce bel enfant que goide la Folie,

Par la Raison souvent calomnié,

S'appelle Amour au printems de la vie,

Et dans l'automne il se nomme Amitié.



Madame De Bouedie.

A HIS was more easily said than done. '' Blundering Bob" had perhaps interrupted the only moment in which lady Louisa was able and disposed to treat her young friend with unlimited confidence. Geraldine was accustomed to the useful activity of her ladyship's country life; but Vol. ii. B she she had no idea of the perpetual round of important or pleasurable engagements that filled up her time in Dublin. Still business occupied a greater portion than amusement, and Geraldine sometimes thought that a more gentle and feminine turn of mind might have captivated and reclaimed sir Charles; then again she reproached herself for these reflections, when she observed that this superabundant activity, this -energy of character, for once that it was employed by lady Louisa, on her own account, was exerted ten times in behalf of merit or distress.





One day she seized, as she thought, a moment of leisure and good-humour, and preferred her request. Lady Louisa looked surprised.—"DM I not tell you," she

said, "that day Oh',i no! I had forgot;

we were. interrupted. Well, you find me in a terrible harry now, Geraldine; I expect Mr. MaeCalenafoourg exactly at two, to. have his opinion on' a: very important case. I* believe no one- hates: law more

heartily





heartily than I do, and nobody is more worried with other people's business and my own. We have just an hour," looking at her watch; "any questions you wish resolved within that space of time, I shall be happy to answer you. And first, as to my acquaintance with Montfort's mother, it was formed when I was a girl, like you, and visiting, with my mother, the baths of Aix-la-Chapelle. Sophia Walstein was the daughter of a Hanoverian lady, who was also there. I was just at the age one loves to contract violent friendships, and mine for Sophia was at its height, when we were all thrown into confusion by her elopement with Mr. Montfort, an Irish gentleman of family and fortune, with whom we had been for some time in habits of intimacy. This was the same person with whom you are now acquainted, under the title of marquis of Beaudesert. Sophia's want of confidence in me was what most wounded my spirit. Other objects soon diverted my thoughts. I was B 2 introduced introduced to sir Charles Southwell; we were mutually pleased with each other, and, contrary to the advice of all my friends, I married him.





"The first years of my marriage I spent abroad. Sir Charles's habits and tastes were all foreign. On my return to Ireland, I thought of making some inquiries about this Montfort, but was unsuccessful in discovering either him or Sophia. At length, after a lapse of years, when I had scarcely a hope, or even a wish, left on the subject, the accidental arrival of a stranger at Meadowscourt, bearing the name of the man whose conduct disturbed the happiest days of my youth, recalled to my mind the memory of those days; I found I was not deceived in my first pressentiments respecting Mr. Montfort. He was indeed the son of Montfort and Sophia. What further particulars I have to tell you, I learnt from his own lips, and he learnt them from his mother. The honourable Mr. Montfort was nephew

and





and heir to the late marquis of Beaudesert.

"Hopeless of obtaining his uncle's approbation of his precipitate marriage with a portionless foreigner, he did not attempt it, but conveyed Sophia to a retreat so retired, that the most watchful suspicion could not have discovered her, and forbade all intercourse by letter with her former friends. She inhabited a cottage amidst the romantie mountains of Mourne; and there Ferdinand Montfort passed the first seven years of his existence. His father had calculated that the death of the marquis of Beaudesert, who appeared in a declining state of health, would have soon put an end to the necessity of concealment; but the event disappointed his expectations.

"Wearied with the solicitations of lord Beaudesert, on whom he entirely depended, and who, believing him free, was perpetually urging him to marry, Montfort resolved to go abroad again, taking with him Ferdinand and Sophia. At BrusB 3 sels





sels Sophia met her mother, now a widow, and in very indifferent circumstances. So deeply did my poor friend reproach herself for her former breach of duty, that she besought her husband to let her accompany madame Walstein, who was returning to Hanover, and to let her spend that time with her mother which Montfort meant to dedicate to visiting Italy. To this he consented; and from that moment, Sophia's life, till it closed, was one tissue of misfortunes.

"After having remained some time with madame Walstein in Hanover, Sophia received a strange, incomprehensible letter from her husband, containing the bitterest accusations of ill-conduct, and ending with a peremptory mandate to send his son to him, as she was unworthy of being entrusted with his future guardianship. This Sophia, in an evil moment, refused, but, in her answer, requested only to be allowed a hearing. She expressed her readiness to set out to meet him at any place he should appoint, and her certainty, once in his presence, of being able completely to justify herself from her unknown accusers. Mr. Montfort's reply was couched in these terms—'Spare yourself the trouble. Henceforth we have nothing in common. I shall never return to Ireland, and you will vainly endeavour to. discover my future plaee of residence.' This answer was the death-warrant of Sophia."





Lady Louisa paused, apparently much affected.

Geraldine almost reproached herself for having urged this painful explanation.

Lady Louisa resumed—" Yes, she fell a victim to a single error. Oh, Geraldine! how much is that woman to be pitied, who has neither strength of mind to resist the suit of a lover, of whom her parents disapprove, nor spirit to support the retribution of his undeserved unkindness!"

Ever making a return upon herself, lady Louisa seemed to have forgotten she had B 4





any thing more to tell, when Geraldine recalled it to her memory, by asking what became of Ferdinand.

"He remained with his grandmother, madame Walstein, now sunk into a state of imbecility from increasing infirmities, which prevented her from attending to his interests, or seeking to obtain justice for him. It appeared as if his father had totally abandoned him, and, whatever faults malice might have imputed to his mother, they afforded not excuse sufficient for this mysterious alienation.

"On entering his fifteenth year, a sudden and brilliant change of fortune awaited him. Madame Walstein died; and a paternal uncle of his mother, a nobleman high in the Austrian service, having lost an only son in a duel, for the first time deigned to notice the destitute youth. He inquired of Ferdinand if he was inclined to the military life, offering, in that case, to obtain for him the situation of page in the emperor's household, and afterwards to

get





get him a commission in the Austrian service.

"Ferdinand immediately repaired to Vienna. Divided between the duties of a court and a military life, Montfort had little leisure, during the period that succeeded, to revert to the past, and that little his haughty spirit disdained to give. A new and flattering prospect presented itself. His great-uncle, count Ferdinand of Hertzberg, talked of making him his heir; and, gratified with the promise of rank, riches, and independence in his adopted country, Montfort drove wholly from his memory the parent whose cruelty had, unheard, condemned his mother, and forsaken her offspring; one of whose present rank he was ignorant, whose abode was unknown to him, and even his language partly forgotten.

"The war broke out; Montfort distinguished himself, but, on his return, found his golden dream dissipated by the marriage of count Hertzberg, now in his B 5 dotage, dotage, with an indigent, but beautiful young woman, who had rank enough to prevent its being a mesalliance, and art enough to persuade him he was an object of disinterested attachment. She soon effected a breach between the uncle and nephew, which deprived Montfort of all the pecuniary advantages he derived from the count's favour.





"Poor as when he was first introduced to him, Montfort quitted Vienna; and happening accidentally, in the Tyrol, to meet with Pendennis, the glowing descriptions he gave of the satisfaction he promised himself in a visit to Ireland, awakened, in the romantic and unsettled mind of Montfort, such a violent fit of the maladie du pays, as convinced him that his former feelings were rather the result of wounded pride than real indifference. Such is the picture ,he himself gives me of the then state of his feelings- i. ,. .

"Pendennis, with his characteristic precipitancy,





cipitancy, mistook him for a painter, because he really excelled in the art; and Montfort availed himself of the mistake to obviate the obligations of dependence. Whether he had, at that time, any settled plan of endeavouring to discover and make himself known to his father, or whether that was afterwards suggested by his accidental meeting with me, I do not know. He had made me his confidante, and we were both at a loss how to proceed, when a paragraph in the paper announced to him that the marquis of Beaudesert was in Ireland. It was one that proclaimed a considerable reward for the discovery and apprehension of some villains who had committed a considerable robbery upon the marquis."

"Oh! now I remember it!" exclaimed Geraldine, eagerly.

"And it explains every thing—the agitation of Mr. Montfort, which was so great as to strike us all. It was at breakfast; he was reading the papers to us, but on coming to this paragraph, he paused, ceased to read, and, soon after, left us to draw what conclusion we pleased."





Lady Louisa looked at Geraldine with an air of anxious surprise.

Geraldine, recalled by that look to a consciousness of the vehemence with which she had spoken, cast down her eyes, and blushed.

Lady Louisa was going to resume, when a messenger from the castle was announced. He was the bearer of a red box, containing letters for her ladyship. Lady Louisa opened it, and eagerly glan, ced over the contents. "Thank Heaven!" she cried, "my request is granted, and a widow and orphan preserved from want V

A tear of grateful pleasure trembled in her fine and upraised eye, and her whole countenance glowed with the effulgence of benevolent delight.

Geraldine was still contemplating her with respectful admiration, when counsellor MacCalembourg arrived.

Lady





Lady Louisa Southwell (a moment before the personification of melting charity) now turned all her attention, with the quick power of abstraction which marks superior minds, to a point of law.

The counsellor was succeeded by a levee of pensioners, petitioners, and visitors; and it was not till very late that her ladyship was extricated from them all to dress for dinner, and afterwards for a numerous party. The following morning she admitted Geraldine into her dressing-room, and briefly gave her the conclusion of her story.

"What I am going to tell you, I learnt partly by letter from Montfort, after his departure for Dublin, and partly from the marquis of Beaudesert.

"The elder Montfort, now lord Beaudesert, was not a man to be trusted by himself amidst the fascinations of a foreign country. He soon lost all wish to be reunited to Sophia, from the attractions he found in the society of a Neapolitan lady.

The The conversaziones of the eountess di San Carlos were distinguished as the most favourite resort of all that was eminent in rank and literature. To the recommendations of beauty and a cultivated understanding, the countess united the dangerous interest excited by the general belief that she was most unhappily married. The count was much addicted to drinking—a fault very rare in his country, and was also given up to the still more destructive vice of play. When he returned home after losing a considerable sum at the gamingtable, the ill-treatment he gave his countess was such as would have raised compassion for her, if she had been one of the least interesting, instead of the loveliest of her sex. Still Montfort talked of the necessity of his departure, when the beautiful countess asked him, with tears, if he could be so barbarous as to leave her, and confessed that his friendship, under the brutal tyranny from which she suffered, was the only circumstance that enabled





her





her to support existence. Montfort, in return, was soon led to acknowledge that, but for a secret and fatal entanglement, he could be content to spend the remainder of his life in Italy. From that moment, his fair Fiorenza spared no pains to win from him the particulars of his private marriage, and soon made herself mistress of every circumstance which had since occurred.

"A few days afterwards, he heard a foreign gentleman, to whom he was personally unknown, mention, incidentally, that he .was lately arrived from Germany.

"The conversation turned upon the society in Hanover, and the stranger added —' I wonder you do not ask me whether I have seen madame Walstein and her charming daughter Sophia, whose beauty is the theme of every traveller's praise.'

"At the name of Sophia, Montfort's attention was caught. The claims of affection and duty vibrated on his heart, and he listened, in breathless attention, while

the



i





the traveller continued —' Though she lives with her mother, her conduct is perfectly independent. Some say she is married, while others assert that she is a widow. All that is certain is her predilection for a certain painter; and Erbestein passes with her the greatest part of that time he used to devote to the honour of the arts.'

"In this statement there was an ingenious mixture of truth and falsehood; for it was true that a celebrated painter was admitted to visit at madame Walstein's, and it is to his instructions that Ferdinand owes his early progress in that charming art, for which he early evinced a decided talent. This passed at a numerous assembly at the countess di San Carlos's.

"Solicitous to conceal his marriage, and therefore unable to-express the interest he took in Sophia, Montfort rushed from the scene, in a state of mind bordering on frenzy. It never occurred to him to doubt the veracity of the speaker, who, he

thought,





thought, could have no interest or design in what he said. He knew not that the stranger from Hanover was a puppet moved at the bidding of the countess to do the darkest deed she might command, so he was rewarded by her smiles; for Fiorenza was one of those rare characters, who, uniting uncommon beauty and abilities to a total want of principle, possess an almost unlimited power of accomplishing whatever design they meditate.

"When Montfort communicated to her the conversation he had overheard, and requested her advice, she affected surprise, and recommended to him to send, without delay, for his son, that he might be removed from under the care of a mother whose conduct was so faulty. Sophia's answer to this requisition refusing her son was intercepted and opened by the countess; its contents were most gratifying to her, as it favoured a plan she already meditated, and afterwards accomplished with temporary success, that of in





during her infatuated friend to make a testamentary disposition in favour of her own son, who was threatened with ruin, from the imprudence of his father the count di San Carlos.

"Taking advantage of the insight her treachery had given her into Sophia's style and manner of writing, the countess suppressed her letter, and substituted for it another, in which his wife confessed her fault, threw herself on his merey, and then proceeded to describe, with all the eloquence of maternal grief, the progress of sickness and death in that beloved child. That no doubt might remain on the mind of Montfort, a German was soon afterwards produced, stating himself to be a domestic, some time in the service of madame Walstein in Hanover, who had witnessed and mourned the death of young Ferdinand. I need not tell you that this pretended faithful servant and messenger of Sophia's was another agent employed by Fiorenza.

"Deprived





"Deprived of the only tie that now united him to his wife, Montfort wrote her the fatal letter, announcing that their connexion was at an end. I have already told you the consequence. Montfort became exclusively attached to the society of the countess and her son Ippolito.

"As soon as Fiorenza learnt from her emissaries in Germany the death of the unfortunate Sophia, she communicated it to Montfort, and seeing him freed from every domestic tie, she now meditated a bolder plan. The treatment she received from the count di San Carlos was become intolerable. Montfort was every day terrified and shocked with accounts of violence, arising to personal outrage. At length the beautiful countess unfolded to her "only friend" the project she meditated. She had an estate in Sicily, which she brought in dowry to the count di San Carlos. Thither the countess determined to retire from his injurious treatment, and pass in peace and security the remainder

of





of her life. In short, she prevailed on Mr. Montfort to carry her off from Naples, and place her in safety at her seat of Villa Viciosa in Sicily.

"From that period he himself removed to Sicily to be near her. He assures me there was nothing but what was innocent and honourable in their friendship, his whole design being to protect an interesting and beautiful woman from insult, and we must not controvert the assertion of a nobleman.

"At length the miserable count di San Carlos died; and about the same period, Montfort became, by the death of his uncle (one of those valetudinarians who hold out to the verge of mortality), marquis of Beaudesert and earl of O'Melvyl. Fiorenza now expected he would marry her; but the enthusiasm of the marquis had, I fancy, a little subsided. Though still ignorant of the base deceit she had put upon him respecting his injured wife and child, he had, by some means, been

made made acquainted with her relations with the pretended "German baron; and this had so greatly lessened his esteem for her, that he was determined that she should never be marchioness of Beaudesert.





"When an explanation to that purpose ensued, you may imagine a storm broke loose; but, on the contrary, Fiorenza, who meditated a deeper and surer vengeance, met her disappointment with apparent resignation. They parted.

"The countess di San Carlos, who had no longer any pretext for not living at Naples, returned thither. The marquis, having no further tie to attach him to Italy, began also to think of revisiting his native home, when a letter was delivered to him from Fiorenza, which, for a time, recalled all his former habits and associations to his mind. The countess described herself as living in reduced circumstances, but regretting nothing in her change of situation except the loss of his society. She expressed a hope that what

had





had passed would not prevent his remembering her with kindness, and sometimes seeing, for her sake, the young count di San Carlos—a request the marquis was not disposed to deny.

"During the long period of his residence in Sicily, this youth had greatly won upon his affections, by the attachment he expressed to his person, and the spirit of courage and enterprise with which he had frequently made short voyages from Reggio, and braved a father's severest rage, to visit, a beloved mother in her retirement. The letter concluded with a warm recommendation of the bearer, as a domestic of tried fidelity, but one whom she was obliged, on account of the reduction of her establishment, to dismiss; and a wish implied that the marquis would take him into his service.

"Glad to be able to oblige Fiorenza at so cheap a rate, lord Beaudesert received Giacomo kindly, and gave him a situation in his household. He had not been many

days





days served by this new domestic, when, one evening, after dining alone, the marquis was taken suddenly and alarmingly ill, and, from the symptoms, was soon convinced that he was poisoned. Owing to a number of corroborative circumstances, suspicion instantly fell upon Giacomo, who was found to have fled. He was overtaken, secured, and, on a promise that his life should be spared, confessed every thing. He owned that he was employed by Fiorenza, and was to have had a reward for administering the deadly draught.

"For six weeks the great strength of the patient enabled him to struggle against the effects of the poison that had been administered to him, and during this period the young count di San Carlos, who was ignorant of the dreadful share his mother had in this calamity, attended him with the duty and affection of a son. At length the powerful antidotes he had taken prevailed, and the marquis of Beaudesert





desert rose from the couch on which Italian treachery had Md him, but changed from the gay, handsome Montfort, to the pale, haggard, emaciated object you have seen.

"Disappointed in this attempt, Fiorenza's vengeance still pursued him. She caused him to be waylaid at night by bravoes, and he would undoubtedly have fallen their victim, but for the spirit and gallantry of young San Carlos. It was on that occasion, before the count came up to his assistance, he received that wound in the head which obliges him to have it wrapped up in a covering of black silk.

"The faculty now all united in recommending a speedy return to his native country, as the only chance of life for lord Beaudesert.

"His arrival could not be a secret, but it required caution to proceed in the business. We were, as yet, unacquainted with the excellent dispositions of San

Carlos,





Carlos, whom lord Beaudesert, in gratitude for his having twice contributed to save his life, still determined to make his heir. I recalled myself to his lordship's memory by letter, in order to enable him to do justice to the son of my former friend. I transmitted to him, through Montfort, documents that completely established her innocence. The event surpassed our expectations. Once convinced of the identity of Ferdinand Montfort, and the innocence of Sophia, the unfortunate marquis was enabled easily to trace back the labyrinth of perfidy and guilt by which he had been entangled, and he gave me all the particulars, as I have related them to you, on our meeting in Dublin.

"When the present lord O'Melvyl became aware of the expectations, and consequent disappointment, of the count di San Carlos, he prevailed with his father to make a very handsome provision for him, as some compensation for this unexpected change in his prospects." !-. , . -A

Vol. n. c "That





"That was worthy of O'Melvyl!" exclaimed Geraldine, with a glow of pleased approbation ; " I trust the son of Fiorenza may prove as worthy of him, yet I cannot help fearing"

"What, Geraldine!" interrupted lady Louisa, hastily, "can you not believe that the offspring of erring parents may be good?"

A gleam of painful light shot across the mind of Geraldine: she remembered the mysterious conversation she had heard among the ruins of Kilmallock respecting her family. Every circumstance relating to that shocking scene recurred to her mind. She thought this was the moment to demand a full explanation of it, and, with tremulous emotion, recounted to lady Louisa all that she had then seen and heard.

Her ladyship was evidently agitated by the description of the dreadful countenance. She made Geraldine repeat it twice over, and then said to herself—" It was he! it could be no other!" Suddenly changing her manner, her lips trembled, her eyes

flashed flashed fire.—" Never, I adjure you, Geraldine," she said, "speak to me on that subject again; your happiness is all I desire, and I shall yet secure it, if you do not, by your own wilful folly, traverse my design. Be satisfied, and inquire no more!"





Lady Louisa rose in great emotion, took two or three turns up and down the room, and then, as if desirous to banish from Geraldine's mind the too great earnestness of her expression, reverted to the previous subject of their conversation, and said, with a constrained smile—" You have made quite a novelist of me, Geraldine— I don't think I ever told so long a story in my life."

"The novel is still somewhat deficient in one ingredient," answered Geraldine, endeavouring, though timidly, to catch her friend's spirit of gaiety.

"Indeed, and what ingredient may that be?"

'* Love!" replied Geraldine, blushing.

"Love! you little unconscionable gipc 2 sy! sy! have not I given you, in the space of one history, the loves of the fair Fiorenza and the unfortunate Sophia?"





"I can imagine another" Geraldine resumed.

"Well, then," said lady Louisa, gaily, "let us see your roman."

"There were difficulties in the way, and prejudices to be removed," Miss Southwell continued, "which a common acquaintance would hardly have dared to touch upon, but which an influence more powerful has obviated. My idea is, that, before he devoted himself either to Sophia or Fiorenza, Montfort would willingly have become attached to a much superior woman, and that, though repulsed at the time, he was destined to acknowledge her ascendancy to the latest period of his life."

Lady Louisa looked earnestly at Geraldine, as if she would have penetrated whether mere accident dictated this random conjecture; then complimenting her upon her powers of divination, she availed





ed herself of a phrase of the French loyalists, which the circumstances of the times had brought that year into fashion, and, laughing off her confusion, exclaimed— "Well, et ' quand meme *.'"



CHAPTER II.



- Perchè mai



Limpido il core in fronte

Non si legge a ciascun?

Mille dubbj mi destano in petto

Quel silenzio, quel torbido aspetto,

Quelle meste proteste d'amor.

Ali frattanto ben giunto è il mio pianto

Che sicura non e la sventura

Ma sicuro pur troppo è il dolor.



Metastasio—// Trionfo di Clelia.

The next morning the young people

formed a party to visit the Scalp. Cobham

c 3 Pendennis, Pendennis, who had of late absented himself very much, called in the morning, as Miss O'Reilly said, assuredly to get invited. As usual, Geraldine was the first dressed; and while the other ladies were attending to their toilets, went down, out of good-nature, to speak to the disconsolate beau.



* "Aimez le roi quand mime."—An expression first introduced during the Vendean war.





"Now, my dear, you will see one of Miss Southwell's martyrs," said Miss O'Reilly. "Observe well, I beg of you, his humble look, his tremulous voice, and the hopeless roll of his large dark eyes, and remember Kean in the first scenes of Leon."

Thinking Cobham might like to have some news of his uncle Pendennis, from whom she had the day before received a letter, Geraldine proceeded on her benevolent errand, when her solicitude was quickly transformed into surprise, at the spectacle that presented itself in the drawingroom. Extended on a couch, from which he did not think it necessary, on her entrance, trance, to rise, and dressed in the extremity of the fashion, lay Mr. Cobham Pendennis. A yawn at her approach, and— "How do you do, Miss Southwell?" was all the notice he condescended to take, till she good-humouredly inquired after his health, and made mention of his uncle Pendennis.





"Oh, ay! uncle Pendennis—how is it with the old boy? any more hares on foot? coming up to town on a new spec—hey? wish he would send me a token of remembrance"—another yawn. "Uncle Pendennis would have been surprised to find himself where I was yesterday. Dined with captain Vane and some more of the officers. Vane, sister Livy's old admirer, is one of the aide-de-camps at the Castle. After dinner we had a little play, and I lost, at one stroke, as much as old Red Roquelaure Would get in a year by teaching mnemonics, and that sort of things— you take me, Miss Southwell?"

"God forbid!" thought our heroine.

c 4 Here





Here our aspirant of fashion again most unceremoniously yawned in her face, and raised himself a little, with the intent of falling back into an easy, elegant attitude; but the arm of the couch happening to be rather lower than he expected, he slipt down, and remained, for a moment, balancing himself in a manner so truly awkward and ridiculous, that even his newlyacquired assurance was not proof against the consciousness of being an object of laughter, and he appeared at a loss what new subject to start.

Geraldine, who had a very quick perception into character, immediately saw that Cobham had fallen into some company who had ridiculed his native bashfulness, and that he had thrown himself into the opposite extreme of impudence, without sufficiently attending to the nicer shades of gradation. She also observed, with a feeling of vexation, that his dress, air, and even manner of holding himself, bore a distant, though absurd and overcharged, charged resemblance to that which was pleasing, because natural, in lord O'Melvyl.





The room now began to fill.—" How do you do, Miss Southwell?" again snuffled Cobham Pendennis to the Southwell —to Matilda, the former guiding star of his affections—" I know I have been very remiss of late. The two Miss Ormsbys have engrossed my attentions. Extreme pretty girls, Caroline and Julia Ormsby. Presented only last week—my friend Vane and I intend to patronise them. Vane swears you don't go half often enough to the Castle, Miss Southwell—why don't you? an extreme good lounge—we are all expiring without you." Here Cobham interposed another tremendous yawn, while Matilda was so astonished at this portentous transformation in her late sighing, dying adorer, that she could not command any portion of her native sarcastic haughtiness to reply to the volley of impertinence he had uttered.

Miss O'Reilly was also thunderstruck, c 5 and and Geraldine bad the manee to whisper her---" Very like Keep in the first scenes of Leon!"





Lord O'Melvyl now joined theeompany, and, after addressing a few words to* his ill-favoured polygraph, advanced to the ladies, and said, in a whisper, feem the Castle of Andalusia—" If this be a faithful copy, how much reason have I to blush for the original!" - —

The playful amenity of his manners, in a.few moments, restored them to that goodhumour which the ill-bred intruder had almost banished. Indeed, if the word amenity had never been invented, it would have been now discovered to describe the manners of O'Melvyl; distinguished, as they were, by that peculiarly-insinuating softness—that gentle fascination of address, which, by a strange contradiction, is never found in such perfection as in some few favoured individuals of the death-dealing profession.

Cobham, having highly displeased the

whole whole party, was obliged to take leave without an invitation to attend them in their country excursion. He covered his disappointment by pretending an indispensable engagement with his friend Vane, who, by his own account, Was leading him into all manner of mischief.— "You will excuse me* Miss Southwell— should not care if I went with you; but





a a—" another great yawn, "attending

ladies is sometimes a monstrous bore, and my friend Vane says he cannot do without me; no—poor Vane—cannot do without me—good day! a pleasant drive to you! Poor Vane — cannot do without me." With these words, Cobham tumbled out of the room as he had tumbled in, and the lively group, who had purposely delayed their departure, were soon afterwards in motion for their little journey.

It had been arranged by lady Louisa—

and her laws were as irrevocable as those

of the Medes and Persians—that lord

Templemore should be the companion of

c 6 Miss Miss Southwell, while lord O'Melvyl drove Geraldine in his curricle. It was in vain that the deepening scowl on Miss Southwell's heavily-defined eyebrows shewed that she would have wished it ordered differently. Lady Louisa did not choose that lord O'Melvyl should be too much remarked by the public, as an attendant on her daughter, till she was herself more satisfied as to his intentions. That public however is not easily deceived.





"There goes lady Louisa Southwell, with her two young noblemen," said a gentleman, in an open barouche, who had passed and bowed to the party on the road—" you will see, before the end of the season, she will have married her daughter to lord O'Melvyl, and the fair cousin to lord Templemore. The cleverest woman in Ireland, lady Louisa Southwell!"

Arrived at the scene they wished to visit, the similarity of their tastes, and the real delight Geraldine took in the sublime

and and beautiful objects of nature continually produced points of coincidence between her and lord O'Melvyl.





As it always happens, in those kind of parties, the persons who found each other's society most agreeable were frequently seen together, admiring the most favourite points of view; thus, while some of the company were exclaiming at the beauty of the prospect from the top of the Three-Rock Mountain, lord O'Melvyl had conducted Geraldine to a sequestered spot, less celebrated, yet perhaps possessed of a charm still wilder and more picturesque.—" Here I could almost fancy myself among my favourite retreats," he said, enjoying the unrestrained magnificence of nature amid the solitudes where she is most truly worshipped. Oh! why did I not possess the intercourse of such a mind as yours, when first I experienced the sensations of awe and admiration that dawned upon my mind at the sight of Switzerland and the Tyrolese? Nay, do not look

so





so alarmed—I am not going to insult Geraldine Southwell with commonplace gat lantry; those words burst unawares from my heart. In scenes like these, every thing tempts one to throw aside that reserve of which the world so constantly reminds us. In that world what bitter thoughts interrupt my momentary enjoyments! I think of the mother who was cold in the tomb before justice was done to her fame and her offspring—J think of the rank she ought to have enjoyed—the mansion over which she ought to have presided, till pomp becomes distasteful, and pleasure is changed to pain."

"Such regrets," replied Geraldine, with an accent of feeling, "are natural, but should not be suffered to outweigh the blessings of your lot. You have a father whose evident attachment surely deserves forgiveness, and even gratitude, in return. San Carlos too"

"What of San Carlos?" demanded lord O'Melvyl, in a tone of deep and fearful

meaning.





meaning. "You, Geraldine, who are in every thing so very superior to your sex, has your penetrating mind informed you aught of San Carlos?" ,..

"Nothing," answered Miss Southwell, terrified at his earnestness, "but that the character I have heard of him justifies the friendship you seem to bear him—you are almost inseparable." .-, -. - ....

"Almost!" repeated O'Melvyl, in a thrilling accent; "speak more justly, Geraldine—henceforth San Carlos is decreed to be my constant companion; nothing but death can effect a separation. Yet hear me further: soon as endure his hated presence, I would have a serpent feeding on my vitals, and twined around my heart!" He pressed the hand he had taken to his bosom, as heu tiered theseinconaprehensible words* and she felt that heart beat with the mingled emotions of hopeless rage and indignation, which his language expressed. She was struck with this disclosure, as confirming the idea of San Carlos' unwor

thiness, thiness, which she had herself suggested the day before with lady Louisa.





Unprepared for such a confidence, Geraldine could only reply, as she gently withdrew her hand—" Do not talk thus: I will—I must believe you destined to be happy."

"Never!" replied O'Melvyl, with emphasis—" never, unless time could roll back, or remembrance be no more!"

Pondering on the meaning of these ambiguous words, Miss Southwell, with slow and uncertain steps, assisted by O'Melvyl, turned to rejoin her party.

Many and various were the pleasures of that day, yet nothing could banish from the memory of Geraldine the singular conversation which had passed between herself and lord O'Melvyl, whose manners had a mixture of the world and of romance, that constantly kept alive curiosity and interest. He took an opportunity to approach her again, and say, in a low voice—" I need not observe to you, Miss Southwell, that

the





the sentiments I expressed this day are such as should be held in sacred trust, never to be revealed, even under the seal of the most intimate confidence."

Half-flattered and half-alarmed, still Geraldine thought she could not avoid giving lord O'Melvyl the assurance he required. As she turned to bestow it, she was struck with the stern determination those eyes, lately bent on her with such tender interest, expressed. He appeared not to sue, but to command; and to threaten too, if his suit should be resisted. She had never seen him give that look before but once, and then it was in reply to some unwelcome proposal from Pendennis. Geraldine remarked then, as now, that the countenance of O'Melvyl, admirably calculated to convey every feeling, from the most melting sensibility to the most killing contempt, was yet, perhaps, the most expressive in embodying the sterner emotions of the mind.

"What compact did you make with

that





that woodland demon?" asked Miss O'Reilly, laughing, as O'Melvyl, with a slight gesture, to indicate that he was satisfied, turned proudly away. "He stalked off as if he had just obtained some most important point. Oh, Geraldine, Geraldine! I hope I shall not have to repeat the caution given to another friend respecting that same disagreeable gentleman. Take care!"

The next day, finding that the spirits of our heroine were not restored, Miss O'Reilly tried to rouse her with—" Come now—we have no time in Dublin for sentimental sighing. Do you know there is to be a grand subscription-ball at the elegant suite of rooms added to the Rotunda, and lady Louisa is one of the patronesses. Lady James Stawell wants it to be a masked ball, and dear lady Louisa, for reasons of her own, wants it to be, as usual, only a fancy-ball; and they have been debating about all manner of beautiful dresses for you and Matilda, and cannot

come come to a determination without you."





"Why, then they must determine," answered Geraldine, very heroically, "for I am totally indifferent about it."

"Indifferent about a fancy-ball!" muttered Miss O'Reilly. "Geraldine, you have no idea what our fancy-balls are in Dublin."

Though she had rid herself of this importunity, and even heard, with a secret satisfaction, that lady James, one of the gayest of the gay leaders of fashion, was gone, it was not written in the book of Fate that Geraldine was to have this morning to herself.

Again the officious but good-natured Miss O'Reilly came a petitioner to her chamber-door.—" Dearest Geraldine, if neither silks nor satins could move you, come, at least, to the rescue of' the blackbrowed CadigeV who is, at this present speaking, in the very uttermost distress."

This was a name Miss O'Reilly had, in playful fondness, given to Matilda Southwell, well, to compliment the beauty of her arched and pencilled brows.





Well used to the exaggeration of her friend's phraseology, Geraldine hastily demanded an explanation of these alarming expressions.

"Oh, my dear!" resumed Miss O'Reilly, out of breath, "she is hagridden—absolutely hagridden by a monster—a most dreadful sort of personage! But come, and judge for yourself."

Convinced, at length, that this was the only way of satisfying her curiosity, Geraldine consented to follow Miss O'Reilly, from whom she could gather nothing but unintelligible exclamations, and hastened to see what was really the matter with the black-browed Cadigd



CHAP





CHAPTER III.



Thus, when the wily snake, beneath a tree,

Darts his red eyes upon his feather'd prey,

Poor bird! no more he swells the song of love,

Waves the wild wing, and glides from grove to grove.

With panting heart he tries to shun the foe;

But looking on the steady fiend below,

In chains of fatal fascination bound,

Captive he hops around him and around,

Till, nearer, nearer drawn, with hopeless cries,

He drops upon the poison'd fang—and dies!



The Rattlesnake.

Lady Louisa had retired to dress. Matilda had just escaped from the morning's consultation, when the calamity befel her, respecting which we gave such alarming hints at the end of the last chapter.

On approaching the room where sat Miss Southwell, our heroine's ear was assailed by a loud ballad-singing voice, giving out—

"Brulant





her, what is called, a nutcracker physiognomy.

"So please you, pretty Miss," said the unwelcome performer, curtseying to Geraldine, "I am one poor little French girl, musicienne ambulante : j'ai parcouru la France et la Savoie en disant la bonne avanture. I ask de good lady housekeeper below to give dis petition to de bienfaisante lady Louisa Southwell. Miss send for me up stair, and now will not let me tell my tale, nor sing my song;" and apparently emboldened, rather than abashed by the presence of Geraldine, she resumed—

"Vous me quittez pour aller à la gloire; Mon triste cœur suivra partout vos pas; . Allez, volez au temple de Mémoire,

Suivez l'Honneur, mais ne m'oubliez pas."

"She has some good high notes in her voice," said Miss O'Reilly.

"Notes!" repeated Matilda, with the highest disdain. . j; to ii.\/ '>

"She,is a little crazy, we are afraid,"

..,..!' Miss





Miss O'Reilly continued in a whisper, "and all we want is to get her out of the house without the knowledge of lady Louisa, who can't endure those creatures."

"Yeez, Meess," said the tuneful charmer, angrily, for she had caught the last words; "dey vants me for to be gone mine vays vidout money or drink. Last summer I vas in de voisinage to Meadowscourt, and I do someting in de smogeling vay. I sell Miss Southwell a lace veil, and I tell her la bonne avanture how she marry a rich young duke next spring; I charge but twenty guinea for de veil, and for de duke only one half-crown; but I never touch ni tun ni I'autre."

Geraldine looked at Miss Southwell, expecting a full contradiction to this statement, when, to her infinite surprise, she found, by the expression of confusion in her cousin's countenance, that it must, at least, bfe partly true. Grievous as it was to Miss Souths well's pride to acknowledge it, the fact was'

VOL. Ii. D so;





so; and the reason she.did not. ring tohave the impudent Frenchwoman, as Miss O'Reilly called her, turned out immedj-! ately, was, that she feared, from herr apparent; derangement, some violent- scene would be the consequence; and. dreaded* more than any thing, exposing- her own weakness.to- the- cutting sarcasm of lady Louisa.—"Do coax. her ou(t, that!s; mykind coz," she said, in,a lpw voice.:of eptreaty to Geraldine. "The. truth i is, I had- the folly, with a. party of madcap young- people, at Mount Amaranth, to-Jet hep tell? my fortune last summer, and I dpi take the lace, wjaichi ha# .turned out-a verybad bargain; b^Iypaid^ hervaf the moment,: andi th^ wihpleiis .a .complete imposition:.."

." You speak French better than- we- do -^say. any- thing,- for IJeaven's sake," added Mjss.P'&gjfe-" tqh^derther-:bawUflg oufcherxyfaFrench songs' W«are lostif .they r^achttlje-eaPiOfi Ja4^ I*quj$a,"

Geraldine





Geraldine offered her money, and spoke in the manner she thought most likely^toj conciliate her.

The gipsy now became pathetic. She had been married, she said, but had lost her husband, un beau brigand de la Loire, and again she began rather to roar than t6 sing—

"Celui qui sut toucher moo cceur

Jurait d'aimer toute la vie;

Mais, helas! c'etait trompeur,

Celui qui sut toucher mon cceur.



Helas! las! las!"

While she was thus bewailing, Miss Southwell tried to steal out of the room; but the impudent Frenchwoman, immediately apprehending her intention, intercepted her, holding up a dirty letter, and screaming—" No, pay me my monies-—no pass by dis porte. Dis petition do me justice. Miladi shall see it."

Agitated between terror and indigna

sion, Miss- Southwell sank upon a seat

This instantly pacified the fair musician,

D 2 who, who, without waiting for entreaty, resumed—





"II se plaignait de ma rigueur,

Moi je plaignais sa perfidie;"



and in opening her mouth to make the gentle plaints, the love-lorn nymph discovered an apparently-double row of teeth, so frightfully large and yellow, that they were enough to intimidate a bolder set of spectators. Suddenly changing her tone, she dropped a curtsey, and said—" Well, beautiful ladies, I vill go mine vays if you vill give me one glass of liqueur and a crown."

The proposal was joyfully accepted. Miss O'Reilly undertook to procure the liqueur, the ballad-singer tossed off the little glass in an instant, and then, to their unexpected dismay, instead of taking leave, reseated herself with renovated spirits, and said—" Tank ye, tank ye, ladies; I must give you one more song for dat. Would you have a chanson a boire, or a

. '.. chanson





chanson de chasse, one hunting song?" and to spare them the perplexity of choosing, she began, with all the strength of her truly-stunning voice—

"He quni! tout sommeille,

Amis, qu'on s'eveille,

Au bruit du cor."



"Oh! there's an end of it!" cried Miss O'Reilly, stopping her ears. "I was prepared for every thing but the huntingsong. Some one must come au bruit du cor. Pray Heaven it be not lady Louisa!"

The noise of the lady's plain-chant was indeed by this time intolerable. Fortunately for Miss Southwell, at the same moment, a chariot, driving rapidly away from the door, conveyed to her ears the welcome intelligence that her mother was gone out.

Encouraged by this circumstance, she

rang the bell violently.—" So please you,

pretty lady, before I go," resumed her

tormentor, "to buy one bottle of eau de

D 3 Cologne





^Cologne—of eau de Luce—one paper of violet powder;" and untying a small bunble, she began expatiating on the virtues of each of the articles she recommended, then suddenly broke forth into singing—

"Que ne suis-je encor un enfant,

Je n'avais ni troupeau ni houlettc;

Je n'allais seulement au champs

Qne pour cueillir la violette."



As she concluded these words, the sunburnt sybil sighed profoundly, cast up her eyes, drawled the last line with a most sentimental twang through her nose, and so completely burlesqued the artless, despairing shepherdess, that^Geraldine, who had a strong sense of the ludicrous, could no longer forbear indulging in a hearty fit of jaughter, in which, to the surprise of all present, she was as heartily joined by the wandering melodist.

Miss Southwell stood aghast; but Miss .QflReilly almost immediately guessed the truth, and was quickly confirmed in her

suspicion; suspicion ; 'for, on the removal of a monstrous artificial nose, and a set of teeth industriously formed from a piece of orange peel, she discovered, underneath the disguise, the features of her frolicsome friend, Diana Pendennis.—" For Heaven's sake, whence do you come? who are you with? and how did it happen we did not know of your being in town?"





"Hush!" said Diana Pendennis, in answer to these hurried interrogatories; "before I reply 'to any of your questions, it is necessary I should make my peace here."

She advanced, with an air of studied humility, to Miss Southwell; but Matilda, already deeply hurt, tossed back her head, and turned away with an expression of the most serious displeasure.

"So you won't forgive me!" said Diana, in a tone that indicated she thought 6he had a right to be offended. "Well, I have heard of the fancy-ball, and intended to have offered you my assistance—no contemptible aid neither. I had the sweetD 4 est est plan by which you might have so teamed all your friends and acquaintance—but it is all over. Good-day to you, Miss Southwell!"





"Is it a novelty?" exclaimed Miss O'Reilly, eagerly; and in the true spirit of an evergreen Irish girl, she continued —" Dear, dear Matilda, pardon, pardon f Do let us hear what the new plan is. Only think! to teaze all our friends and acquaintance! Oh, if you have any pity or good-nature, let us have it!"

But it was now Diana's turn to be silent and sullen. She would not even tell how or whence she came till an act of oblivion was passed, in which the names of sir Charles and lady Louisa Southwell were specially included. She then informed them, she had arrived in Dublin only the night before, in consequence of an invitation from. Mrs. Stratford Gore. Mrs. Gore had taken a house adjoining that inhabited by lady Louisa Southwell, and there was a door near the stables

of of the one house, which communicated with the garden of the other. Through this door Diana had passed, and had introduced herself to the servants of the Southwell family, by saying that she was sent that way by those of Mrs. Stratford Gore, who had heard and approved her singing. She did not doubt of soon attracting Miss Southwell's attention, under the disguise of the adventuress, whom she had really consulted, as Diana well knew, but of whose figure she had but an imperfect recollection, having only seen her once in the dusk of the evening, and the confusion incident to the consciousness of a degrading frolic. Diana was tempted to assume this habit in preference to any other order, to give Matilda some idea of her powers, in case she should adopt her plan for the fancy-ball, which she now condescended to explain. She proposed that they should go as a group of Savoyard peasants. Diana, besides charming the company with her French songs, and D 5 terrifying enced a ^degree of confusion, far more real and] unaffected than his own. The apparent embarrassment of O'M elvy 1 '- distressed her more than an air of presumption would have done; for she was not awarethat embarrassment was one form which: presumption can assume. Her place was no longer-agreeable to hec, and she felt;relieved when lady. Louisa Southwell5 rose, and, with a look of affected gaiety, but real inqwdetude, proposed1 a; promenade through the rooms, avowedly to: amuse herself; with the various characters that were collected, but, in reality, to.watch and) follow sir Charles.





Suddenly .their ears were struck with a strain of the sweetest and most melting music that ever proceeded :from a female voice; it was the "Fonlorn; Queen," an ancient, Irish; air, off the: most affecting pawier and;patHasj:

Geraldine felt the: tears: rush unbidden toiheceyes;. There;was something inhere native music that, had always :a. singular

V :i and





and petsuasion, they at length got Miss Southwell to agree, that, i»i case no better substitute could be procured, Cobham should be admitted to Make his first appearance in that character.

Every one now being a Rttle more composed, Miss Southwell asked Diana how she had left her friends at Mount Parnassus?

"Oh, bad enough, Missy—tad enough," she replied, resuming her foreign tone and tragicomic face. '*' My poor Uncle, at the recommendation of my sainted sifter Bridget, was tempted, in a luckless hour, to supply Cobbani's place by the reverend Zephaniah Toplofty, who has been lately afGlenartrey.'on a mission among the natives. Whether he thinks he may do more good by disseminating his principles among the rising generation, of whether he was attracted by that filthy dross against which he declaims so eloquently, I wiH not take upon me to determine; but certain it is, he accepted my Ancle's proD 6 posal posal with eagerness, and the school has fallen off, in consequence, considerably."





Fatigued with all the nonsense of the morning, Geraldine did not experience, in reflection, that relief which she had formerly experienced from it; she had not felt pleased with her own conduct since her excursion to the Scalp, and the result of a diligent self-examination was only an increase of repentance.—" How is this to end?" she asked herself. "Is it customary for men to repose in young females,like me, the confidence of friendship; v and if it be aught else, why is not O'Melvyl's conduct, in other respects, different from what it is? But would he have expressed himself to me in the way he did, if my manner had not, unconsciously, invited it? Was such my conduct to lord Templemore? Is it that dissipation has already altered even me, or that lord O'Melvyl is so different from all others? What do I wish—what do I expect? I will consult lady Louisa, for this new

feeling feeling of self-reproach is intolerable—Miserable!" she resumed, as she recollected the solemn promise of secrecy extorted from her by O'Melvyl—" He has bound me with a chain, invisible indeed, yet allpowerful— he has separated me, by a viewless line, from my truest friend and monitress. I may not ask her advice in the most critical circumstance of my life, and to what have I trusted in exchange? To a soft smile, an insinuating voice, a tale of sufferings, perhdps real, perhaps imagined. Unhappy Geraldine! The woman, who, under the fallacious guise of friendship, encourages the sentimental and ambiguous attentions of a man of whose principles and character she is ignorant, has gone the first step towards the ruin of her peace of mind. Oh, thou, Eternal Searcher of Hearts!" she exclaimed, "thou to whom alone I now dare open mine, assist, guide, protect, my orphan, inexperienced youth!" These expressions of selfpity, if I may be allowed the term, led to '. j reflections ve&eetiotmin the melancholy mystery that ^enveloped hfer own birth. What could have been the fete-of'her parents, that lady Ijouisa would not even entrust her with ihe -particulars of ft? Then, reverting to the cloud that , still partially shaded the actions of O'Melvyl-^" There again we sympathise* -she said. "Amidst apparent prosperity, gloom and darkness, in reality, enshroud us both." Thus finding no respite >from .distracting thoughts, she felt'as if -wandering amid the circles of a labyrinth, of which every path was terminated by one object, and that object was O^Melvyl!





Meanwhile, haw different were the feelings of Matilda! She thought, with increasing pleasure, on the amusement to be derived from her projected disguise, when, happening to hear lord ©'Melvyl'mention, with admiration, a lady who had appeared, on a similar occasion, in the character of Zara in the Mourning Bride, she altered -her mind The love of frolic gave way < to to the taste for magnificence, and it was determined she should appear as a most dazzling Zara. Geraldine was to be one of her attendants. This absolution was taken with secrecy, as Miss Southwell did not wish lord O'Melvyl to be acquainted with her change of intention, but rather to be surprised on the evening of the ball with this delicate compliment to his taste. From that moment it must be supposed Geraldine was expected to lay aside a dejection for which she could ostensibly assign no adequate cause; and nothing was talked of but figure-dances, splendid dresses, and all the brilliant et-ceteras connected with the approaching fancy-ball.





CHAP





CHAPTER IV.



-Look to behold this night



Earth-treading stars, that make dark heaven light.

None here, we hope,

In all this noble bevy, has brought with her

One care abroad; we would have all as merry

As first-good company, good wine, good welcome,

Can make good people.





Oh, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!

Her beauty hangs upon the cheek of night,

Like a rich jewel in an iEthiop's ear!



Shakespeare.

The fancy-ball at the Rotunda was expected to be the most splendid thing of the kind that had been seen for many years. It was under the patronage of ladies of the first consequence; and as the money subscribed was collected for a charitable purpose, it was not doubted, from the graceful readiness the Irish ever evince

to





to blend benevolence with amusement, that the books would be full to overflowing.

In order to concede something to the wishes of both parties, it was finally agreed that masks should not be excluded; still it was generally understood that the majority of the company would prefer appearing in fancy-dresses. Never was Geraldine seen to greater advantage than in the good-humoured readiness with which she consented to take a secondary character to the haughty Zara.

Desirous of producing an increased effect, Miss Southwell prevailed on lady Louisa to go very late, and the rooms were well filled; and there had already been some dancing, when, unmasked, and in the full radiance of youthful charms, Miss Southwell, arrayed as Zara, the captive queen, followed by her slaves, made her entri. All the diamonds she possessed, united to those of lady Louisa, sparkled on her bosom, in her aigrette and her

chains. fancy her change of dress announced.—" It is only in such trifles it can be ascribed to me," she replied. "In matters of serious import, fickleness is a fault with which no one can charge me."





"There then we completely differ," answered O'Melvyl. "I confess my chief vice of character to be a certain waywardness and indecision, which torment myself full as much as any of those whom I have to deal with; but," he added, in a more serious and sentimental tone, "there are some things in which I can never change."

Now would Geraldine have given one of the finest strings of pearl in her turban to know what those were; but it was O'Melvyl's fate, or perhaps his choice, to leave a degree of oracular doubt ever hanging over his most animated expressions. He did not add another word to this, but exclaimed, in a lively tone of voice, and with a sudden change of manner—" See that friar, sir Charles Southwell,





well, attacking, with the finest compliments, that witch, lady James Stawell; yet no one could, in reality, be less to his taste. He, all wit, life, and gaiety; she, all languor, sentiment, and romance!"

"And don't you sometimes find," asked Geraldine, unthinkingly, "that we feel attracted by the strongest partiality towards those characters that least resemble our own?"

"Oh, certainly, certainly!" answered O'Melvyl, with a slight and graceful bend of acknowledgment, as if for an implied compliment.

This startled Geraldine, as she had been far from intending one; but the soft, halfrepressed smile, that undulated his lip, a conscious air of mingled self-sufficiency and embarrassment, and a blush of pleasurable emotion, revealed to her that he had applied her remark to his own confession of instability, and her avowed opposition of sentiment, in the earlier part of their conversation. Instantly she experi

i. .: enced





Lady Kilcrest replied to lady Louisa's introduction with the air of one who is used to admiration and expects it: still her manners were extremely prepossessing, and the expression of her countenance, the tone of her voice, and the few words she uttered, impressed Geraldine with the most favourable ideas of her character. When forced, by the increasing crowd, to move forwards, lady Kilcrest, with a grace peculiarly her own, presented her, at parting, with a card, which Geraldine doubted not was for one of her far-famed Readings.

Whatever it was, she had not time to examine it now. She was so much persecuted with the forward loquacity and officious awkwardness of a Bob Handy, who assailed her with the most extravagant compliments and troublesome attentions, that it combined, with the lateness of the hour, to produce in her an overcoming degree of lassitude.

Bob Handy was succeeded byaFlorizel, who, in admiration of the address with

v. which which she had at length contrived to get rid of his rival, rapturously exclaimed—





-" What you do



Still betters what is done; when you speak, sweet,

I'd have you do it ever.



When you do dance, I wish you

A wave o' the sea, that you might ever do

Nothing but that.



1 take thy hand—this hand,

As soft as dove's down, and as white as it,

or the fann'd snow,

That's bolted by the northern blasts twice o'er."

This Florizel, who had studied his speeches pretty correctly, was no other than Cobham Pendennis. Poor Cobham, after having made himself quite perfect in the part before assigned him, was, on the sudden alteration of Miss Southwell's intentions, in danger of being "no character at all," when the mischievous Diana persuaded him, that the fancy-dress of Florizel would particularly become him, and offered, herself, to make up knots of ribbon, and flowers in profusion, for him, that he might appear at the ball complete

roL. Ii. E ly ly tricked out as the royal shepherd. A crook, fantastically wreathed with flowers, completed his costume. He wore a straw hat, lined with pink satin, and surmounted by a chaplet of roses, which bloomed in full contrast with his sallow cheeks, hollow eyes, and long Quixotic physiognomy. His sister! Olivia, who had been presented with a ticket by sir Charles Southwell, accompanied him as Perdita; and as she judiciously preferred the pastoral id the royal habit worn' by that princess, looked as nature intended she should —pretty and pleasing. Emboldened by some recent successes, she entered into very sprightly chat with Geraldine, describing^'HeY cbnqu&sts1^ and particularly regretting^that "'elegant captain Vane" was hot of tW£ patty.





"You speak in stadh constant raptures of captain ,Va,tie,"r,siitd Geraldine, rather pettishly,;«thitf I Sikut at'leng^t? regret11 never hap'pefferfe seeliitn."

^KegreH ^b^e" sure -yWregretfit. Y1 a Oh, Oh, he is such an unaccountably-elegant creature! and dying for me, poor fellow! But are not you surprised at Cobham's making such an unaccountable fright of himself in Florizel? That was Diana's doing—I was always against it, but obliged to give way. How Vane would laugh!"





"Olivia! sister!" interrupted Cobham, in his newly-acquired drawling tone, "don't you know my friend Vane—captain Vane, I tell you? He is watching to speak to you."

"What, that clumsy Basque?" whispered Geraldine to Olivia, with an involuntary start. "I think, Olivia, he is no bad match for your sallow Florizel."

"Dear, so it is!" cried the fair Perdita, with a look of impatience; for she discovered that her admirer, whose elegance existed only in her own imagination, had chosen a dress the least calculated for his figure, that of a Basque. For a further description of the graceful form and picturesque dress of those human Mercuries, I E 2 refer refer the reader to lady Morgan's delightful travels in France. Suffice it to say, that Olivia experienced, as young ladies sometimes do, a degree of shame and regret at having spoken in high-flown terms of a person on the strength of his being unknown.—" He certainly does not look in high beauty to-night," she murmured, in a mortified tone. "How could he think of stuffing himself into that dress? I never saw the dear, delightful, elegant creature look so unaccountably ill!" She was however the next moment in high flirtation with him, while Geraldine beheld once more, advancing towards her, the graceful bandit chief. This time he was masked; but they fell into conversation as before. It seemed as if they had scarcely parted, so naturally did he resume the tone of tenderness and interest he had before employed—so unaffectedly did she reply.





Meanwhile, Miss Southwell, leaning against a pillar, and arrayed in the" gorgeous geous robes of Zara, exhibited, in her fatigued and disappointed countenance, the most complete contrast with her magnificent habit, and shewed how vain are the expectations of pleasure built upon eclipsing a rival.





Geraldine felt .almost vexed, when her second short but delightful colloquy with the bandit was interrupted by a shrill female voice, rather screaming than singing—

"Mourir gaiement pour la gloire et l'amour,

C'est le devoir d'un vaillant Troubadour."



She soon recognised in this female minstrel her friend Diana Pendennis, who had adopted for her costume, on this occasion, the same disguise in which she had performed so notable a part at lady Louisa Southwell's. But if she was annoyed at Diana's interruption, vexation soon gave place to surprise, on seeing the supposed O'Melvyl relinquish his envied post by her side, and, seizing the hand of the fair . E 3 ballad





ballad-singer, claim her promise in the dance; at the same moment he half-removed his mask, and discovered, instead of the features of O'Melvyl, those of the count di San Carlos.—" I believe you did not know me," he said; and those few words, so natural in such a scene, filled the mind of Geraldine with anguish and confusion. She tried to recollect the terms of the conversation held with him, under the belief that he was lord O'Mek vyl. There was nothing she could positively wish retracted, yet was Geraldine but too conscious that her whole manner would have been different, had she known it was another. This conviction was pressed upon her mind by the look and countenance of San Garlos, which shewed that he was master of her secret. There was a degree of laughing malice in it, as he half-withdrew his mask, that at the same time made her smile and shudder; while a confused idea of future ills came over her mindi, with painful forebod





ings that had never tormented it before. She also remarked, with surprise, the twinlike resemblance San Carlos bore to O'Melvyl, in his voice and figure, although his features and complexion were totally different.

As Geraldine was making these tardy and unprofitable observations, she saw the real O'Melvyl, who wore, on that night, exactly the same dress as San Carlos (only with the difference of being unmasked), making his way through the motley crowd, as if in search of some one. She only caught a glimpse of him at a distance, and, as it were, beyond a vista of heads. Suddenly he quickened his pace, and Geraldine, though surrounded by beauty, felt the instantaneous delightful conviction, which only belongs to minds newly in accordance, that it was herself alone he sought. In a moment he had joined her— had resumed that species of aside conversation, half-complimentary, half-confidential, in which he delighted and excelled. E 4 Geraldine's





Geraldine's lassitude disappeared. A sweet intoxication winged these short and precious moments in which he engaged her attention; and it was with regret she observed the approach of sir Charles Southwell, who had exchanged his disguise of a Spanish friar, for the more rich and becoming costume of that accomplished cavalier and amiable prince, Francis the First. He began rallying her, with that courtly air he ever assumed toward the females of his own family, upon having chosen a dress that seemed to preclude the idea of dancing, and asked her, if there were no means to be discovered of satisfying the numerous aspirants who had bespoke his interest for the honour of her hand?

Lord O'Melvyl availed himself of this hint, and, for the first time, requested Geraldine to dance with him.

"Most willingly," she replied; "but 1 fear, with my dress, it would be quite inadmissible." Holding up one pearl-encircled





cled arm, she continued—" You see I am a captive."

"A captive!" replied the earl, gazing on her passionately—" no, it is I that am enslaved, and for life!"





Or 'mid the lurid clouds of doubt, we find

Love rise tbe sun or comet of the mind!



Miss Seward.

"It is I that am enslaved, and for life!"— Was this a burst of momentary admiration, suggested by her beauty and the scene in which O'Melvyl met her, or the serious sentiments of the speaker?

This question kept Geraldine waking

during the greater part of the night that

succeeded to the fancy-ball. She felt that

the evening had been most delightful; but

E 5 that,





that, if it were not the precursor of many more such precious hours, she should pay very dearly for that one delightful evening. The next day she examined the card given her by lady Kilcrest; it was for a reading-party at her house. Geraldine asked Miss Southwell what those reading-parties were?

"Oh, the most delightful things in nature!" she replied. "First, you will be introduced to the goddess herself, whom you will find seated under a statue of Friendship, or some such sentimental device. Then you will have the companion, Miss Stanley, pouring out weak tea in a rapture, and letting all the water in the urn run about the table, while the goddess disserts upon the superiority of intellectual sadder frivolous pursuits. Them soft music will announce that Ariel, or Puck, or some such gamesonae sprite, is hovering near, and that you are going to hear some select passages out of the Midsummer Night's Dream, or the Tempest; and, lastly, for she found that it did not answer merely to give 'tea and turn-out,' you will converse upon the pleasures of the evening over a nice little sandwich supper."





Notwithstanding this account, given in the spirit of ill-nature, Geraldine found, at lady Kilcrest's, sociability and pleasure united, in the mode in which she passed the evening.

Accustomed, as her only female intimates, to lady Louisa Southwell, whose attention was too constantly engrossed by objects of worldly importance to allow her really-cultivated mind and brilliant imagination its full play, and Matilda, whose expressions and ideas seldom went beyond the last dress she had worn, or the last public place she had visited, Geraldine was equally delighted and surprised at the various attractions she discovered in the society of her new friend- Lady Kilcrest, on her part, found our heroine a truly-valuable acquisition.

E 6 Though





Though she had received a most brilliant and careful education, Geraldine was, like all persons of real talent, in a degree, self-educated. Next to the ancient history and records of her native country, the beauties of the English language, and the examination of its more delicate refinements, were the studies she preferred. Endowed by nature with an exquisite ear, and a voice the most copious and harmonious, Geraldine united to these gifts a profound study of the graces of elocution, according to the purest and most severe principles of taste. She possessed, also, to perfection, the talent of varying the inflections of her voice and the expression of her countenance, according to the passion she designed to represent. To hear her read a play or a poem, therefore, was a pleasure in which the eye, the ear, and the mind, equally participated. When she consented to take a part in those dramas which were occasionally read at lady Kilcrest's, a universal desire to be

present present was excited among the whole circle of her acquaintance; and as she was ably supported by lady Kilcrest and others, the readings, which had a little fallen off the winter before, suddenly rose to the pinnacle of popularity. But there was one person whom their celebrity failed to attract, and that was lord O'Melvyl. At first Geraldine scarcely perceived his absence. Surrounded by incense, the deserved tribute to such an uncommon combination of mental and personal attractions, she found herself* suddenly drawn into that dangerous vortex, in which the strongest head can hardly enable any one to move with safety; and, charming as my heroine was, she was still a woman, and a a young, lively, inexperienced woman. Admiration anticipated her| words—flattery threw a lustre over her talents. The learned wondered to hear the principles of criticism, and the laws of taste, discussed by lips that would have lent a charm to folly itself: they were delighted to find





that that not a grain of pedantry mingled with her really-uncommon attainments. Professors celebrated her taste in the flne arts; and, in short, without design, without cabal, Geraldine was, that winter, the rage in Dublin- Was it possible for her, then, to weigh and measure the former sighs of a now-neglectful lover? no; for there is, in true passion, a humility that can hardly exist in company with the triumphs of gratified vanity. But recovering from this short-lived illusion, it was in vain that her heart sought the suffrage it would have valued beyond all others.





Geraldine remembered, with dismay, that the evening of the &ney-ball was the last, though not the first time she had had any confidential conversation with lord (XMelvyl— that this conversation, to which something more explicit might have been .expected tp sucqeed, seemed, pn the contrary, the signal for a marked change in his behaviour. She might he the admiration of artists—,of men of science

and





and of letters—she might be surrounded in public, by men of the most distinguished rank and fashion; but O'Melvyl no longer seemed to interest himself in her occupations or her success, while Matilda Southwell was now in possession of those attentions which had once been so peculiarly gratifying to Geraldine. She knew not whether most to accuse lord O'Melvyl or herself. Her heart acquitted her of coquetry, but not of some degree of vanity and negligence. Be it as it may, a reading-party, to which she was engaged, at lady Kilcrest's, appeared, for the first time, extremely tiresome to her. She went through her part languidly, and experienced an insupportable depression of spirits, at the moment that the foldingdoors were thrown open, and the names of lady Louisa, and Miss Southwell, and lord O'Melvyl, were announced.

Miss Southwell was dressed for a ball to which she was going, and seemed in high spirits.

Lady





Lady Louisa said, they had just looked in at lady Kilcrest's, and begged the reading might not be interrupted by their entrance.

Lord O'Meivyl and Miss Southwell seated themselves beneath a Turkish canopy, facing Geraldine.

Though they spoke very low, or were silent, they were evidently much taken up with each other; and Geraldine remarked, that O'Melvyl's countenance, when turned towards Miss Southwell, had exactly the same dangerous species of expression which had formely lent such interest to his uncommonly-beautiful features whenever he addressed herself. She began mentally to question, whether she had not withdrawn too much from the society of lady Louisa (who allowed her an uncommon degree of liberty), to form separate plans' of amusement? The question came rather late; the drama read on this night was a French one, Rousseau's Narcisse—a weak piece in the original, which

lady





lady Kilcrest was trying to revive in another country, with the aid of some excellent music. When it was concluded, one of the company remarked, it was a singular inconsistency, that Rousseau, who was himself the author of several dramas, with various success, should have written one of the most eloquent letters that ever came from his pen against the establishment of a place of theatrical entertainment *.

"Inconsistent it certainly was," said lady Kilcrest; "but was not Rousseau's whole life a tissue of inconsistencies? His reason, and the principles he had adopted and formed into a system, were equally at variance with his natural tastes, his passions, and the times in which he lived. The professed panegyrist of the good housewives of Geneva, but the admirer, the lover, the adorer of fine ladies at Paris, grace, elegance, and beauty, had his heart—

the



* Lettre a D'Alembert sur le Projet d'établir un Theatre de Com^die dans ia Ville de Geneve.





the useful virtues, his esteem and praise. The same may be said of his eloquent sophisms on the subject of literature, science, and the arts, in which he employs such variety and originality of genius in depreciating, the discoveries of genius, like another French author *, who was said never to have displayed so much imagination as in a work written expressly against the use of that faculty."

As soon as lady Kilcrest paused, lady Louisa and Miss Southwell rose, and, after speaking to her ladyship and their different acquaintances, expressed the regret they felt at being under the necessity of hurrying away.

Lord O'Melvyl had changed his place, and, while lady Kilcrest was talking, had gone round to that side of the room, as if to listen more attentively to her ladyship. He now stood near Geraldine, but without speaking. She felt an unwillingness to turn round and address him first; and

• Father Mallebrnnclie.





in this state of mute embarrassment* they remained some minutes, his hand resting slightly on the back of her chair, by which circumstance alone she was certain of his proximity. At length the hand was removed. Lord O'Melvyl disappeared with lady Louisa and Miss Southwell, and Geral* dine recovered herself. The rest of the soiree was dedicated to Shakespeare; and Geraldine's melting voice, in the sweet tones of Viola* was remarked to possess peculiar energy and softness. In the fourth scene of the second act, which affords the greatest development to that charming character, Geraldine was startled by a sigh breathed quite close to her, and half-turning round, she perceived lord O'Melvyl had once more taken his station near her. He listened to her then—perhaps it was with pleasure. She durst not again look up, yet wished to ascertain whether he meant to go or stay. Again the back of the chair slightly vibrated beneath the pressure of his hand; and during the rest

of of the reading, she knew, by the sighs which he could not always repress, that he listened and leant over her.





When lord O'Melvyl left the room to conduct lady Louisa and Miss Southwell to their carriage, he had announced that he should meet them at the ball, and at the time believed what he said. He returned to the room, to indulge himself a little longer with hearing the thrilling melody of Geraldine's voice, and felt irresistibly rivetted to the spot he had chosen, till the selections were concluded.

Geraldine had excelled herself, and this was acknowledged on every side; but the moment of vanity was past.

As the company were dispersing to the supper-tables, lord O'Melvyl, taking out his watch, exclaimed —" Past twelve o'clock, on my honour! what will Miss Southwell say? Shall I go now?"

"By all means," answered Geraldine, with a smile which forbade the thought; "the only thing to be regretted is, that

you you have not been gone these two hours."





"Well, then, since I have transgressed so long," resumed O'Melvyl, taking a seat next her as he spoke, "it would be utterly useless to attempt to make my peace to-night. I will leave it till to-morrow— and leave it," he added, with a look of peculiar expression, "to her who was the sole cause of my offending."

"You would prove," said Geraldine, "a much abler advocate."

O'Melvyl smiled and bowed.—" Agreed —what shall I say to her? That in listening to the modulations of a fine-toned voice reciting poetry, I was not so far removed, as she might imagine, from admiring the measured motions of a graceful figure in the dance? No, that would be too abstruse for her—she would never understand it."

"And yet," observed Geraldine, "nothing can be more correct. Music, poetry, and dancing, are a family, of which dancing is the younger sister. There is the

same same analogy between diversities of sound in music and"





She was proceeding—O'Melvyl hastily interrupted her.—" Analogy, Miss Southwell! what a word for the loveliest lips that ever spoke of learning!"

"Well, then," she resumed, patiently smiling, " you will allow there is a degree of family resemblance between feet in poetry, bars in music, and measured movements in dancing."

"Such a degree of family resemblance," lord O'Melvyl replied, with vehemence, "as exists between Geraldine and Matilda Southwell—the one, capable of conveying and inspiring feelings and thoughts at once the most impassioned and the most refined; the other, the frivolous amusement of an idle hour—no more."

"You do the younger sisters injustice," said Geraldine, blushing at a preference so unequivocally expressed: "music, even when unaccompanied by words, can surely often! excite every variety of deep or ..;»-"• cheerful cheerful emotion; again, in the dance, the marked time of the waltz resembles the movement of the dactyl in poetry— the"





"Dactyls and spondees! Oh, Geraldine, leave those terms, invented by pedantry, to such as "and his eye glanced archly at lady Kilcrest.

"Yet, without appropriate terms," asked Geraldine, "how am I to express my ideas?"

"As you please; only speak, and your natural eloquence is sure to charm."

"But is it not rather hard in you to givd to the expressions peculiarly appropriated to a subject the name of pedantry? You do not like to hear a woman speak correctly, yet you despise frivolity in our sex—how is one to: hit your happy medium?"

"Only," replied lord O'Melvyl, with fascinating earnestness, "by preserving the richness, the freshness of mind, the inexhaustible exhaustible variety, that now renders your conversation so enchanting, united to the artlessness and gaiety of one who had never looked into a book."





"A very modest requisition truly!" thought Geraldine, as she reviewed the occurrences of the day; and this last conversation with O'Melvyl brought back a reflection, which had, of late, very often obtruded itself upon her mind—how happy is she who is possessed of objects of domestic affection! how secure that her well-intended endeavours will meet the smile of partial parents—the praise of indulgent friends! But the woman, on the contrary, who submits her conduct to the sole judgment of capricious love, sails, without compass, on a starless sea. The tastes and predilections of the object chosen are often scarcely known when the heart has made its election. A new standard of excellence is set up, which "may be far from the true one; and when every

sacrifice





sacrifice is made, is the desired end attained? That the remainder of Geraldine's history will shew.



CHAPTER VI.



"O vous qui desirez attendrir une belle

A mans! amusez son esprit;

L'ennui s'est-il empart: d'elle,

Bientdt la reflexion suit;

Et la beautc qui reflechit,

A l'amour est toujours rebelle."

After what had passed the preceding evening, Geraldine had no great reason to expect to find Miss Southwell in very good-humour either with lord O'Melvyl or herself; she was therefore rather surprised, the following day, on entering the drawing-room, to find his lordship and her cousin together. What excuses he had been making to justify his apparent negliVol. ii. F gence gence of the night before, she could not tell; but whatever they were, Matilda seemed perfectly satisfied with them. With pleasure sparkling in her eyes, she shewed Geraldine a beautiful little spaniel, which lord O'Melvyl had brought, perhaps as a peace-offering, and eagerly asked her cousin if it was not a most adorable little creature ?—" I want to call it Tiny," she continued, "but lord O'Melvyl has already given it the name of Carlo."





"Yes; Carlo, I hope, you will call him, to oblige me, Miss Southwell," said O'Melvyl, "and for the sake of my dear San Carlos."

Geraldine could scarcely believe she heard aright. She called to mind the conversation that passed between them on the day of their excursion to the Scalp, and involuntarily directed a glance of inquiry and astonishment at O'Melvyl. His countenance it was impossible to fathom, for it was totally devoid of all expression. He was looking straight forward, and appeared





ed engaged, if by any thing, in counting the number of passengers in the street. From this interesting employment he at length turned, to give Matilda some directions respecting her little precious charge. Whenever O'Melvyl. conferred a , favour, however trifling—made a proposal, or an offer, of any description, it was with a winning grace of manner, which those who made him their model tried to copy, but in vain.

Miss Southwell was delighted, to the most absurd excess, with the little tricks the dog had been taught to play. Every moment witnessed her starts, and even shrieks of surprise, while the room resounded with her almost-hysterical laughter.

O'Melvyl seemed to take delight in encouraging and increasing her folly by every means in his power; and Geraldine, who, in the course of the preceding evening, had been charmed with the elegance of mind displayed in his conversation, adF 2 mired mired to see the puerilities to which this Proteus-like character could descend, when conversing with a woman of a more frivolous stamp.





Geraldine rose to prepare for a morning airing with lady Louisa Southwell.

Miss Southwell continued talking with lord O'Melvyl.—" I wonder," said she, "has this divine little dog been taught to tell the hour, and to point out the letters of the alphabet, like the wonderful pig that I heard of at lady James's last night? You lost a great deal, my lord, by not being at lady James's. I wish you had but seen my flattering lover, as you used to call him in the country, sir Felix Opium, stretching his short neck, pushing back his wig, and staring most interrogatively in the face of his next neighbour, with— 'Wonderful indeed! But, pray sir, can you tell me, did the pig articulate distinctly?"

Lord O'Melvyl found no difficulty in laughing at this anecdote, which I pledge

myself





myself to my reader to be a genuine one.

Encouraged by this applause, Miss Southwell continued—" I confess I like to see learned dogs, learned horses—in short, every learned wonder except learned ladies;" here she laughed affectedly, and then more seriously resumed, "and yet they are certainly coming very much into vogue. One can scarcely open a book of amusement, French or English, in which the heroine is not one of your terrible clever women."

"And I believe," returned lord O'Melvyl, "nobody is tempted to fall in love with her but the author. For my part, I don't like clever women, either in books or out of books."

As he concluded these last words, he saw Geraldine so close to him, that she must have heard them. She had returned, unobserved, to the room, to look for a book lady Louisa wanted to take in the carriage. Lord O'Melvyl, ever scrupuF 8 lously





kmsly polite and attentive to females, hastened to assist in the search—found the book—presented it to Geraldine, bowing with his accustomed winning grace; and then, turning with a smile as winning to Matilda, said—" Allans done! I suppose you are for the Park."

"I did mean to go the Phoenix Park this morning," she replied; "but after your behaviour of last night, you wretch! do you think, in conscience, you deserve the honour of being my charioteer?"

With these words, Miss Southwell accepted the offered assistance of lord OMeivyl, and was soon gaily seated in his curricle—a station she had, more than once, preferred to a seat in the family-carriage with her cousin and lady Louisa.

Notwithstanding the consciousness of what she owed to her ladyship's presence, Geraldine could not command herself so completely but that her mind wandered once or twice during the course of her air





ing with lady Louisa. She could not forbear dwelling on the sentiment last expressed with such force, if not bitterness, by lord O'Melvyl, and contrasting it with the directly-opposite behaviour of the count di San Carlos. From the first, this young nobleman had been a regular attendant at lady Kilcrest's reading-parties, and an enthusiastic admirer of Geraldine's. From habits of early and frequent intercourse with the marquis of Beaudesert, he spoke English like a native, and, of course, understood it with equal facility. The circumstance of the young foreigner's constant attentions to her there, united to some gentle reproaches for neglecting her, uttered by lady Louisa during the course of their drive, contributed to render Geraldine's visits much rarer, from that period, at lady Kilcrest's. She now mixed more than ever in the great and the gay world; but there was one engagement, from which no pleasure could divert her attention—an engagement, unF 4 known





known even to lord O'Melvyl, though he had perhaps a share in the satisfaction with which she always fulfilled it.

It happened that some Italians from the opera were arrived in Dublin; and though lord Beaudesert never went into public, lord O'Melvyl was instantly engaged, in consequence, to attend the ladies of the Southwell family to the theatre on the first night of the performance of the foreigners.

Calling rather early on the evening appointed, lord O'Melvyl missed Geraldine from the social group. Though he had, of late, appeared but little to regard her presence, he was always observed to be uneasy when she absented herself. Following the impulse of this feeling, he went into the inner drawing-room to look for her. O'Melvyl had scarcely opened the door, when his ear was thrilled with the accents of that melodious voice which he could never hear without experiencing a throb of rapture at his heart; but he was

unprepared unprepared for the manner in which it was now employed. He saw his father, the marquis of Beaudesert, extended on a couch, and listening, with gratified attention, while Geraldine read to him "The Pleasures of Hope." *





At lord O'MelvyTs entrance, she was reciting this passage :—

"Yet, o'er her lovely hopes, that once were dear,

The time-taught spirit, pensive, not severe,

With milder griefs her faded eye shall fill,

And weep their falsehood, tho' she love them still."



These lines contained so exact a picture of the feelings Geraldine had once indulged towards lord O'Melvyl, that, as she met his eye, she could scarcely repress the swelling tear that rushed unbidden to her own. She was obliged to turn from him, and refuge herself in one of those caressing looks which she so often lavished on his father. The marquis himself explained the meaning of the scene.—" To Miss Geraldine Southwell," he said, "I owe the most pleasing hours of my existence. I F 5 am





am cut off from many sources of amusement Music I can no longer bear to hear. If indifferent, it offends my taste; if excellent, it wrings my feelings; but, by that art, so much superior to it, yet so much less cultivated, she charms many a weary hour; and never, when I express a wish to hear her read, does any engagement induce Miss Southwell to neglect me; she gives me half-an-hour before she sets out for the most brilliant party. Do you not, Geraldine?"

His young companion took the hand of the marquis in silence, and her dovehke eyes said, in an eloquent look, how happy it made her to contribute to his comfort! Her heart could confirm the truth of the expression.—" I love his parents since they are his;" for the features of lord Beaudesert, though disagreeable and repulsive in the eyes of others, had become, in hers, by habit and association, absolutely interesting. "Yes, I have found a source of pleasure for him," she said, smiling affectionately.





tionately, "in his long estrangement from these isles, which has made some of our best-known poets new to him. We have admired together • The Pleasures of Memory," and 'The Pleasures of Hope;' but I wish in time to bring his lordship back to relish the beauties of our elder bards. How often have I coincided with the sentiment expressed by Cowper, that the blank verse of Milton could only be compared to the full peal of an organ, from the period I Was able critically to scan his verses, and discover his immense superiority to all other poets, not only in his subject and manner of treating it, but even in the mechanism of versification!"

Geraldine paused. Hurried away by enthusiasm for her favourite bard, she had made use of no less than three of those technical terms, of which O'Melvyl had expressed such decided disapprobation. The next moment she felt sorry for having checked herself, as her only motive for doing so was but too apparent. To F 6 complete complete her vexation, she could perceive, through all his polished ease, that O'Melvyl observed her fear of displeasing him, and observed it with but ill-repressed triumph. Some of his thoughts, could she have read them, were of a more flattering nature. While Miss Southwell, who spread every net to attract the handsome O'Melvyl, would have thought a moment wasted that was given to lord Beaudesert, this lovely young creature, still more beautiful, more blooming, and far more accomplished, cheerfully devoted those gifts, those talents, to the solace of his father's lonely hours. .





Such was the observation that could not escape the discriminating mind of O'Melvyl; but it was difficult to say whether it had reached his heart.

It was the custom of the marquis of Beaudesert (a custom taken up abroad) frequently to make his visits in the evening. Sure of finding lady Louisa and the lovely Geraldine, the suffering invalid

would





would establish himself on a sofa in the smaller drawing-room, where common visitants never entered. He had come this evening as usual, and Geraldine had readily attended his summons.

Lady Louisa Southwell now entered, to beg the marquis would come into the next room to take some refreshment, or that he would have some sent to him.

Lord Beaudesert declined both; but, rising, stood some moments talking with her ladyship, and at length was prevailed on to look in upon the lively group in the adjoining apartment. Meanwhile Geraldine and lord O'Melvyl remained in the inner room. Geraldine's heart beat; for, though she did not look towards him, she felt his eyes fondly fixed upon her face, and was assured that the wished-for, dreaded hour of explanation was come.

"How similar are our feelings," at length O'Melvyl exclaimed, "in all that relates to the attention, the devotion, due from the young. to age and sorrow!

how how lovely would your example in the character of a daughter have been!"





"I never knew a parent's care," Geraldine replied, as she turned away to hide the starting tear; "and to this sorrow, which I share with many others, circumstances of melancholy and mystery are attached, which oppress my heart with anguish peculiar to itself."

Another indiscretion. The desire, unconsciously cherished, of reproving OMelvyl for wantonly adding to the distresses of a heart already a prey to unhappiness, had led her to give him an insight into her family-history, over which it had been the business of her more cautious friends ever anxiously to throw a veil. But in this case such caution was needless.

Given up entirely to a different train of feeling, O'Melvyl gazed on her altered countenance with a mixture of solicitude and remorse; he seemed much agitated, and his irresolution increased with every moment; at length, in an under-tone, he

exclaimed exclaimed—" Good God? I fear I hate been a wretch!" Then, as if starting from a dream, he added—" Miss Southwell, I have been very unjust. I believed the representations of those who described certain societies as the nurseries of unsteady principle, of vanity, and display—I hare judged by my own eyes, and have at length convinced myself of the contrary-— I watched by your side, and listened, while lady Kilcrest was giving her opinion on a celebrated, but dangerous author—I re* marked your modest silence, where your eloquence would have had the amplest scope—but, to see you eagerly devoting those talents, which have so often commanded the admiration of crowds, to the soothing of a suffering friend—it is that has convinced me how compatible the highest gifts are with the most engaging modesty—convinced me how much mote precious are those charms of literature and conversation, that never cloy, to those accomplishments of display that are nothing,





or or worse than nothing, to the frame worn down by sickness, the nerves rendered tremblingly irritable by grief."





"Then you acknowledged," answered Geraldine, flattered by this avowed triumph over the prejudices of the fastidious, yet amiable O'Melvyl, "that intellect sometimes finds its level, though, in general," she added, with a look of playful reminiscence, "you don't like clever women either in books or out of books."

A smile, such as had not been seen there for a long time, passed over the expressive features of O'Melvyl, while he calmly replied—"Oh, that was said to compliment Matilda Southwell!"

Geraldine could not forbear laughing at this apology, but, upon reflection, felt almost frightened at the degree of malice and duplicity this deep and cutting sarcasm betrayed. Still it was uttered sportively, and a secret assurance convinced Geraldine it was discrimination, not ill-nature, that

rendered





rendered O'Melvyl occasionally severe.— "You had many causes of offence of which I little dreamt," she said, resuming the former subject on which they had conversed. "I own it," lord O'Melvyl replied; "I ascribed your partiality to one coterie to the constant presence and assiduity of one

particular person—a person who But

you will not, I am sure, insist on the humiliation of my disclosing all my foolish and inconsistent thoughts; I am now undeceived, and but for "He sighed

deeply; pressed, in both his, the hand that he had taken; then, suddenly relinquishing it, said, in an altered tone—" Forgive me, dear Miss Southwell, and if I express myself ill, impute it to circumstances over which I have no control! Do not judge me severely, but pity me!"



CHAP





CHAPTER VII.



Is there no brighter mien, no softer smile,

For Love to wear, to dark deceit unknown?



SnEKsrouK. Love and Honour.

Geraldine found herself, after this conversation, just as far as ever from fathoming the real intentions of O'Melvyl. That he loved her, but that some secret obstacle prevented him from declaring his passion, was what she was inclined to think, when disposed to judge of him most favourably. At other times she remembered his confession at the fancy-ball, and feared to be the dupe of vanity or artifice —" At all events," she said, "if he knows there are insuperable objections to our union, it would be more honourable in him not to endeavour to interest my affections."

What





What a relief to her wounded mind it would have been, could some kind spirit have whispered—" O'Melvyl is unhappy, but is not deceiving you."

It was in the midst of these contradictory reflections that she was summoned to a conference with lady Louisa Southwell.—" I have to congratulate you," said her ladyship, "on the power of your charms, being commissioned to communicate a proposal which will have the greater chance of a favourable hearing, as it does not tend to separate you from your deaf marquis of Beaudesert." Geraldine listened, with a palpitating heart, to this exordium. Lady Louisa continued—" The count di San Carlos, who has admired, from the first moment he beheld you, requests permission to address you. Notwith* standing his father's profusion, his Italian estates, which are now freed from debt, are considerable; while the generosity of the marquis of Beaudesert"

* Let me entreat you, dearest madam,"

interrupted interrupted Geraldine, earnestly, "to permit me at once to decline this proposal. Independently of every other objection, the difference of religion"





"Is nothing," interrupted lady Louisa in her turn; "the count is but too liberal in his opinions."

"Then so much the greater is my objection to him," Geraldine replied, for she saw the necessity of being as firm as her ladyship.

Lady Louisa now changed her manner to the gentleness of persuasion.—" I will give you time to reflect, my young friend," she said, "and all I request of you is, to reflect, before you refuse a really advantageous and brilliant proposal. Perhaps you fear the being obliged, at some future time, to reside abroad. Believe me, in your case, that is no real objection. All the circumstances that would make such an offer less desirable in the eyes of some, only renders it peculiarly suitable to you."

Forced from every defence she had endeavoured deavoured to make, by the variety of arguments lady Louisa had at hand in favour of any point she was determined to carry, Miss Southwell was obliged, in the plainest terms, to declare her utter rejection of the count's suit, and her conviction that no time could effect the smallest change in her decision.





Lady Louisa then spoke to her of lord Templemore; notwithstanding her neglect of him, and the difference of their characters, this young nobleman continued, she assured her, to cherish in his heart a passion, the duration of which was the best proof of its sincerity.

With tears, Geraldine entreated this might be the last time she should be urged on the subject of either of these offers.

Lady Louisa seemed much disturbed.— "This cannot proceed from mere aversion —it is love for some other," she said, vehemently; "and for whom?" Geraldine was silent. "Is there any other person

whom





whom you have reason to think regards you with particular preference?" Again Geraldine was silent. "You know not," her ladyship resumed, with a voice more in sorrow than anger, "how much you are your own enemy. It is my earnest desire, I acknowledge, to establish you well during this first winter. You are not aware how much circumstances have restricted your choice; were they all known, few men might emulate the generous devotion of lord Templemore and the count di San Carlos. Another season, and your fashion will be gone by. Geraldine, I tremble to think what would be your fate should I die, leaving you without a protector!"

Though the greater part of this discourse was enigmatical to our heroine, she understood enough to mortify her feelings, and again gave way to tears she could not repress.

Lady Louisa was softened, and this circumstance alone perhaps saved her

from from a scene as violent as that she had endured at Meadowscourt on a similar occasion.





When alone, Geraldine indulged in bitter regret for having permitted O'Melvyl to assume that ascendancy over her, which, by sealing her lips, had deprived her of the counsel of prudence when most she needed it. Not only in the disclosure he made relative to San Carlos, but in every subsequent interview in which he appeared to unburthen the real sentiments of his heart, some hasty glance, some caution, uttered or implied, always indicated that these were the effusions of confidence, and that the mysterious, the inexplicable attraction he found in her society, would perhaps be dissolved by a single word of imprudence on her part.

What power he must have acquired over her, to bind her to secrecy by such means! Geraldine overlooked this very natural reflection. Had she been blessed with parents to refer to, such weak compliance pliance on her part would have been absolutely inexcusable; but, as it was, she quieted her conscience by considering, that in lady Louisa Southwell she could not expect a perfectly-disinterested adviser. She could not forbear however asking herself, what would probably be her future life with this woman, of an irritable temper, and a benevolent, but haughty spirit, should she continue to thwart her high-raised views and expectations?





It was in drawing a mental picture of the loveless, joyless existence she should probably be condemned to endure, between lady Louisa and her cousin Matilda Southwell, that fancy irresistibly whispered, there was one being, in whose fascinating gentleness, in whose manly tenderness, she might find consolation for every wo. When she called to mind the character of O'Melvyl, which appeared, to her partial fancy, a combination of every thing most desirable, as it was most unlike the failings that she daily witnessed—that

amenity amenity of temper—those effusions of filial tenderness—that love, so praiseworthy (and, alas! so rare!) of his native country—an attachment which was constantly prompting him to acts of beneficence or patriotism—." there is a man," she would say, "who might indeed be, to the orphan, father, brother, friend; but is it generous—is it manly, thus to talk indifference while looking love? Leave her at once, O'Melvyl, if you think not of her, and cease thus to applaud and to neglect by turns—thus to pursue and shun!"





She was roused from these meditations by a soft voice calling—" Geraldine, dear Geraldine, come down! There is a gentleman below very anxious to speak to you."

She obeyed the summons of Miss O'Reilly, for it was that young lady; and we know not with what expectations she might have entered the drawing-room, where the first object that met her eyes was the tourist Fendennis!

Vol. ii. o Had





Had Geraldine been a truly-sentimental, i. e. selfish person, she would have instantly run back at this apparition, so totally at variance was the grotesque appearance of Pendennis with the whole train of her former imaginations; but one glance was sufficient to convince her he had suffered, and the benevolent heart of Geraldine lost already a part of its load, in the prospect of affording consolation to another.

The tourist was seated, in a disconsolate posture, opposite the brilliant, but cold grate of polished steel. His dress was neglected, his wig uncombed, and the favourite red roquelaure, which he kept wrapped about his shivering frame, bore marks as if it had been injured by fire. A gleam of joy, however, illuminated his rugged countenance on the entrance of his "beautiful pupils," as he complaisantly styled both Geraldine Southwell and Miss O'Reilly, on account of his having initiated them into the principles of mnemonic science.





Having rung for refreshments for the traveller, and bid him cordially welcome to Dublin, Geraldine next inquired, with the graceful affability peculiar to her, the news of Mount Parnassus?

Pendennis shook his head, clasped his hands together, heaved a deep sigh, and was silent.

"If you don't mean us ladies to die of curiosity, Mr. Pendennis," said Miss O'Reilly, "you must make haste to explain the cause of your dejection. When I told you lady Louisa was engaged, you said you wished to see Miss Southwell."

"I did," replied the pedagogue, with another deep sigh. "Oh, my beautiful pupil, how much will your sympathizing heart be affected when I give you the history of my mischances! I have been attacked—robbed—burnt—fired at—with difficulty saved my life! My sufferings have been heavy indeed!"

Geraldine prepared, with real concern,

to hear the detail of them, but was a littie reassured by Miss O'Reilly's comic countenance, who, having found, in many former instances, that Fendennis indulged in the traveller's privilege of embellishment, had come to the prudent resolution of never believing more than half he said; the ladies, therefore, promised themselves a due mixture of the amusing with the pathetic, when our tourist began as follows.





CHAPTER VIII.



Prodigious! prodigious! prodigious!

Dominie Sampson.



Sempre a quel ver ch'ha faccia di menzogna

De l'uom chiudez ie labbra quanto puote. Dante.

Fab be it from me to attribute my misfortunes to the departure of my nephew Cobham, and the entrance of Zephaniah Toplofty into my family; but this I will

say,





say, since that period never did a poor man undergo such a variety of unexampled persecutions. You have heard, no doubt, my charming pupils, of the historical theatricals at Mount Parnassus? Not heard

in Dublin of the historical theatricals? Well, that's strange! Chief hero of them a master MacArthur—a fine, intellectual, talented creature—a pupil of mine; and I had so completely taught him, by example, the graces of gesture, countenance, and manner, that the young Roscius, in his glory, was a fool to MacArthur.

"A thought of my own the historical theatricals—selections from Shakespeare, with improvements by your humble servant. Never struck out a more felicitous idea. Parents and pupils, equally pleased, flocked to Mount Parnassus. Never witnessed such success since the winter of the run of Marius—every one delighted but Toplofty. He preached against the historical theatricals and all theatricals—made a party in the school—and at length won G 3 over over my Magnus Apollo, MacArthur, himself; of course there was an end of that affair.





"Soon afterwards, the neighbours, who, till then, had been remarkably quiet, began to commit nightly outrages. Anonymous letters and threatening placards were found about the premises, warning me that I had enemies, and that, now lady Louisa Southwell's powerful protection was removed, I was looked On, with an evil eye, as a stranger and intruder. At length, one night, as we were all assembled in the library at supper, of which Toplofty had permitted us to partake, after a grace as long as the Thirty-nine Articles, we were startled with the sound of pop! pop! pop! at three distinct intervals. Several muskets were fired in at the windows —the balls whizzed by me—grazed a curl of my wig—passed clean over the head of my niece Bridget, which was providentially bent down in the act of searching for a cheese-paring she had dropped, and

finally





finally lodged in a thick folio volume of Sidney's Arcadia, a New Testament in the Irish language, and one of the massive ancient Druidical books committed to the flames by order of St. Patrick."

"Committed to the flames by St. Patrick, Mr. Pendennis!" said Miss O'Reilly, who had listened till now with a face of exemplary credulity; "then, how, upon earth, did it return to life to be a receptacle for bullets, at the latter end of the year eighteen hundred and fourteen?"

"Committed to the flames, did I say?" resumed Pendennis, nothing disconcerted by this unseasonable objection. "Con-demned to the flames, I should have said, but saved by the zeal and intrepidity of a very intelligent Druid. In the lapse of ages, it fell into the hands of a learned monk of St. Bernard; thence, in process of time, found its way to Trinity College, Dublin; and at length was presented to me, as a relic unique in its kind, in return for a complete copy of my works, includ6 4 ing img my Tour in Ireland, System of Mnemonics, and Tragedy of Marius. But where was I, my intelligent friend, when you , interrupted with this remark? Oh, in fear of my life at supper.' Every one thought of selling their lives dearly, and seized the weapon nearest at hand. I brandished a poker; Toplofty, an umbrella. MaeArthur, who, though he would not play Richard for me, was still my Magnus Apollo, which means, in Irish, my whiteheaded boy (and supped with us), grasped a pitehfdrk."





"A pitchfork! and where did he find it?"

"I mean a toasting-fork. Mac Arthur seized a toasting-fork, which Fdrtunately hung by the chimney-corner, and We all sallied forth in the midst of from twenty to thirty White Boys. The shrieking females withinside believed our destruction inevitable. I could plainly perceive, by the light of the candles burning on the

supper-table, my niece Bridget putting up

prayers





prayers for her devoted uncle, when a happy thought seized me. I threw down my weapon, and, advancing towards the assailants unarmed, and with a pleasant countenance, I began an address from my tragedy of Marius, beginning—' Ye men of Carthage!' I had hardly repeated three lines before the ferocity of the ringleaders appeared subdued; when I had advanced to ten, they dropped their arms, and hung their heads in mute dejection; and before I had completed this animated appeal from an unfortunate stranger to the natives of the country where he sought refuge, every man of them had returned peaceably to his own habitation. But this is not the only instance in which I have proved, by experience, the power of poetry over a people of warm and unsophisticated feelings. Did you ever hear, Miss O'Reilly, of my wonderful escape from the hands of the rebels in the year ninety-eight?" "I thought, Mr. Pendennis, you often 65 said





said this was the first time of your visiting Ireland."

"The first time! Gad! so it was, except a little trip, not worthy to be called a visit, to see my friend, lord Blenerville. whose seat, you know, is not a hundred miles from Glendaloch, where the rebel generals, Dwyer and Hoult, had at that time formed fastnesses."

"Returning home from his lordship's, one night after dark, my horse missed his way, and tumbled over a precipice, down which we continued to roll, my horse and me, I know not how many fathoms, till at length we came to terra firma; but the scene that met our view more resembled the infernal regions than the habitations of living men. It was a heap of blackenened and smoking ruins, in the centre of which blazed a red and lurid flame: round this, a group of figures were warming themselves, worthy of the pencils that have delineated Conrad and Bertram.

The





The bare brown mountains and rushing torrents that encompassed this desolate spot were in gloomy unison with the objects around, and presented an unvaried aspect of desolation, that pressed upon the shuddering heart the impossibility of escape. Having received no material injury, I now humbly approached one of these men"

"In buckram?" asked the incorrigible Miss O'Reilly.

"No, in green—the true green of the united, but mistaken defenders of Erin. I approached one of these men, I say, who proved to be general Hoult. He would have had me condemned at once as a spy, by martial law; but, observing some expression of relenting in the countenances of his companions, I briefly told them the particulars of my lamentable story, and then addressed them in the words of Shakespeare's beautiful eulogium upon mercy in the Merchant of Venice. I had not gone half through it before I had G 6 the





the satisfaction to see they had totally given up their inhuman purpose.

"Encouraged by this, I next gave them a speech out Of Milton, from one of the rebel angels; for you know, my fair friends, when you are at Rome——But here t made a capital mistake; for general Hoult, taking me aside, asked me if I knew many more of these speeches? and on my answering in the affirmative, I was kept in a cave three weeks, under the strictest surveillance, and brought out occasionally to repeat a passage to animate the insurgents when they set out on an expedition."

From long practice, nobody could deal out the lie circumstantial with a better grace, and a more plausible variety of corroborative particulars, than Pendennis. Having finished this episode, he now continued to account for the disgust he had taken to his home.

"Some nights after the howsehad been thus surrounded by White Boys, as my niece Bridget was sitting up late, finishing a novel—I think it was 'The Elegant Enthusiast, or Interesting Emotions of Arabella Bloomville *





"I did not suppose," interrupted Miss O'Reilly, "that Mis* Bridget Pendenrtis's principles would have permitted her to look into a novel."

"Principles! Oh, ay, true! It was not a novel she was reading; it was bishop Beveridge's 'Private Thoughts,' Now I recollect myself, Beveridge was the book. As my niece Bridget was sitting up finishing a volume of Beveridge, she was alarmed at observing a degree of unusual light under her chamber-door, and presehtly afterwards there was a smell of fire. Imagine, my beautiful pupils, what must have been her situation. If she opened her door, the flames would burst in upon her. Escape by the window seemed a thing impossible, that in her room being (owing to some accident which happened to the pulley) of the nature of those whirfi wili neither ther open nor shut. There was a small aperture which exposed the inhabitant to all the winds of heaven, and which no human force could either raise up, or close down. At this moment, the door fell in with a tremendous crash, and Bridget was enveloped in a volume of smoke and flame.





"Goaded by desperation, she sprung to the fatal window, squeezed ber body through a space, which, moderately speaking, would scarcely afford egress to a cat, and • plumb down she dropt,' but fortunately no lower than the next story, where she was received into the balcony of the great school-room, in which I had just sowed a great quantity of mignonette —no, now I remember me, it was pheasant's eye.

"The balcony being thus transformed into a sort of garden, filled with soft mould, Bridget, of course, did not experience such a dreadful concussion as if she had fallen upon a bed of stones. I was up, rousing

the





the house; and hearing her fall, hastened to the window, and picked up poor Bridget, more dead than alive. Most fortunately no bones were broken. We now sounded the alarm, and sent for engines. As usual, they were all out of order; and here, though I should be truly concerned to attribute any part of my misfortunes to Zephaniah Toplofty, I cannot help cursorily observing, that he manifested a most unchristian, not to say wholly Turkish, unconcern, upon this truly-dreadful occasion; reproving our efforts as an opposition to the will of Heaven—nay, beginning a psalm at the very moment I was loudly calling upon several of the bystanders to save some of my most precious manuscripts from pillage. By the efforts of the scholars, united to the assistance of the neighbours, who continued pouring buckets of water plentifully upon the flames, the fire was got under, without much damage, except to the great schoolroom, toon), and the plunder of several of my most valuable effects, which were carried off in the general confusion.





"Among those most attentive to me on this melancholy occasion, was Mrs. Stratford Gore, a fine, intellectual, talented creature—a pupil of mine. It was I first taught her how to pronounce the word 'European.' When I informed her, by letter, of my misfortune, she immediately wrote to offer Mount Amaranth to serve for the purpose of a temporary academus; but I genteelly declined her proposal. Heaven forbid I should misjudge any one! yet certainly nothing but ill luck has pursued me ever since that fetal agreement with Zephaniah Toplofty. As the house had literally been made too hot to hold us, I left the eoncern for him to manage; for 'when vice prevails *' You

remember the rest."

None



* When vies prevails, and impious men hew sway, The post of honour is a private station.

Tragedy of Cato.





None but those who are themselves possessed of some portion of Pendennis's talent for extemporary romancing, will be able to conceive how very little of the foregoing statement had any foundation in fact. Pendennis had certainly some bad neighbours, and was one night alarmed by a cry of fire; but the whole story of bullets lodged in the books, of Bridget's miraculous descent from the garret to the lower regions, and of Toplofty^ Nero-like psalmody, together with several other particulars, were additions purely gratuitous, inserted by him to embellish his narrative. Thus the illuminators of old sought, by the brilliancy of marginal arabesques, to redeem the worthlessness of the scroll they illustrated.

The truth was simply this. Pendennis had quarrelled with Toplofty, and left the management of the school to him in disgust. The approach of a short season of vacation tempted him to execute a little tour be had long meditated, and he Was also allured lured by a new project, which shall be mentioned in the sequel. But all these reasons, he knew, would be insufficient to reconcile his first patroness, lady Louisa Southwell, to any neglect of an undertaking, at the head of which she herself had placed him; he therefore thought the most prudent course was to forestall reproach, by a moving story of injuries sustained and wrongs endured, and drew up, in consequence, the narrative above related. Pendennis had a habit, common to many literary men, of entering upon long discussions, and continuing them, heedless alike of interruptions, or of how wearisome they might be to his hearers. He had another trick scarcely less annoying. If he found a book at hand, let the subject be what it would, he took it up, and began discoursing on the contents, let them be ever so uninteresting, or even unintelligible, to those to whom he addressed himself.





Aware of this particularity, Miss O'Reil





ly, the moment Mr. Pendennis was announced, had taken care to secure every thing in the shape of poem, review, or pamphlet, that might be made the subject of interminable dissertation. Unfortunately a book of roads happened to be left upon the table, probably in the false belief that it could not be an object of literary attraction. Vain hope! Pendennis took up the book; and after discussing, at some length, the merits of different engravers and publishers, continued—"Talking of roads, my niece Bridget and I have measured some ground since we left Mount Parnassus. We have been in the wilds of Connaught. Did I tell you, my beautiful pupils, our tremendous adventures in the Caves of Cong—the greatest natural curiosities in the kingdom, the Grottoes of Cong? It is usual to take a guide in order to explore these subterrene recesses, but the ardent and poetic mind finds an additional charm in danger. Thinking we had fully acquainted ourselves with every necessary particular, my niece Bridget and I sallied forth, one morning, upon this expedition, unaccompanied. Our intention was to visit the Pigeon-Hole, the most celebrated of these wonderful grottoes. After descending about one thousand feet perpendicular"





"A thousand feet, Mr. Pendennis!" "I beg pardon, Miss O'Reilly. A thousand did I say? I meant a hundred feet—a hundred feet and upwards; which descent was rendered easy by means of steps, most commodiously hewn for the purpose of getting water; we then found ourselves, all at once, in a scene, the awful sublimity of which beggars description. Imagine, my intellectual friends, a grotto, gradually widening into a series of dark and gloomy caverns, faintly illuminated by the light I carried; while a subterranean river, which owes its existence perhaps to the vicinity of Lough Mask and Lough Carrah, rolled swiftly past our feet. Bridget and I were lost in contemplation





plation of this nether world. The dim light, which served only to render darkness visible — the gloomy and vaulted arches above us—the loud rushing of the river, scarcely seen in the twilight gloom around—the caves—the echoes, all united to fill our minds with a kind of pleasing horror; and we imprudently advanced so far among the inner rocks, that we lost all recollection of the situation of the outlet, when suddenly a rush of wind extinguished our light, and we were left, without guide or clew, 'amid the palpable obscure, to find our weary way.'

"Judge, my susceptible friends, judge now of the horrors of our situation! I began to shout with all my might, but with a very faint hope of being heard above. My cries were returned by the reverberating echoes of the sullen rocks around, which, presenting no longer a scene of enchantment, appeared transformed into so many yawning sepulchres open to entomb us.

"A night





A night and a day we remained in this condition, Vainly repeating our shouts at intervals. During this period, my niece Bridget must decidedly have perished, but for the refreshment she derived from two Naples biscuits and a half, and a small bottle of raspberry vinegar, which she happened, most luckily, to have in her pocket. I gave up this slight supply entirely to her use, and at length laid my head down upon my stony pillow, and was fortunate enough, for a little interval, to sleep——"

"To sleep, Mr. Pendennis !—to sleep! —perchance to dream!"

"To dream! Oh no! I had no dreams, I assure you. What I am relating falls far short of the reality. Finding it vain to trace back our steps, as we had, in all probability, wandered in the dark a considerable way further among the caverns, I called to mind the numerous instances in which literature and philosophy have been a resource in times of the most extreme distress, and began repeating aloud the

abbe abbe* Delille's exquisite morpeau, descriptive of a similar accident which happened, at Rome, to a traveller amid the labyrinths of the Catacombs; and now, my fair friends, I entreat your credence for what follows.





"My niece Bridget declared she felt the united sufferings of hunger, cold, and darkness, wholly suspended while listening to my voice; and this being the case, we agreed (in emulation of the ancient Lydians, who sought, by diversified amusements, to allay the pangs of famine) that we would sing and recite pieces of poetry to each other alternately. We still preserved in our bosoms a faint hope that chance or curiosity might conduct some travellers, like ourselves, to this dreadful scene.

"It being now Bridget's turn to entertain me, she proposed to sing. You may remember, ladies, her voice is clear and loud, and has been much exercised in psalmody at the meeting-house. She be





gan, with a strength and volume of sound almost superhuman, to give out, 'Fly not yet."

* Fly not yet!" involuntarily exclaimed both ladies at once.

"Did I say so? I had forgot. No, no! it was not * Fly not yet'—it was—

'Angels, ever bright and fair,

Take—oh, take roe to your care!"



which she went through in such a manner, that it actually reached the ears of two young officers who happened to be walking near the entrance of this perilous descant, and belonged to a military party quartered in the neighbourhood. Without hesitation, these gallant young men procured lights, descended into the vault, and, after some search, discovered a spectacle sufficient to melt the hardest heart. Extended on the cold earth, lay I, preserving, as well as I could, with the aid of my i;ed roquelaure, from the mildewing damps that filtered, in trickling drops, from the

arched arched and stony roof, the lifeless body of Bridget!"





"Of Bridget!" repeated Miss O'Reilly, in astonishment—" she whose voice sent forth, but a moment before, sounds so superhuman!"

This critique a little disconcerted our traveller, who, without further working up his pathetic picture, hurried on to the conclusion.

"One of the officers carried Bridget, who began to exhibit, signs of returning animation, up the flight of steps; while the other, who most politely and humanely offered me his assistance, I recognised, with equal pride and pleasure, to be a friend—an old pupil—a wonderful clever, creature, captain Denis Fazakerly."

Divested of the marvellous, all that the ladies could gather from this tale was, that Pendennis had been to visit the Grottoes of Cong, and meant to work it up into a story in his next publication; but it must be observed in his defence, that, if the nar

Vol. Ii. H ratives ratives of our traveller sometimes emulated a little the style of the renowned baron Munchausen, habit had become, in this respect, such a second nature to him, that he might really be said partly to have persuaded himself of the truth of the extravagancies he uttered.





"Well, Mr. Pendennis," said Miss O'Reilly, "this is a story of hair-breadth 'scapes and dangers, highly creditable to your intrepidity and the vocal talents of Miss Bridget; I declare I have not heard of any thing so extraordinary since—no, not since the run of Marius."

At the mention of the run of Marius, the grotesque features of Pendennis split into a smile. He saw he was laughed at, but was ready to join in the laugh against himself; for vain people depend too much upon others readily to quarrel with them. Besides, Pendennis was, to do him justice, one of the best-humoured of human beings, and it was this talisman of invincible good-humour, which made him so

many





many friends, in spite of ugliness, poverty, vanity, absurdity, and caprice. The only tax Miss O'Reilly paid for her imprudent remark was the having suggested to Pendennis a new topic of discourse, upon which he began—" Talking of Marius, I have a request to make to you, my beautiful pupil," addressing himself to Geraldine, "but it must not be now."

"How impossible it is to find any subject to which he has not something a-propos!" said Miss O'Reilly, in a half-whisper, to Geraldine; "he is quite equal to Swift, who, Stella said, could write fine things upon a broomstick."

"A broomstick !" exclaimed Pendennis, only catching up the last word; "talking of brooms, I have an excellent story to tell you about my niece Bridget, when we were together in the county of Galway."

What this excellent story might have

been, can never now be known; for, at

this moment, a stop was put to all further

H 2 commucommunications by the entrance of sir Charles Southwell.





Though surprised to see our tourist, the baronet welcomed him with his usual engaging suavity of manner; lamented, in courtly phrase, an engagement at the Castle, which would prevent his dining at home; but insisted on Mr. Pendennis's making the ladies amends, by giving them the pleasure of his company. 'This was an intimation Pendennis by no means thought it prudent to neglect; and being,: among other things, a great coxcomb, he took out his watch, and observing he had scarcely time to Adonize himself for dinner, took leave of his fair friends, with the consolatory promise of a very speedy return.



CHAP





CHAPTER IX.



Black spirits and white,

Blue spirits and gray;

Mingle, mingle, mingle,



You that mingle may. Shakispeake.

Pendennis met, as he expected, with but an indifferent reception from lady Louisa Southwell, who was much dissatisfied with him for deserting, on any pretext, the post at which she had placed him. Sir Charles, on the contrary, treated him with more than usual civility and attention. Never joining in any of the benevolent schemes of his wife, he experienced a sort of perverse pleasure when they met with an unforeseen check or failure; but this he was too well-bred a man outwardly to manifest, except in the way above related.

H 3 Having





Having consulted Geraldine, in private, with respect to his new scheme, and finding her utterly averse to it, Pendennis determined to change his mode of attack; and relying perhaps on the influence of sir Charles Southwell, renewed his proposal one morning that the family were assembled. If Geraldine had never heard of the historical theatricals at Mount Parnassus, it was not the same with Pendennis, in regard to her literary triumphs. He had been greatly struck and delighted with the fame of her readings, and his request was simply this—that she would give his unfortunate and long-forgotten tragedy of Marius the advantage of her powers of declamation, one evening, at lady Kilcrest's, which, he was persuaded, would give it so much fashion, that he could easily afterwards prevail with the manager of the Dublin theatre, or the committee of management at Drury-lane, to revive it.

Now, independent of her not being so intimate as formerly with lady Kilcrest,

Geraldine





Geraldine had, since O'Melvyl explained himself on the subject, an invincible aversion to the idea of public declamation or display; and when to this we add the intrinsic absurdity of the piece, we need not be surprised that she was firm in her refusal.

At this moment, a reinforcement came in to the aid of Pendennis. Lord O'Melvyl, and the count di San Carlos, his "constant companion" entered together; and San Carlos, almost without waiting to hear the merits of the cause, joined in earnestly entreating that Geraldine would give the manuscript play a reading.

Miss Southwell was surprised to find that San Carlos, instead of shewing distance or pique on account of her recent refusal, should again address her in the tone of friendship, with which was still blended a degree of respectful admiration. She could not reply with harshness to such an appeal; but turning it off with a smile, contented herself with observing to the count, that he seemed to have a favourable recollection of those evening readings.





Fixing his brilliant eyes upon her with the most penetrating expression, San Carlos replied, in the words of his native poet *—

"Nessun maggior dolore Che ricordarsi del tempo felice Nella niiseriaf-"

The beauty of that native tongue, in which he expressed himself with a manner and voice which possessed uncommon grace and melody—the interesting expression the fine features of San Carlos assumed as he addressed her, united perhaps to a little vanity fluttering at her heart, and whispering how much 'the noble foreigner suffered for her sake—altogether so far won upon the compassionate feelings of Geraldine, that she bestowed upon him a look of the tenderest pity,



when,

• Dante.

t There is no greater torment than the remembrance of past felicity in the season of affliction.





when, at that moment, accidentally encountering the eyes of O'Melvyl, she was frightened at the expression of indignation, mingled with high disdain, with which he proudly turned from her, and appeared to say—" And this is woman!" How gladly would she have flown to him, and assured him that her resolution was unchangeable — that nothing on earth would induce her to accede to a request of the count di San Carlos, in opposition to his wishes. But how could she venture to do so to one thus ever ready to pass from the extremes of suspicion to triumphant security—who seemed to claim the undivided empire over every thought of her mind, without assuring her of his own heart in exchange?

This reflection led her to think more favourably than she ever yet had done of the son of Fiorenza. Geraldine compared his devoted admiration, his hopeless attachment, to the incomprehensible and exciting O'Melvyl; but Love, who was H 5 present





present at all these deliberations, only permitted her to say, with a sigh—" Perhaps his may be, by far, the truest passion. Alas! why do I prefer even blame from the lips of O'Melvyl to praise from those of San Carlos?"

Finding that her uncle did not cease his importunities, Diana Pendennis undertook to rid Geraldine of them completely, and, at the same time, to do him an essential service.—" My uncle is ruining himself in the opinion of lady Louisa Southwell, his only real friend," she said, "by listening to the suggestions of a parcel of silly people, who do not care twopence for his true interest, and who will plunge him again into that variety of schemes from which he never derived either honour or profit. He now talks not only of a public reading of Marius, but of delivering a series of lectures on the drama, for which he is as well qualified as I am for giving lectures on sentiment; nothing will save him but a speedy return

to to Mount Parnassus, and that I will undertake to bring about. Thank God, Bridget is out of the way, having gone, for a few days, into the country, with some Moravians, with whom she has scraped acquaintance. She might be raising some puritanical objections against part of my scheme, whereas now I shall have my good uncle all to myself."





"Well, mind, Diana, you do not play any of your tricks seriously to vex your uncle," replied Geraldine; "he is a worthy man, and I would not have him annoyed or frightened."

Perhaps Diana took this hint in the manner of the friends of the fair Scottish queen, when she said—" Let me hear no more of it!" For certainly had she received a tacit permission, this incorrigible pursuer of fun could not have set more zealously and heartily to work than she did, in her project of teazing and terrifying her uncle out of his present abode. This was a small lodging he had taken, as near lady H 6 Louisa





Louisa Southwell and Mrs. Gore as possible; land Diana had given up residing with the latter lady, in order to administer to his comfort, which she did in the following manner. '.-.': '--'' .-..uj /»-;.-'- ».-o-"?

That very evening, Pendennis called for lights and a good fire, and sat down at his desk to correct the last sheets of the second edition of his tour. Diana, notwithstanding his remonstrances to her on the extragavance of it, was seated at a table with another pair of candles, being engaged, as she said, in a piece of fancywork, that required much light for the performance of it. On the chimneypiece were bronzes, containing tapers unlit. Suddenly Pendennis started from his work, and, with horror in his looks, ex-< claimed—" Niece Di, what is the matter with the candles?" .x; uvi\.'; 'Jj..

"Nothing," replied Diana, raising her

eyes, with great tranquillity, from her

work; "they are very good candles, for

any thing that I see to the contrary.'?.; ,. "But the colour!". , . --...





"The colour!" resumed Diana—" white to be sure?'- .'-.iv ;t

Pendennis passed his hands across his eyes, stared, and then, trying to laugh off his perturbation, resumed—" It is very' unaccountable then; but, as I look at those candles, lit and unlit, I vow to Heaven they all appear to me of a bright blue."

Diana burst into a loud laugh.—" Nay> dear uncle, if, instead of your own peaceinspiring lucubrations, you had been reading one of the terror-breathing tales of the author of Bertram, and then had ima>gined that the lights burnt blue, I should not have wondered at you; but as it' iff 1—" .Lori ~ :,'\'. .%' - -: i''f! ''-' oJ ';;f«ii...'

"I mean the candles themselves^ri-the candles that are usually white," resumed Pendennis—" I cannot be deceived." As he spoke, he rung violently for the maid of the house, and, on her entrance, asked her, not without some agitation in his

look





look and voice, the colour of the candles she saw before her.

The girl, already tutored by Diana, answered, with an appearance of rustic surprise—" .piess your heart, sir! what colour would they be but white ?—as good moulds as any in the city of Dublin."

"I am ill then," said Pendennis, striking his forehead violently. "Diana, put up my papers—I can do no more to-night. Light a taper—I will go to bed. Good Heavens! even that taper appears bright blue as the flame waves before me!"

To account for Diana's making choice of this mode of deception (for she had, indeed, with some expence and trouble, procured these coloured candles), it is necessary to mention a trait, not noticed yet, in the character of her uncle. He was extremely nervous and hypochondriacal, partly from affectation and a desire to be interesting, and an idea that it was characteristic of the morbid sensibility of genius; partly from natural constitution, he

was





was habitually a mental valetudinarian, and in perpetual apprehension of at length becoming the victim of some optical illusion.

"Dear uncle," said Diana, in a soothing tone, "perhaps such intense study has a little deranged your nervous system; give yourself a holiday to-morrow evening, and spend it amongst your friends. If the same illusion attends you abroad, we must consider how to treat your case; but perhaps"

"No, Diana," replied Pendennis, in a desponding tone, "that is what I cannot do; I am much hurried in preparing these sheets for the press, and would not, on any account, by delay, disappoint the hopes of my bookseller and the public."

Now this Diana was well aware of already, or she never would have hazarded the above-mentioned kind and considerate proposal. Accordingly, on the following evening, Pendennis once more sat down to his work, with which he had not been

engaged engaged many minutes, when Diana came in, and, with an affectionate smile, hoped her uncle was not disturbed to-night with any of those spectral appearances which, on the preceding evening, had so much annoyed him. Great indeed Was the surprise the young lady assumed—great, as if it had not been the very answer she expected—when Pendennisj with a trielancholy shake of the head, replied—" The appearance indeed is altered, but the disorder remains the same. To-night ail the candles look to me of a rose colour." VI -'





At this account Diana seemed highly amused.—" Well, now I have some hopes of you," she said; "to change from blue devils to idies couleur de rose is already a great step gained." .,.,.,,--'

Pendennis gave her a rueful look, but contrived, by means of turning his eyes from the offensive objects, and fixing bis thoughts intently on the employment he was engaged in, to get tolerably through his business that evening.. ,i . ,.. .-.-/ ;:" .- ol

The





The next night it was worse and worse. Our visionary tourist saw candles blue,; green, red, purple, orange, and yellow; and it would have been very extraordinary if he had done otherwise, as such were the colours with which his dutiful niece had, previous to his entrance into the apartment, tricked out the candlesticks and bronzes.—" Dear uncle," said she,; with an air of tender solicitude, "this must not be suffered to go oh; you must —indeed you must have some advice."

"Advice! I will none of it!" exclaimed Pendennis, who, among many other ri*: diculous prejudices, harboured a most ex»; travagant one against the faculty; " unless; indeed," he added, softening down a little: —" unless I could have the opinion of one who was at once a medical adviser and a friend—such a one as good little Mar, par exemple" •

"Sir Ulysses Mar," said Diana, correcting her uncle. .-; > '/: - i

"Have you not heard of the lucky cure

he





he performed in the country—of his conning up to town—of Mr. and Mrs. Gore's violent commendations of him, and of his being knighted by the lord-lieutenant?"

Now our tourist had not heard a syllable of this, but he was equally glad to find his friend within reach; and heaving a gentle sigh that he was not also sir Peter Pendennis, he sent, on the following morning, for sir Thady Ulysses Mar.

Whether the wise Ulysses had received some hints from the wily niece of Pendennis, it is impossible for us to determine; but certain it is, that when the tourist had described his symptoms, sir Ulysses, after talking a little about spectral deceptions and optical illusions, acknowledged it was not in the power of medicine to do much in this case, and suggested change of air, of scene, and a return to regular and stated, but less anxious and laborious employments, as the best chance of working a speedy cure.

This Pendennis affirmed to be impos





sible, alleging he should disappoint innumerable persons of fashion, if he did not present them, in the course of a month, with a play, and a series of most instructive and entertaining lectures.

After a little more conversation, sir Ulysses shook his friend by the hand, wished him better, and withdrew.

But while Diana was thus vainly endeavouring to drive out one absurdity by the assistance of another, Fortune—not the thoughtless and beautiful nymph, with a green ribbon over her eyes, and mounted on a rolling wheel—but rather arrayed with "sable stole of cypress lawn," was preparing to serve her a better turn than she either deserved or expected.



CHAP





CHAPTER X.



And still she goes, at midnight-hour,

To weep alone in that high tower,

And watch and look, along the deep,

For him whose smiles first made her weep.



Lalta Rookh.



When will the measure of my grief he full?

When will the silent asp of hopeless love

Withdraw his fang of torment from my heart?



Hermioite.

Since his introduction, at Mount Amaranth, to the antiquary, Mr. O'Carolan, as related in the first volume, Mr. Pendennis had cultivated a strict intimacy with that gentleman, who, in order to pursue some objects of research, which, at that period, engaged his attention, had taken up his abode in a small house in the same village. A few years before, Mr. O'Carolan, who was then arrived at a very mature time of . . life, life, had united himself to a young woman, the daughter of a petty farmer in a very remote part of Ireland, wisely preferring, like many men of erudition and genius, a very fine figure, and great sweetness of temper, to that refinement of taste, or cultivation of mind, which some visionary enthusiasts reckon one essential ingredient in domestic happiness. The antiquary never had reason to repent his choice. Mrs. O'Carolan rather worshipped than loved her husband. All his works on Irish antiquities she read with avidity, as they came out, though she did not understand one word of them; and, to let the reader into a secret, these and her prayers formed the sum-total of Mrs. CCarolan's studies. At their house, or rather cottage, Pendennis had often been hospitably entertained; and a painful shock was given to the feelings of this really good-natured man, by the receipt of the following letter, edged and sealed with black, which was delivered to him almost





immediately immediately after the door had closed upon sir Thaddeus Ulysses Mar. It was from the unliterary spouse of his literary friend O'Carolan, and ran as follows:—





"Rock Cottage, Glenartrey, Co. Limerick.

"DAER FRIND AND MUTCH-RISPICTED

SUR,

"Feeling ashured, from the recicropredy of affliction that persisted between yourself and my daer Antiquity, that you woud tak it il, if I lift it to another parson, I tak up my pen to inforrum you, with manny teres, the dere man is no more; and here I am lift al alone, wid the dere corpse, a bereaved widow. Indede, daer sur, I am bereaved! The daer sowl cot could, I tak it, simplifying among the mountens—it turn'd to a feavor, and in five dayes he was gone. Now, sur, as the dere departed disappointed you one of his executioners, Ithink it befitting to enquire

your





yourprisince atoppenning the will, and to setle about the sail; and as lift you choice of any of his bucks and peppers, and tould me himsilf he had betheawed his sublime Long Jonas as a tocken of rimimbrence, to Mr. Cobham Pindinnis, and sivirel other bucks to the back o' that. O that I cou'd but ones more here my dere Antiquity's sweet voice discoresing so finely about anticquarities, and cumulies, and wheelbarrows, and retrenchments, and the entomology of all the words in the irish dicsenery! But how dars for to arrange Providens? Father Gargan has been exulting with me, but am not yet fit for his spirituous exultations—however, has been mutch comforted by his symphony; and had a leter from the air of the daer angel that's happy, and seems inclinable to be very mellifluous to me, a bereaved widow. The may tak the cash, I can tell 'em that; but I defy them to say any thing of my conduck, its so conspicuous; and hopes to

see see you, sur, with all convanient speed, at Glenartrey, to advise with me, for am indeed a bereaved widow; and sinds the catalog, and likewise my sarvice to Mr. Cobham, and Miss Bridget, and Miss Livy, and Miss Di; and no more at prisint from,





"HONERD SUR,

"Your mutch afflicted frind and sarvent,

"EvELEEN O'carolan."



To the letter was subjoined a catalogue of books and effects, in the handwriting of the deceased, so precious in the eyes of a brother virtuoso, as almost to take off his attention from the melancholy event in which the communication originated.—

"Genuine fragment of the Brehon Laws.

"Part of the Psalter of Cashel, in the handwriting of Cormac Macuillenan.

"Catalogue of King Cormac's effects. Inventory of his rich sideboard of plate, &c. &c. &c.

"Ground





"Ground plan and elevation of Emania, the palace of the Ulthonian Kings.

"Genuine correspondence between Saint Malachy, primate and legate in Ireland, in 1140, and Saint Bernard, abbot of Clairvaux.

"Historical doubts, in the manner of Horace Walpole, concerning the excessive ugliness of Saint Bernard, as affirmed by Dante* and others.—N.B. Communicated to Mr. O'Carolan by an ingenious friend.

"A M.S. Grammar of the Irish Tongue, compiled, and almost finished, by Mr. O'Carolan." &c. &c. &c.

But what most fixed the enraptured attention of our connoisseur was a very scarce map of Ireland, which he had often seen and envied in his friend's house, and on which were marked the names of the original proprietors of land in every county and barony. He began reading aloud the title, with various expressions of satisfaction—" A map of Ireland, on which

Vol. Ii. I the



* Paradiso, c. 11.





the ancient families, among whom the country was partitioned before the English invasion, are accurately distinguished, with marginal notes and illustrations in red ink, by Mr. O'Carolan."

"The very thing," resumed Pendennis, "from which I wanted an engraving to prefix to the second edition of my tour. Poor man !—worthy creature!—very considerate of his widow to send me the choice of the books and papers—deserves every assistance I can afford her in return. Poor Mrs. O'Carolan! many is the pleasant evening I have spent at her house. A fine

intellectual talent No, no, faith! I had

forgot—she is not that; but she is the sweetest-tempered, best-natured creature in the world, and a very fine woman into the bargain."

Pendennis was now as anxious to leave Dublin as he had been, a little while before, to stay there. His ideas had taken the O'Carolan track. Here was at once a kind action to be performed, and an inter





esting pursuit to be followed up. All his ailments were forgotten; and, indeed, Diana, seeing him return, of his own accord, to the disposition of mind she wished, forbore any further to torment him. Pendennis was vehement in the expression of his determination.—" Cobham shall go with us, and take up his legacy, or I will know why. Two to one, I think we shall prove a match for Toplofty. Pack up your things, Diana, and slip a line to give notice to Bridget. An ancient map of Ireland, with O'Carolan's manuscript notes in red ink upon the margin! Such a rarity !—might have sold for ten times its worth at the auction. Poor Eveleen ! my heart bleeds for her — with manuscript notes in red ink upon the margin!"

His preparations were soon made, and the whole family of Pendennis, with the exception of Olivia, to whom the renewed flatteries of captain Vane, or some other reason, rendered Dublin delightful, were on their way to Limerick.

I 2 Meanwhile



r





Meanwhile Geraldine had reasoned herself into a belief, almost amounting to conviction, that O'Melvyl must have very little real affection for her; yet this conviction, so far from conveying to her that satisfaction which mathematicians affirm to be inseparable from the discovery of truth, threatened to deprive every other blessing of the power of bestowing happiness; and every sentiment of honour, delicacy, and female pride, urged her to conquer a preference that was trifled with, at least, if at all returned: yet such anguish accompanied the struggle, that life itself seemed valueless after the sacrifice. Her spirits drooped—her powers declined; she was no longer the courted, flattered beauty, in the full flush of health and bloom of charms, pointed out wherever she was seen, and followed wherever she moved. Pale, drooping, languid, on the contrary, she rather realized the Italian poet's exquisite description *:—

"Cade • Guarini.





"Cade al cade> del sole

Si scolorita in su la siepe ombrosa

Cli' nppena si puo dir: questa fu rosa."



Lady Louisa saw the change with irrepressible vexation—saw in it the disappointment of all her hopes for Geraldine. Change of air was recommended, and her ladyship suffered her to accompany Mrs. Stratford Gore, who affected to be scarcely able to breathe in Dublin, and who had taken a small house, or rather cottage, at Howth, for the benefit of sea-bathing. Here Geraldine also often bathed; and as she wandered among the chambers in the rocks, or, arm-in-arm with her companion, pensively traced the shore, she felt a transient interval from affliction, and seemed, when the bracing sea-breeze arose, revived and invigorated again.

One fine sunset, that Geraldine had left Mrs. Stratford Gore reading a canto of Childe Harolde, while reclined, in a picturesque attitude, under one of the rocks, she wandered on, and was soon lost in re13 flections flections on the past and present. Suddenly the sound of two voices, in earnest conversation near her, arrested her attention; and though she did not see the speakers, she almost immediately recognized, in one of them, the fine voice of O'Melvyl, never finer than in the tremulous and hurried accents of passion.—" Impossible!" he cried—" you cannot be serious!—she dares not do it!"





"On the contrary," replied another voice, which Miss Southwell knew to be that of San Carlos, "she glories in it." He added something in a lower voice, in which Geraldine only distinguished the words—

"An alien—an exile—an "The last

appellation was in so subdued a tone that she entirely lost it, when he was interrupted, with all the precipitancy of passion, by O'Melvyl.—" Say that again, base Italian ! and"

"Ha! do you threaten?" resumed the count; "and do you not remember how completely you are in my power?"

At





At this moment two men issued from beneath the rocks, and Geraldine's worst fears wereconfirmed. Though the shades of evening were gathering in, it was impossible to mistake their figures; and if she had felt before rivetted to the spot by curiosity, fear, or some stronger motive, now equally compelled her to fly, ere she should be observed. She felt as if some instant dreadful misfortune would follow the knowledge of her having listened to them.

Geraldine hardly thought herself safe, and was certainly not recovered from her agitation, when she joined Mrs. Gore f yet, upon reflection, this short scene, however mysterious, was not without comfort for her. It proved that O'Melvyl had secrets, which might, if explained, account, perhaps, even for his extraordinary behaviour to herself; she ceased, therefore, to consider him as a mere trifler, and, in restoring him to a portion of her esteem, seemed to have recovered a portion of her own existence. I 4 Lady





Lady Louisa was delighted, on Geraldine's return to town, with the evident improvement in her health and spirits.

Miss Southwell found, on her side, that lord O'Melvyl was by no means so constant a visitor at their house as formerly.

His conduct was now certainly pretty extraordinary. With the exception of his attention to the marquis of Beaudesert, which was constant and unremitting, he seemed to have but one object in life—that of making himself conspicuous by every species of dashing absurdity.

Buonaparte is said to have declared, that in the single word, "Osez," was comprehended the whole secret of a revolution: it seems as if it was also the talisman by which the most preposterous fashions may obtain a momentary currency. Lord O'Melvyl and the count di San Carlos pushed this axiom to the very verge of practicability; yet still all the eccentricities of O'Melvyl were interspersed with

gleams





gleams of right and generous feeling, and attended with flashes of originality, talent, or taste.

It was impossible to drive from the mind or memory a person with whose name every conversation was filled; and had Geraldine not been possessed of a counterbalance to her imagination in principle, her predilection would have possibly been heightened by the eternal tales concerning this "observed of all observers." As it was, a native dignity and delicacy of mind led her to shrink from the idea of every irregularity that bore the least appearance of vice; and when his absurd eulogists, and still more absurd imitators, would relate some wonderful trait of the mad O'Melvyl, as he was sometimes jocosely called, she heaved a sigh for his degradation, and lamented the wayward conduct of a being designed by nature for a far better character. - ..

One only of these reporters found a little favour with her—it was a gentleman who observed—" They say, that this strange mixture of whim, and brilliant talent, and absurdity, is far from being the real character of lord O'Melvyl; but that some vexations of a private nature—an attachment to a lady, which circumstances prevented him from ever hoping to indulge, have driven him into this mode of life, in the vain hope of escaping from reflection."





That very evening lord O'Melvyl spent at lady Louisa Southwell's. He was without the count di San Carlos, and seemed relieved from a dreadful and inexplicable oppression. In his conversation and manner there was none of that brilliancy which distinguished it in public, but rather a pensiveness—a subdued and shaded softness, more engaging still.

In vain Geraldine strove to make the least alteration in her behaviour. He seemed so unhappy—so confiding—so much, as it were, to throw himself upon her pity and forgiveness, that it was impossible possible not to extend it to him. She soon found her intention of resenting his conduct changed into a lively desire for an explanation of the real terms on which he stood with the mysterious Italian; but there was that in O'Melvyl's manners, which, except when he chose to be communicative, effectually repelled the most indirect attempts of curiosity. All then that she could conclude, from this rare, and therefore precious visit, was, that tenderness and affection still continued to be the real habit of O'Melvyl's mind; while the character in which he appeared to the world was the assumed brilliancy of spirits only—a species of gaiety that may be indulged to extravagance, while the sad soul remains melancholy and joyless, sighing and looking on, from its lonely solitude, at a mirth in which it has no participation.





16 CHAP





CHAPTER XI.



"Seek action—'tis the scene which Virtue loves;

The vigorous sun not only shines, but moves."



Lady Louisa Southwell, finding Geraldine's health completely re-established, resolved on giving a ball as a termination of her winter entertainments. Now I would not wish to be understood to mean by Winter, that "wrinkled, crabbed man," so admirably depictured by the poet, but rather that blooming, lively lass, crowned with natural flowers, by vulgar mortals yclep'd Spring, but still, in fashionable phraseology, denominated Winter.

Matilda Southwell, who had not, tor a considerable interval, exhibited any symptoms of ill-humoured caprice, being weary, we suppose, of this cessation, announced

her her intention of going out of town with her friend lady James Stawell, and a very fashionable party, on the very day fixed for her mother's entertainment.





Lady Louisa Southwell, who made it a rule never to interfere with her daughter in any thing, coolly observed, that Geraldine must help to do the honours. Now, considering the very strict friendship that subsisted between that young lady and her cousin, it will seem extraordinary that she did not bitterly regret her absence; particularly as, in consequence of it, the troublesome task devolved on her of opening the ball with lord O'Melvyl; but, be the reason what it may, she never dressed herself in better humour in her life.

This good-humour had been increased, in the morning, by the receipt of a letter from the old and faithful follower, Katherine Lawless, who had been left, on the removal of the family, at Meadowscouri. In her letter addressed to Geraldine Southwell, occurred the following paragraph :—

"lam





'' I am very glad to till you, my dear Miss Geraldine, that every thing is settled as well as you could wish with regard to Laurence Trench and his family. The poor fellow, whin he hard of your bounty, as sint through my hands, popped down upon his knees, and invoked every blessing upon your head, while he blessed the day that he was seen begging by the road-side, and you going with Mr. Stratford Gore, and all the quality, to Kilmallock. He says, nothing but being out of work, and the favor, would have made him demean himself to do such a thing. His youngest girl, little Mary, is quite well, and has quite lost the perished look you rimimber. He has cleared and kept up your little garden, as you diricted, and set to work about bilding the dairy; and Mr. Mortimer gives plinty of work to a many poor craturs, and pirty it will be when yourself comes back, Miss Geraldine, that's the pirtiest thing in it, and the crame of all the rest. I hope you'll excuse a joke; for you know, Miss, we will be always making fun, as is natural when it's peple we love: and Judy sinds her humble duty to you, and thanks you for the flannel; and every body wishes and prays for your return, Miss Geraldine, and says you are an angel sent among 'em to comfort 'em."





The success of a scheme which had for its object to blend the pursuits of her elegant taste with her desire of benefiting the distressed, inspired our heroine with an unusual flow of spirits; she felt as if she deserved, in her turn, to be happy; and a secret whispering seemed to say, that, for this night at least, she should be so. Pleasure animated her rosy smiles, and gave renovated lustre to her eyes and complexion; she looked as she felt—all benevolence, sweetness, and love; and when to this was added the becoming effect of a dress the most tasteful and well-fancied, it is no wonder that, as she entered the ball-room, she appeared





peared a divinity, armed at all points for conquest.

The first object that struck her eyes was the count di San Carlos, standing near the fireplace, in earnest conversation with lady Louisa Southwell.

"The count brings us vexatious news," said her ladyship, turning quickly round to Geraldine; "an engagement of a political nature deprives us, for this evening, of lord O'MelvyPs company. He requests permission to act as his substitute, and I have referred him to you for a decision."

San Carlos now fixed his dark, piercing eyes on Geraldine, and, in his foreign manner, bowed profoundly. He added something, in a low voice, about the honour to which lady Louisa permitted him to aspire; and Miss Southwell, from mere inability to answer him, returned his bow in silent acquiescence. Never had a trifling incident so entirely disconcerted her; but, to Geraldine, it did not appear tri



N





fling. Since overhearing the mysterious conversation at Howth among the rocks, all the prejudices infused into her mind against San Carlos originally by O'Melvyl himself recurred to it with redoubled force. The slight appearance of goodwill she had sometimes been induced to entertain towards him vanished; and in its place, a secret, undefined, resistless dread seized on her spirits whenever the son of Fiorenza approached her. Her intended partner's excuse seemed to her an insufficient one; she felt as if some other cause detained him; and had she given utterance to her thoughts, or rather to he* feelings, would, perhaps, in hurried acs cents, have demanded of San Carlos to give her back O'Melvyl.

The ball passed off totally without pleasure to Geraldine; but she was not, on that account, forgetful of her duty, as the assistant, and* in part, the representative of lady Louisa. No one had reason to complain of being dissatisfied on that night,

but





but the gentle and graceful being who gave satisfaction to all.

In the course of conversation with San Carlos, she could not avoid once expressing, in an indirect manner, some expectation of seeing O'Melvyl on the morrow. San Carlos, with a slight change of countenance and hesitation, replied—" I believe not;" and this answer, so simple and so brief, struck her imagination with the force of a prophecy.

Retired to the solitude of her own chamber, Geraldine found it in vain to think of rest; all the gay visions of the preceding part of the evening came, in strong contact with the dreamings of the reality, and she felt conscious that, in fancy, she had staked, on the possible occurrences of those few short hours, a great portion of the felicity of her future life. Geraldine was amazed that she did not make this discovery sooner; but the fact was, for several weeks past, the pulse of hope had beat so languidly in her bosom,

that



N





that she could only be made aware of its previous existence by experiencing the subsequent pang of disappointment.

It was a fine night, or rather morning, like the beginning of June; Geraldine drew aside the draperies which shaded her windows, and threw open the sash, to gaze on the last star, as it retreated before the dawn of day.—" So fade my hopes!" she sighed expressively; "for lovers have that in common with poets—they can assimilate every external object to the prevailing tenor of their minds."

Her apartment was so situated as to command a view of the gardens of lord Beaudesert, who lived at no great distance. These, for a town-residence, were extensive, and laid out in the Italian taste. As she leant her cheek upon her hand, Geraldine almost fancied she felt wafted towards her the perfume of the orangetrees, which, in a season so temperate, feared not exposure to the night-air. She fancied—say, did she wholly fancy, or is it

a pleasing





a pleasing reality? Did she overlook the scroll upon her toilet, or have invisible hands conveyed to her the billet I am going to transcribe? As I would not be suspected of dealing in the marvellous, I am inclined to think the former was the case. „ .,



"To G. S.

"To others a commonplace apology suffices; but I cannot think of losing sight of you, for an indefinite period, without attempting, at least, a few words in explanation—explanation did I say? I dare give none. Forgive mejl write in pain, and hardly know what I write. You will be told to-morrow where I am gone; but believe it not; it is not there, I am to be found. Faulty as I have been, the want of a proper value for your unequalled merit has never been among my faults. Oh thou, who, in thy charming person, dost unite so perfectly the oppo





site attractions of softness and spirit, let them be exerted, on this occasion, for one more deserving of pity than I am. If ere I bid farewell, perhaps a long farewell, I durst prefer a request—console, console my father."



This note, mysteriously worded, and as mysteriously conveyed, was not signed; but could Geraldine entertain a doubt respecting the allusions—the request it contained? It was from O'Melvyl—still the same O'Melvyl, irresolute, unsatisfactory, incomprehensible—that character of contradictions—trusting without confidence, and praising without lovg, yet exacting kindnesses, as if conscious of deserving them, and asserting an influence over her actions in an adieu that was perhaps eternal. One circumstance pleased Geraldine—that he should think it necessary to explain and apologize for his conduct more particularly to herself than to lady





Louisa or Miss Southwell. Such solicitude she could only explain in one manner, and that was a manner the most flattering and grateful to her feelings. All the rest was confusion, perturbation, and dismay; and her attention was only drawn from her own subjects of regret to contemplate those of the unhappy marquis of Beaudesert.

The next morning, it was reported, all over Dublin, that the " mad lord O'Melvyl," on the day he was expected to open a ball given at lady Louisa Southwell's, had set off, in a frolic, with a party of friends, on a tour to the Western Islands; but Geraldine knew a different story, and she soon fancied that the marquis, though he affected to be easy under his son's absence, was not without some vague suspicions; she also imagined he received, with a secret coldness and disgust, the assiduous attentions of the count di San Carlos.

Lord Beaudesert had a villa near Dublin, in which every refinement of foreign luxury was lavished on the furniture and decorations. Taste and learning presided at the formation of the library, and in the selection of the pictures, vases, and statues; while the disposition of the gardens vied with the elegance of the interior of the mansion. Here Geraldine spent many pleasing, if not quite happy hours; and if ever gossiping folly affected to pity her that those hours were stolen from dissipation, she silenced the effect of the remonstrance, by silently repeating O'Melvyl's expressive appeal—"Console my father!"





Matilda Southwell, incapable of intellectual occupation, had all that wayward fretfulness at seeing others better employed than herself, which distinguishes women of her stamp. She could not bear that Geraldine should seem for hours happy and amused with a gem, a medal, or an intaglio, that conveyed to her sluggish taste and uncultivated mind only confused and uninteresting perceptions. She could not endure to see her cousin range through '- '- the the varied stores of lord Beaudesert's wellchosen library, while she experienced the most listless ennui, if compelled to spend an hour with the venerable invalid. The villa, its visitants, and inhabitants, became alike the subjects of her malignant, though pointless satire; and many were the hints she dropped respecting the policy of cultivating the goodwill of relatives and friends, while the real object of pursuit may be out of reach.





All this Geraldine bore very patiently. Her anxiety to hear further tidings respecting lord O'Melvyl had arisen to such a height, that she hardly perceived what was passing around her; and the fear of giving future offence, by communicating his strange billet, as usual prevented her from deriving any benefit from the advantage of a friendly counsel.

Matilda Southwell, on the contrary, who had taken it in her head that lord O'MelvyPs absenting himself from the ball was on account of her not being present to

grace





grace it, was fully satisfied that, when returned from his tour, he would openly declare his passion.

Lady Louisa was of the same opinion; and things were in this state when the Southwell family left Dublin, to spend the summer months at their seat in the county of Limerick



VOL. II. K CHAP





CHAPTER X.



His habit carries peace; his brow defiance.

Miltoh.

L'œil aime dans un lac une vaste étendue;

Cependant offrez lui quelques points de repos.

Si vous n'interrompez l'immensité des flots,

Mes yeux sans intérêt glissent sur leur surface;

Ainsi, pour abréger leur insipide espace,

Ou qu'un frais bâtiment, des chaleurs respecté',

Se présente de loin dans les flots répété;

Ou bien faites éclore une île de verdure;

Let ilessont des eaux la plus riche parure;

Ou relevez leurs bords, ou qu'en bouquets épars

Des masses d'arbres verts arrêtent vos regards.

Delille.

As lady Louisa Southwell's equipage approached the village of Glenartrey, its progress was impeded by a multitude of people, that on each side lined the road leading to Meadowscourt. Blessings on their benefactress rent the air, and respect

was





was forgotten in affection, as they eagerly pressed forward to welcome her return.

However accustomed to restrain the expression of her ardent feelings, lady Louisa, yielded, in this instance, to the delicious emotions that rewarded her active benevolence. Drawing back, as much as possible, from the curious and earnest gaze, she covered her face with her handkerchief, to hide her flowing tears.

Oh you, to whom fortune has given the power of witnessing and causing scenes like these! what are the satisfactions of vanity, compared to the happiness, the honest triumph, of such a moment! Return to a people grateful, affectionate, enthusiastic, as they are intelligent and gay!— return to those who only ask permission to love you, and whose warm, unsophisticated affection would lay a tribute at your feet you will seek in other climes in vain!

Lady Louisa had at length disengaged

herself from the kindly-meant pressure of the multitude, and sir Charles Southwell, who began to be a little impatient at the interruption, had given orders for the carriage to proceed with all speed, when, after advancing a few hundred yards farther, they encountered a fresh obstacle of a very different description. And now, reader, prepare for a transformation as wonderful as any recorded in the metamorphoses of fairy lore—not that I deal in art magic; on the contrary, I have already disclaimed all pretension to it, and, for that very reason, demand the greater credit for effecting, without supernatural aid, that which so many of my brothers and sisters in fiction have not been able, but with the help of such inventions, to accomplish.





Mounted on a little elevation on the wayside, which was a necessary addition, to give importance to his figure, stood dne of those itinerant performers yclep'd Methodist preachers, haranguing, or rather rebuking, the surrounding multitude. His voice and action were as ungovernably vehement, hement, as his dress was ostentatiously plain. His eager eye, "in a fine frenzy rolling," now glanced at the astonished crowd—now turned, indignant, towards the handsome equipage that was trying to make its way through it. Borrowing, as is the custom with his brethren, a hint from every passing object, the preacher thus continued, in a loud voice, his exhortation—" Ay, there go the carriages and the horsemen—the carriage of the mighty man and the wicked, who comes from dinners with privy councillors, and suppers at the Castle. Did Joseph give cabinet dinners when he ruled over Egypt, think you ?— did Daniel thus find favour in the sight of Nebuchadnezzar? No, my brethren! they knew better things, my brethren! and you, poor deluded sinners! Pat Riley, John Byrne, Thady Grogan, and the rest of you—for what have you wandered so far? To meet the woman Louisa Southwell, who lives without God in the world. Out upon her, with her ribbons and her K 3 stuffs,





stuffs, and her hat manufactories! Would queen Esther have patronized a fancyball, think you, my brethren ? — would Deborah, who judged the twelve tribes of Israel, have gone to a masquerade?— would righteous Judith, who cut off the head of Holofernes"

"Oh, the horrid creature!" exclaimed Matilda Southwell, who had been forced, by the stopping of the carriage, to listen to these frenzied exclamations; "he is mad—absolutely mad—out of his senses! This is assuredly the Zephaniah, with an odious Methodistical name, Mr. Pendennis told us of in town. It is assuredly—heavens !—no! it is not possible—it cannot be!"

It was but too true. The near approach of the carriage, and a break in the crowd affording a full view of the orator, discovered to Miss Southwell's astonished eyes, not Zephaniah Toplofty, but her quondam sighing adorer, and the subsequently ridiculous coxcomb, Cobham Pendennis!

What





What a change was here! Instead of the dress, at once showy and fantastical, in the most outrageous extreme of ultradandyism, a suit of rusty black adorned the person they had lately beheld in the gay habiliments of Florizel, the pastoral prince; while his cropped hair, and "face than razor thinner," announced him at once, to the intelligent observer, as a newly-enrolled volunteer in that class of combatants, who, endowed by nature with the unfortunate gift of a sullen and saturnine disposition, revenge themselves for her unkindness, by declaring "war to the knife," against every elegant pleasure and liberal pursuit.

Sir Charles and Miss Southwell, once they had discovered who the inspired orator was, found the incident so irresistibly diverting, that they completely forgot their usual polite and insipid nullite of character, and indulged in repeated and violent bursts of laughter; but lady Louisa, who never considered any thing in a K 4 ludicrous ludicrous light which struck her as degrading, called out, in her most authoritative voice, to the postilions, to drive on at their peril; and they had nearly obeyed her ladyship's mandate, when Cobham, springing from his tub, suddenly threw himself exactly across the path of the horses. At the manifest risk of terrifying those much nobler and more rational animals, he thundered out, in the voice of a maniac, that he had an irresistible impulse to address lady Louisa. He then began to reproach her for the ungodly life, as he called it, that she had led in Dublin, declaring, with many groans, he had been too great a participator in such scenes, not to have dearly purchased a right to rouse and call her to repentance. . -.-<•





He was proceeding in this strain, with the same absurd and disgusting mixture of scripture images and figures with the most familiar and ignoble phrases, that distinguishes this kind of oratory, when he was interrupted by the still-louder

voice

\





voice of a female, exclaiming—" Arrah now, Mr. Cobham Pindinnis, or Glindinnis, or whatever your name is, is it yourself would be after taking lave of your sinses altogether and entirely, and all the quality in it? Sorrow the taste of good your poor uncle ever got of you since you had the new birth, as you call it, and was degenerated! And you, ye pack of teeves!" continued the Amazon, turning fiercely to the half-stupified assembly, "is this the way you let her ladyship be affronted—and you, and your wives, and your childer, and your cattle, that she give laming, and food, and raiment to, looking on? But ye are an ungrateful kit altogether and entirely. Farmer Davies, sitting there a top of your fine, tall, big hunter, like a midge upon the back of an elephant, I'm ashamed of you! Neighbour Brennan, make way, if you've any sinse in you, and let the quality pass!"

The eloquence of the fair orator, like

that of the divine Hersilia among the Ro

K 5 man man ladies, was productive of the most immediate and beneficial effects.





The little farmer, whether stung or not with her reflection upon thediminutiveness of his person, instantly, at her word of command, turned the white nose of his bay horse from its former friendly contact with the shoulder of the preacher; women and children emulously assailed him with missile weapons, and Cobham was glad to regain his post by the road-side, and left the cavalcade to proceed, without further molestation, to Meadowscourt.

Katherine Lawless, for it was she indeed, in propria persona, who had effected this desirable revolution, welcomed the noble family home with raptures and tears of joy; and the sight of lights, the prospect of repose, and an elegant supper of her providing, soon banished from recollection the disagreeable part of the occurrences of this eventful evening.

Pendennis did not delay beyond the morrow paying his compliments at Meadowscourt. dowscourt. His friends found him tolerrably discontented with the present aspect of affairs; Cobham, instead of joining forces with him against Toplofty, having been easily persuaded to embrace his party. Sir Charles Southwell, who, in the country, never sought any thing beyond the amusement of the passing hour, entreated the incensed pedagogue to forget all differences, for a day at least, at his house; and when this proposal was communicated to Toplofty, notwithstanding his contempt of the vanities and luxuries of this life, he did not think proper to neglect it. Cobham, as a just punishment for his presumption and impertinence, was not invited; but sir Charles had asked Mr. Preston and father Gargan, promising himself some diversion in the clashing opinions of these different religious professors. He had added as many more singular people as he could find, to fill up the corners. Among these was Zachary Mudge, a coadjutor of Zephaniah Topic 6 lofty lofty, but as different from him in person as in manners and behaviour. 'i,iJ '-'}-'---





Though it "would seem difficult for Cobham Pendennis to find a foil to himself, such a foil was presented in Zephaniah Toplofty. Of features mean, and of ignoble stature, let the reader imagine a figure and face in which every line and curve are in direct opposition to the rule of right, and this intrepid reformer stands before him. Zachary Mudge, on the contrary, greatly resembled the portraits of Wesley, which are well known to be very handsome. His white hair, falling in a natural manner about his temples, gave him a venerable air; his address was simple and apostolic, and his language nervous and eloquent. Such a man was no food for ridicule, and this was the game sir Charles was in search of; he therefore very soon turned him over to the ladies, and betook himself to drawing out Zephaniah Toplofty.

The servants were scarcely withdrawn,

and





and the dessert upon, the table, -when/ sir Charles turned the conversation to the subject of a viceregal visit that bad* some time back, been made to a nobleman in the neighbourhood. '>.r;

"Why yes, sir;" answered Toplofty, wriggling like an evvet among old timber, and spreading out his little hands, like fins, upon his knees, "I remember the time full well, and a goodly company there was. Plenty of fine-dressed lords and ladies, poor deluded wretches! (I ask pardon of the present company)—plenty of eating and drinking—of singing men and singing women. There was even.a talk of a regatta on the Shannon: but the chief occurrence of that memorable day was his excellency's accidentally falling into conversation with myself and the powerfulJeremiah Steepleshun. His excellency was so highly edified with our discourses, that vainly did the lady Charlottes and the lady Georges Again I crave pardon—I believe lieve the quality calls it Georgiana—the hounds and the hunters—the singing men and singing women, endeavour to draw his honour—his excellency I mean, from us."





"Worthy Zephaniah," said sir Charles, smiling, "your modesty is too great in imputing this conversation to accident. Is it not more likely that the visit to lord

B was the pretext, and that the great

man was allured from afar by the fame of the precious Zephaniah Toplofty and the powerful Jeremiah Steepleshun?"

"Oh, sir, you are too good, sir!" replied Toplofty, simpering, and in a foolish tone, in which the vulgar vanity of the man betrayed itself through the affected indifference of the preacher. Then, heedless of Mudge's whispered—" Peace, brother, I pray you!" he went on, laying himself more and more open to the ridicule of the polished man of the world, till lady Louisa, saying, in a low voice, to Ge

raldine





raldine—"All this is very disgusting," gave the long-wished-for signal for the ladies to withdraw.

Observing the uncommon fineness of the evening, her ladyship proposed a walk. Geraldine asked, with something peculiar in her look and manner, if she did not think the grounds afforded sufficient variety? She herself undertook to point out the devious way, and when arrived at the spot on which she wished to fix the attention of her friends, turned round, and enjoyed their delighted surprise, with an expression of answering delight in her sweet and animated countenance.

Embosomed in trees, and situated so near the fairy lake, already mentioned, as to appear built upon an island, arose a cottage, divided into two commodious apartments. In the one was a harp, drawings, and other pleasing objects of employment, surrounded by odoriferous flowers: the other was a dairy, constructed on the most elegant and luxurious plan. All the '. windows windows were of stained glass, calculated equally for beauty and coolness. The vessels were of the finest porcelain, and placed;upon marble slabs. A profusion of flowering shrubs and roses, now in full beauty, had been planted around this tastefully-designed building. . ' -.- r '-:.-..{ -.•





'Whife the little circle partook of a coU lation of fruits and cream, which Geraldine had provided in her "fancy dairy," she said to lady LoUisa, playfully—" Do you recollect, my dear madam, your solemnly investingGeraldineSouthwell with full powers and prerogatives over this spot, which you called the Wilderness, and my engaging, with the assistance of my transforming friend, Mr. Mortimer, to make it resemble some of the magic scenes he had produced at Mrs. Stratford Gore's?"

"I do perfectly," her ladyship returned, "and am far from disapproving this application of money and talent. The love of landscape gardening and picturesque embellishment, when not carried to an ab----/)(;'.. '-;'/.- surd surd excess, is a taste peculiarly adapted to females in our rank of life, and contributes at once to benefit our inferiors, and to render home endearing."





"I think," said Miss O'Brien, one of the ladies who had spent the day at Meadowscourt, "Geraldine's cottage is still imperfect; it wants an inscription, and should have one, in the manner of Shenstone or Thomson, addressed < to the genius of cultivation." . . '.'>•«• ?--•/- Joij

Lady Louisa was going- to reply, when, turning towards Matilda Southwell, she perceived one of those heavy clouds that predicted the approach of the thunderstorm gathering on her brow. Though Miss Southwell never herself made .any pretensions to "taste, Shakespeare, or the musical glasses," as she used, in derisiofl, to call Geraldine's pursuits, she could not bear to hear her cousin praised for them; and lady Louisa, unwilling to expose her daughter's inferiority, even in temper,

hastily hastily rose, observing, it was time to return to the house.





Geraldine accompanied the party a few steps, then turned, to take a last, longing, lingering look at her beloved cottage, which she had not expected so abruptly to leave. I know not how to account for the circumstance, but, the longer she gazed on it, the more strongly she felt impelled, by a retrograde motion, once more to take possession of this calm retreat. In the drawing-room she knew what awaited her —young ladies, simpering, tittering, and talking of lace; the gentlemen, if they chose to join them, consisting of sir Charles Southwell, contemptuous, though polite— Mr. Pendennis upbraiding—father Gargan disputing—Mr. Preston sneering— Zephaniah Toplofty haranguing. The temptation was irresistible. From such solitude she flew to the choice society that filled "Geraldine's cottage;" for it is when the world believes them lone and

pensive, pensive, that spirits like hers hold blessed communion with the absent and the dead. The setting sun had now tinted the fine scenery around with its richest, mellowest ray; it was the very place and time for an enthusiast to exclaim—





"How dear to me the hour when daylight dies,

And sunbeams melt along the silent sea;



For then sweet dreams of other days arise,

And Memory breathes her vesper sigh to thee!

"And, as I watch the line of light, that plays

Along the smooth wave, toward the burning west,

1 long to tread that golden path of rays,

And think 'twould lead to some bright isle of rest."

Indulging in a pensiveness from which imagination and poetry had extracted every thing that was bitter, Geraldine, for some moments, gave the reins to fancy, and felt

There is a joy in wishes, even though Hope

Scarce seems to mingle there—a doubtful charm

Of something yet to be, that almost gleams

On the wild vision of the grief-worn heart,

Like half-forgotten gladness *.

■ ,

* Dr. Brown's Poem of " Agnes."

She





She was roused from this state of mental luxury by the rustling of something under her feet; and, stooping to pick it up, found it was a letter, or rather the torn leaf of a letter, without address or signature. Geraldine imagined she knew the hand; and the sight of her own name, in large characters, irresistibly impelled her to read on* -i••

"You cannot doubt my affection for Geraldine—an affection so well justified by the virtues, the graces that adorn her character; but, for that very reason, worlds should not tempt me to ask her to share my lot—an exile, an outlaw."

Why did Geraldine experience a convulsive shuddering as she perused this passage? why did her glazed eyes wander vaguely over the paper without comprehending the remainder of the contents? The sun had set, and she felt an unusual terror creeping over her at being in the twilight alone. Trembling like some guilty person, she was unable, unassisted,

to to rise from the fatal spot. At this moment, a hand, of frightful size and muscular strength, was put over her shoulder, and seized on the letter. Horrorstruck, Geraldine turned to see who stood behind her, and beheld the face that had blasted her eyes at Kilmallock! Involuntarily she covered her eyes with both her hands, to shut out the horrid vision. After a short interval thus passed, she summoned all her resolution to call aloud for help; but, on looking again, no vestige of a human being, save herself, remained in the cottage! Faint and spiritless, Geraldine at length rose, and returned to the house. On rejoining the circle, she was, of course, exposed to some raillery for her altered looks and love of solitude; but this made very little impression on her, compared to the idea which was uppermost in her thoughts throughout the evening, and which, in spite of all her efforts, often rendered her absent and inattentive to what was passing around. Geraldine turn.T;ii :ii -) ed





ed it in her mind a thousand ways, without being able to come to any satisfactory conclusion, and a thousand times asked herself the question, which my reader may have asked once or twice—" Who is the Outlaw?"



CHAPTER XIII.



It is not so! thou hast misspoke, misheard.

Be well advised—tell o'er thy tale again.

It cannot be! thou dost but say, 'tis so.

I trust I may not trust thee.

Then speak again; not all thy former tale,

But this one word, whether thy tale be true?



SHAKESPEARt.

Oh! know'st thou not his looks are my soul's food?

Pity the dearth that I have pined in,

By longing for that food so long a time. Id.

"Miss Geraldine," said Katherine Lawless, somewhat abruptly entering her

chamber,





chamber, "do you know I was dreamt last night, that my lard O'Nelvil was come back, and that he put tin guineas in my hand, and said we was to have a wedding? "What do you say to that, Miss?"

"That I should be satisfied," Geraldine replied, " if the half of it came true."

"What!" resumed Lawless, with quickness, "that I wouldn't get the tin guineas, but that you'd be married to my lard O'Nelvil? There's for you!" winking significantly. "Well, if ever I hard the like o' that!"

"You mistake me," said Geraldine, blushing; "and do, Katherine, call him O'Melvyl."

"Well, O'Melvyl, or O'Nelvil, or whatever else his name may be, you know who it is I mane well enough; and as for the pronoun cification, it's a folly to talk, Miss Geraldine, for I never will larn it."

"Indeed, Lawless, I believe you," answered her mistress, for she had long observed in her attendant, though not other





wise ignorant or stupid, a strange, perverse pleasure in miscalling every proper name or title.

"Well," resumed Katherine, "if, as I was saying, my lard O'Delvil does come and court you, it's he that will be having my consint; for, oh, Miss Geraldine, dear! I've often tould you there's but one thing in this world would go nigh for to break my heart—that you would marry a jantleman who couldn't keep you a coach; and it's you and lord O'Helvyl that's matched like two angels in heaven, for he's charitable and kindhearted like your own sweet self; ask John Dwyer's family if he is not. He give them money to pay their rint, and to privint the man from being obliged to go over to reap the harvest, and was so good to the childer. How did you like little Kitty last Sunday, Miss Geraldine? Her coat was a stuff one I give her, that I made last winter out of one of my own, and enough for another of the childer. I made it on the long nights while Jenny read -•-': me me the Pilgrim's Progress, and Collection of Voyages and Travels."





This little statement greatly pleased Geraldine; it at once displayed three traits not at all uncommon in Ireland in Katherine's class of life—active benevolence, humble piety, and intelligent curiosity.—" Here," said she, smiling, "- to make you amends for this havoc in your wardrobe, take this stuff and tabbinet I brought from Dublin. You know how much lady Louisa insists on our wearing our native manufactures—you must be in the fashion, Lawless."

There is an art in receiving graciously, as well as in giving generously; and poor Katherine, who was an adept in the second, was a mere tyro in the first of these duties. Tossing up her nose with an infinite deal of disdain, she said—" Humph! that is the very stuff the Frenchwoman wore when she come down. I wouldn't be in her livery any way; and as for the tabbernet, it's pretty enough; but I must

Vol. H. L say, say, Miss Geraldine, it would have pleased my fancy better, if it had been a silk, or a sarsnet, or a poplin, or a bombazeen, or a bombazet, or"





"Or any thing, in short, but what I have brought you," said Geraldine, putting up her pretty lip in some ill-humour; for the wayward and unaccountable disposition of Lawless possessed the singular and unique privilege of sometimes exhausting the patience of her mistress.— "Here, Kattie," resumed Miss Southwell, "is money to purchase a poplin, or a bombazeen, or a bombazet; for I see it is impossible to please you."

The eyes of the "ould follower" filled at this reproach, which she looked very conscious of having deserved; she laid down the money irresolutely on the table, and stood as if expecting her mistress should say something more; then reading, in the relenting dimples round Geraldine's lovely mouth, that her short-lived displeasure was past, her countenance cleared; and beginning ning to tell it over—" There's more than will buy two gowns, ma'am," she said, dropping a curtsey—" I thank you kindly—I suppose the rest is for the drame" And thus, in a jest, ended, as it often did, the ill-humour and the repentance of the spoiled, but affectionate and faithful Katherine Lawless.





Just as she withdrew, Miss O'Reilly tapped at Geraldine's door, with the newspaper, which she had left unread upon the breakfast-table. The first paragraph that chanced to meet her eye thrilled her with astonishment and horror:—

"Died, suddenly, at his lodgings in Kildare-street, Ippolito, count di San Carlos, knight of the order of St. Ferdinand, and of Merit, &c. &c."

Miss Southwell shewed the paragraph to Miss O'Reilly, with a look of earnest and significant meaning.

Miss O'Reilly broke forth into loud lamentation.—" Such a dear—such an elegant—such an amiable young man! one L 2 whom whom they left in such high health and spirits!"





She was running on in this manner, when Geraldine interrupted her.—" Do you not observe," she said, in a suppressed voice, "the word suddenly?"

"I do—what then?"

"That is never put in but when the person is supposed to have died by his own hand."

"Never! Oh* Miss Southwell! how can you be so uncharitable?"

"I am not accustomed to be uncharitable, Dora," Geraldine mildly replied; "but in this instance I cannot resist the impression on my mind. I feel an assurance—a conviction; that unhappy man has closed a life of irregularity by a death of guilt."

"An impression! an assurance! oh! 'tis plain you have been lately talking with the Zephaniahs and Jeremiahs—Heaven defend me from their jargon!"

Without trying to defend herself further, ther, Geraldine fell into deep and painful meditation upon the event with which she was just made acquainted. She had not reflected long before a sudden idea started into her mind, that this circumstance would, some way or other, work a change in the fate of O'Melvyl, and, consequently, in her own. She could not help feeling as if one bar was removed to their happiness. It was a reflection which restored her serenity, that had been much disturbed by so abruptly learning this shocking piece of intelligence.





In the evening, lady Louisa and Miss Southwell being gone out, Geraldine took the opportunity to revisit her cottage alone; yet scarcely had her hands wandered over the strings of her harp, when the vision of the preceding evening recurred to her mind, and she felt a secret horror breathe about the spot. This led her to reflect on the singular conversation of which she had been a hearer, in the visit she made to the religious Ruins of EilmalL 3 lock lock—of the mystery to which that alluded. She compared her own fate with that of lord O'Melvyl, who, though apparently raised to the highest pinnacle of fortune, had ever, to her affectionately-watchful eye, some secret drawback and source of care—some " thought in the midst of enjoyment," which had prevented him from tasting one moment of pure and perfect happiness, from the period of his being acknowledged as earl of O'Melvyl, while the marquis of Beaudesert, though apparently possessed of all this world could give, was evidently pining away, and dying by inches, the victim of a treacherous Italian.—" Yes, dear O'Melvyl," she said, "in the parity of our fate, I may still unite myself to you. A fearful mystery overclouds us both."





"Do you then, indeed, still sometimes think of me?"

Geraldine started in wild surprise, to find from whence this voice proceeded; and emerging from the rustling evergreens,

O'Melvyl O'Melvyl stood before her. He looked pale and ill, but still, in her eyes, most pleasing. He came to give, at length, free utterance to the flame that so long had been smothered in his breast.—" Dear —dearest Geraldine!" he cried, "my first, my only real love, let the past be forgotten; we have both loved the world but too well—let the future be given to each other." He assured her that his father approved his passion—that it was with his permission he sought her—and that it wholly depended on herself whether they should be happy.





Geraldine heard him in a confusion of spirits which prevented her from apprehending any thing distinctly. Her feelings she would have vainly attempted to analyse, but certainly pleasure was the predominant sensation. What is very extraordinary, she never once thought of demanding of him an account of his long absence, whence he came, or why he so suddenly made his appearance; it was L 4 enough enough for her that he was returned—that he loved her—that she heard his voicethat she saw himself. At length, however, with a trembling tongue, and in a faltering tone, she alluded to the dreadful news which she had heard that morning, and asked, if she was right in her belief, that the removal of San Carlos influenced his declaration?





O'Melvyl, after some hesitation, replied r—ft It does; but never more, my GeralT $ne, let the subject be mentioned between us—let the hateful secret be buried in etenjaj silence with him in whom it originated."

Now, though such an arrangement might suit the feelings of O'Melvyl, )t is rather more surprising that Geraldine should immediately experience an equal readiness to accede to it; but among the other minor feelings that are deadened and swallowed up by felicity, curiosity is one; for curiosity is uneasiness, and uneasiness cannot subsist with perfect happiness.

Seated





Seated within that simple yet elegant dwelling planned by Geraldine's taste, oh, how far happier than when they used to meet in gayer scenes! Hanging, unreproved, over the mistress of his soul, her hand fondly locked in his, O'Melvyl pleaded the apology of his former tumultuous life, and recapitulated the hours when uneasiness of mind had hurried him into follies uncongenial to bis heart.

While Geraldine listened, now with a smile, now with a frown-—even such a frown as the fond mother turns upon the truant-hoy, who, she thought, had lost bis life by his imprudence, when he is unexpectedly restored to her arms. In short, the smiles prevailed, and played, not only on her lips, but beamed in her eyes, be. stowing on them such an effulgence of beauty as never had appeared even in her person before.

Long they thus indulged in this reciprocal interchange of sentiments, till now concealed or misunderstood, and perhaps L 5 enjoyed enjoyed on earth that happiness which the spirits of alienated friends shall know when meeting hereafter—friends destined, in this world, never to cross each other's path again.





A full hour had been thus consumed, and still Geraldine had much to learn, for there was much in O'Melvyl's conduct still mysterious and unexplained, when the sound of footsteps, approaching the cottage, induced her mechanically to rise, and, in another moment, it was entered by lady Louisa and Miss Southwell. Her ladyship stood "in dignified amazement." But who shall paint the mixture of surprise, rage, and disappointment, that swelled the vindictive bosom of Miss Southwell? It made her totally forget the decorum due to her sex and station.—" Oh, thou serpent!" said she, turning her resentment first on Geraldine, "is it thus you return the unremitting kindness for so many years bestowed on you? And as for you, my lord," she added, darting at

O'Melvyl O'Melvyl a look, that wanted only the power to blast him, "you do well to return to the obscurity from which my mother's ill-judged friendship first called you, by meanly courting the favour of a creature upon sufferance—the daughter of a fugitive—a man proscribed—An Outlaw!"





A dead silence followed this overwhelming discovery. Lady Louisa was ashamed for her daughter—lord O'Melvyl was alive only to the outrage offered to his Geraldine. He turned to her, while some halfformed assurances of deathless constancy and fond endearment burst from his lips.

In vain—she heard them not. Swift, as if struck by lightning—ere his pitying voice could reach her—ere his encircling arms could support her to anticipate, or prevent her fall, the outlaw's daughter dropped down prostrate on the earth, to all appearance a lifeless corpse!



L 6 CHAP





ladies of Meadowscourt from the disagreeableness of hjs presence, he. could not tear himself from the neighbourhood, till relieved, of his worst fears with respect to his adored Geraldine; and it was not till she was declared completely out of danger, that he left £lenaftrey for Dublin, where duty required h.is attendance.

^uriflg. the whole period ejf Qeraldine's illness, lady ^.ouisa's, behaviour was admirable. Matilda was preluded frema the sick chamber* whifih hardly any one was perr. naitted to en,ter, except the medical yisih tars^ Katherine Lawless^ and herself. By these meaRs, any exclamations tiiat. eseajh ed th^e poor sun^erer respecting the painful secret thus rudely nreke to hei?, were pjpeyented Awi penetrating further; for, to, Lawless, her, wild, incoherent exprea. sions conveyed nothing with which she Was Wit already but to« weU acquainted. Stijl the tears coursed ?aeh other fast down her furrowed cheeks, when she heard the fijayitiye. adjuj»t£pnjs e£ hey dating i nor

was was she to be consoled, till Geraldine began to recover to health and reason.





Oh, to what a dreadful blank had a few short days converted her smiling prospects! The first idea that clearly returned to her mind was, that she was the daughter of a man proscribed, and that she must give up all thoughts of lord O'Melvyl. Soon these vague and confused images acquired consistency and form. As lady Louisa entered her room, she raised herself, and taking her hand, in token of continued and grateful affection, pressed it to her lips; and then fixing her eyes on her with the most plaintive and touching expression, with earnestness, yet difficulty, uttered the words—" Is it true?"

Lady Louisa returned her salutation with affectionate kindness, and, in a mild and considerate voice, replied—" We will have some conversation another time, my Geraldine; at present let us think of nothing but your health."

"Oh, noP replied Miss Southwell, in a

louder louder and clearer voice, "I can bear all now—indeed I can; any thing better than suspense. Is it indeed true that my father lives?" Lady Louisa gave a token





of assent. "And is "she paused,

and looked wildly at lady Louisa.

The lady bent her head, but almost immediately added—" Do not therefore think too hardly, Geraldine, of the author of your being. Misled by the pernicious counsel of wicked men, he, for a short period, held a command among the betrayers of his country. But he was not one of the base or sanguinary inciters of rebellion; never did a nobler heart beat in a human bosom than in that of Gerald Southwell Fitz-Clare."

"Oh, bless you for that word!" exclaimed Geraldine; and then, with the natural weakness and inconsistency of sickness, immediately relaxed from her earnest importunities to be informed of every thing, and, as if her mind had already experienced ped a considerable relief, soon after fell into a profound and sweet repose.





Once Qeraldine began to mend, she recovered rapidly. In a week's time she was able Sgain to join the family-circle, and even to endwre the sight of Matilda; be* tween whom and herself, a kind of cold a.nd sullen reconciliation was brought about, by the authoritative influence of lady Louisa, The first opportunity, bow* ever, Geraldine did not forget to urge her ladyship t<* a fuller explanation.*"-" I am flow sufficiently recovered to bear every thing?" she said s "and my only chance of acquiring strength and peace of mind lies m peing ma$e clearly acquainted with the extent of my misfortunes, and of my obligations to sb» Charles Southwell and your

Lady Louisa looked at her with an ex-. pressiiPn of thetenderest commiseration.— "Ase yon indeed able to endure the disckSsme?' she said. <' Then I will relate

what what it is necessary for you to know of your sad story, and, in as few words as possible, dismiss the painful subject:—»





"Charles and Gerald Southwell were the sons of two brothers, who loved each other with an attachment very unusual, and who cultivated the same friendship between their offspring. The elder brother died, early, leaving his §on, the present snr Charles Southwell, a minor; and the foLlowing year, Gerald Southwell alsp los$ his father. The guardians of sir Cbarh^ foreseeing, J suppose, hjs future dispositipn, restricted him Jo a very moderate aj« Ipwance. GrerakJ Southwell, on the contrary, was pi}t intp immediate possession of affluence, by the bequest of an uncle, in consequence of which he took the sur, ngme anij arms of Fit?s-Clare. From thpt mojEqent his purse was at the disposal of Sir Charles; and an incident which occuri£d during a party of pleasure, in which, GeraJd s^ved the life of his cousin, rivetted his aftaejiment in a manner never to be

shaken. shaken. It was a friendship formed before the world had corrupted his heart, and the only strong and disinterested one sir Charles ever felt for any human being.





"At that period sir Charles Southwell was all life, gaiety, and animation, anxious for nothing but to enjoy the passing hour. Gerald, on the contrary, who had two or three years the advantage of him, was of a disposition at once ardent and melancholy, enthusiastic, romantic, and daring to excess.

"At the time I was first introduced to him, he was deeply involved in engagements with those deluded men who had nearly destroyed their country; but, as sir Charles had embraced diametrically-opposite political principles, he was accustomed to suppress his opinions in the company of his friend. The news therefore burst upon us like a thunderclap, when the troubles of the country were at their height, that the name of Gerald Southwell Fitz-Clare stood foremost

among





among the insurgents, and, shortly afterwards, the proscribed! Our disapprobation of his principles did not render us the less anxious for his preservation. He long eluded the pursuit of his enemies by flight, and, for some time, was concealed among the Ruins of Kilmallock; from which place he was enabled, by means of a trusty emissary, to consult with sir Charles and myself respecting the best means of finally effecting his escape.

"It was at length determined, that, unless an act of amnesty should be proclaimed, he should seek a retreat in America. His plan was prepared, and every thing provided for departure, when a last, lingering wish to take leave of a beloved and amiable wife, whose situation made him dread for her the horrors of the voyage, induced him to delay his flight for one night longer.

"At the first report of his danger, Isabel, who had been kept till the last moment in ignorance of his fatal engagements, raents, would have flown to share his tetreat; but Fitz-Clare had chosen she should remain unacquainted with it, tee conscious that she wanted that strength 01 mind which alone enables us to bear up against scenes and sights of terror. It was now necessary to reveal it to her. Oh, Geraldine, what did not your father sacrifice in the madness of an hour! Domestic love, an ample fortune, a youth, unstained by crime or folly, save that one which was his ruin! It was to one faithful servant whom he had acquainted with the place of his concealment—to Katherine lawless, who had nursed your mother, that the task devolved of conducting the unhappy lady to the solemn scene he bad chosen for the place of their last adieu. Never shall I forget her description of the parting—of his touching expressions of repentance—of her calm, yet deep despair. All the blessings he had so madly spurned rose, in redoubled value, to the memory of the unhappy Gerald at the moment





of





of resigning them for ever.—' Can you forgive me, Isabel?' he wildly exclaimed." Here Geraldine's attention became still more eager. The mysterious expressions she had heard, when wandering among the ruins of the abbey church and monastery of Kilmallock, were now, in part, explained; and she did not doubt but the remainder of lady Louisa's narrative would enable her to form a guess relative to the mysterious speaker. His metaphorical expression, "stabbed to the heart by the husband she adored," alluded only, then, to the death wound Fitz-Clare's imprudent conduct had given to his Isabel's peace: her parents were guiltless, at least towards each other. She breathed more freely upon the conviction.

"They were still engaged in mournful recapitulation," lady Louisa continued, "when an alarm was given that they were betrayed. Fitz-Clare had imparted the secret of his retreat to one more person, whom he believed trustworthy, but who

had had seized the means of preserving his own worthless life by delivering him into the hands of his enemies. He had been a concealed witness of the whole conversation that had just passed, and now, giving the concerted signal from his ambuscade, the whole place was in an instant filled with armed men, whose force rendered successful resistance impossible. Still Fitz-Clare resolved to sell his life as dearly as he could. Singly he made head against a band of soldiers; and when one weapon was wrenched from his hand, drew, from its concealment, a frightful and two-edged instrument, that, whichever way he turned it, inflicted a mortal wound. His situation had completely transformed him. —the once gentle, the elegant Gerald fought like a ferocious desperado—the ruins became a scene of blood—your mother was forced to witness it all, till, at length, she beheld her husband, faint and covered with wounds, dragged away by two of the military. It was then that all





courage





courage forsook her; she dropped down insensible in the arms of the unhappy follower of their fortunes, and was conveyed to this house, where every attention of friendship awaited her. But the thread of life was snapped; she languished a few days in unutterable misery, and then expired, recommending her daughter, with her last breath, to my care, conjointly with sir Charles Southwell.

"I sent for you immediately to Meadowscourt, and found less difficulty than I expected in reconciling you to your new abode. Your mother had been unable to nurse you herself. Fitz-Clare had, during the last year, in consequence of his political pursuits, been almost estranged from home. For some time you had been placed under the care of an aunt; so that your recollections of the paternal roof were faint indeed, and soon, with the happy versatility of infancy, were totally obliterated."

"I have, indeed," replied Geraldine,

with





With a deep* convulsive sigh, "scarcely any rtmembrarice of the caresses I may have received from a mother. But the horrid etertts that deprived me Of my parents— oh, Heavens! at Kilmallock, I have witnessed the traces of them all—the bloodmarks of the conflict—the voice of my father's betrayer—even his confession of being the indirect cause of lily angelic mother's death!"

"You are right!" lady Louisa Southwell replied. "The voice you heard among the ruins—the face you saw, were certainly Knowlan's, once a desperate associate of your father's, but no more worthy to associate with Gerald Fitz-Clare, than—-But let me conclude what I have to relate concerning Gerald. One of the officers of justice sent to apprehend him had been killed, and two others desperately wouhded in the conflict; and these circumstances, added to the preceding events, left him not the smallest chance of pardon. Imprisoned, and threatened





ened with a trial, of which the fatal result -was but too certain, still / did not forsake your father."

"That I would pledge my life thou didst not, worthiest, most excellent of women!" Geraldine replied.

"I discovered means to gain access to him," lady Louisa resumed, "and found him in a high fever, the consequence of his wounds, and in imminent danger of his life. He knew me, and expressed his strong hopes of escaping, by an honourable death, from the expected revenge of his enemies. I could only mingle my tears with his—I could not wish him to recover! It was not decreed however that he should die, and, with returning strength, his first solicitude was for you. He solemnly adjured me, whether he suffered or escaped, to bring you up in ignorance of his fate -, and, as it was under the name of Gerald Fitz-Clare he was best known among the misguided leaders of the day, made it his

Vol. Ii. M request





request that you should only bear his first name of Southwell.

«'I combated this idea as injudicious and absurd—I represented to him that, introduced into the world as a branch of a family so distinguished, you would attract the observations of malignant curiosity, which would never rest till the truth was discovered, or some error established, worse than the truth. I represented that his conduct, however faulty, was rather to be considered as a political crime than a source of private disgrace. But whether his judgment was weakened by such accumulated sufferings, or that his wish was the result of mature deliberation, Gerald was inflexible on this point, and it onlj remained for me to seek out the best means of assisting him in those points in which he would consent to be served. At length I submitted to him a plan, better laid than the first, for his escape. It succeeded. He was soon in France, whence he passed





over to America; but I could not prevent the severe decrees of justice, which, as it could not bring him to trial, condemned his estate to forfeiture, and his person to outlawry."

What is the mysterious force of sounds that makes us, while enduring, with some firmness, the reality of ills, yet shrink, with nervous horror, from their name?

Geraldine clasped her hands to her forehead, as if she had, for the first time, heard the dreadful word. In the passionate confusion of her agitated feelings, she was even unjust enough to accuse the generous lady Louisa of want of delicacy, after she had so earnestly adjured her to tell the whole truth. Repenting of this momentary aberration, she said, in a low voice, and with a cheek covered with blushes— "Enough, dearest friend, most kind, most heroic of women! Another time I'll learn the rest of my obligations to you. At present I can bear no more."

As lady Louisa had already been so ex-

M 2 plicit,





plicit, Geraldine ventured, in her next interview, to mention the adventure of the letter in the cottage, and to ask if her ladyship knew to whom the paper might belong?

Lady Louisa looked surprised.—" By the words you repeat," said she, "that was part of the last letter I received from your father, which I must have dropped; and Knowlan, who often lurks in the neighbourhood—nay, presents himself in the very grounds, may have seized it, hoping to turn it to advantage. This wretched man, originally a gentleman, but sunk, by complicated enormities, to the lowest stage of human degradation, is sometimes goaded to desperation by occasional fits of remorse; and it was undoubtedly in one of these, that he made to some priest the agonizing confessions of which you were, last year, an unwilling auditor.

"After Mr. Fitz-Clare had withdrawn to America, Knowlan disappeared, and, for some years, we were lulled to security with a false report of his death. Suddenly he was again seen wandering among the ruins, and attempted to make use of the secrets he was possessed of, to extort money. He succeeded more than once in his design ; and the last time he was the object of my forced bounty, he bound himself, in return, to quit the kingdom; but I soon found, by your too-accurate description of him, when you joined me in Dublin, that he heeded this no more than any other moral obligation. You certainly saw him once again; but his absence or presence is now immaterial. The secret is discovered, which, in compliance with your father's wish, I took such pains to conceal. When you had been about four years at Meadowscourt, poor Lawless, whose discretion is not equal to her zeal, by some unaccountable imprudence, revealed to Matilda (at that time your friend and playfellow, though some years older than yourself) the sad story attached to our adoption of you.





M 3 "Fearful



r





"Fearful of the consequences of such a disclosure to a child, whose temper was always rather quick, and who might, in your little disputes, have unintentionally wounded your feelings, I saw the necessity of immediately separating you from Matilda, and indeed from every one whose indiscretion was likely to have recalled the past. You were sent to an English school, and I had the pleasure of transmitting to your father accounts of your rapid improvement. Geraldine, you yet owe much to this poor absent father. Of your mother's fortune settled upon you, he would not touch a shilling, but left it to accumulate, retaining only the scanty pittance which the sale of some plate and jewels afforded him.

"On this sum he subsists, in obscurity, in a foreign land. His high spirit rejects any pecuniary assistance, and his ripened judgment teaches him to consider the privation he endures as the just retribution of the errors of his youth. He has entered ed into no new connexion; on the contrary, his greatest delight seems to consist in the letters he occasionally receives from me with accounts of your welfare. In my last I could not forbear urging him to drop this injudicious concealment, and at least to allow me to put you in possession of your own story. His ideas on that head are singular; in his answer he refuses to make you the depository of a secret which might weigh heavy on you, though certainly he might have found in your correspondence an alleviation to liis cares.—' It is but her entrance into life,' he says; 'let not her young mind be warped with conscious duplicity, nor bowed down by the apprehension of unmerited obloquy. Let me be to her as though I did not exist'





"Vain precaution! You see, in that part of the letter which accidentally met your eye, how generously he disclaims the idea of wishing for your presence to lighten the severity of exile—a consolation, which, in the opinion of a common mind, M 4 would would outweigh the suggestions either of your interest or advantage."





"And do you think, madam, those are his real sentiments?" asked Geraldine, earnestly. "Oh," she continued, clasping her hands, with an emotion involuntary as fervent, "shall J bask in the luxuries of Europe, while you, poor father} suffer the bitter pangs of adversity, unsupported and unrelieved? Direct me, lady Louisa! ought I not to fly to him?"

"Geraldine," resumed her ladyship, with seriousness, "such ideas are romantic and impracticable. Nothing could add a severer pang to the sufferings of FitzClare, than to see the child of his Isabella the sharer of obscurity and indigence; but there is a way in which you could indeed impart joy to your father's heart. Introduced into the world under my auspices, known only as Miss Southwell, enjoying the advantages of family and fortune, you had already captivated the attention of two young noblemen. Lord Templemore I should certainly have preferred. His singular gular story; his family splendid, yet once involved in troubles greater than your own; his particular obligations to me—all would have prevented him, when I revealed the secret (as I fully meant, in honour, to do, before your union took place) from experiencing that repugnance a person otherwise situated might feel to such an alliance. The poor count di San Carlos





"Are you not glad, madam," interrupted Geraldine, "I did not listen to that unhappy man, whose frenzied passion for play was, as I have since been told, the real cause of his dreadful end?"

"San Carlos I do not, of course, regret," replied lady Louisa, with increased gravity; "but if I see you still cherishing a preference which prudence and principle, on both sides, unite to oppose, I shall certainly lament the obstinacy which, in the instance of lord Templemore, leads you to reject the' best prospect that will perhaps ever offer for establishing yourself." M 5 "I should





"I should be sorry," answered Geraldine, while the blush of modesty dyed her cheek, "to be guilty of the degrading weakness your ladyship imputes to me; but if, on the contrary, lord O'Melvyl does not see my unhappy situation in the light you suppose—if I possess the strongest assurances of his unabated attachment—"

"What assurance can you have?" interrupted her ladyship, eagerly.

"This!" replied Geraldine, producing a letter received that day from her lover; but, recollecting that the ardour and constancy which it breathed in every page might be misinterpreted by lady Louisa, she said, while her blushes became every moment of a livelier hue—" Excuse me, madam, if I do not communicate expressions heightened, far beyond my deserts, by a generous feeling of my distress. Let it suffice that lord O'Melvyl binds himself, by all that is most dear to a man of honour, never to forsake me; and can I

—can —can you ask me, forlorn and wretched as I otherwise am, to give him up?"





Her voice sunk into the softest and most melting accents of supplication at these closing words; and, as if asking pardon for being so much beloved, she threw herself, her eyes swimming in tears, at lady Louisa's feet. But the moment of compassion and confidence with that lady was past: in asserting the continued attachment of lord O'Melvyl, she had touched a jarring string.

"Miss Fitz-Clare," said her ladyship, sternly (it was the first time Geraldine had ever been addressed by that name, and it struck ominously on her ear), "while I thought you disposed to listen to the advice of friends truly interested in your future welfare, I was willing to forget much of which I might complain; but if you persist in this madness, I must freely declare, in return, that your ingratitude and duplicity have degraded you in my opinion for ever."

M 6 Repenting





Repenting of her momentary humiliation, Geraldine rose from her prostrate posture. She had used no unworthy arts to win a lover—her heart acknowledged no duplicity: up to this period, the addresses of lord O'Melvyl, if addresses they could be called, had been carried on in such a manner that she could not have communicated them without incurring the charge of the most silly vanity and presumption,

"My dear Geraldine," said lady Louisa, resuming some degree of kindness in her manner, "allow your reason play— consider, the marquis of Beaudesert will assuredly never give his consent, and a perseverance in this attachment can only be productive of lengthened misery to you both. Hear, I entreat you, the remonstrance of a dispassionate friend; and let me have the satisfaction of seeing, by your answer to this romantic letter, that you know how, with gentle firmness, to put an end to hopes inconsistent with duty."

But





But this dispassionate friend was not, in fact, sufficiently uninterested to have much weight with Geraldine. She felt it was so, and, suddenly roused to indignation, gave way to all the violence of her character, in one of those painful scenes which reduced this otherwise highly-gifted woman to a level with common humanity. Geraldine bent to the storm, but she began bitterly to feel her dependence, and, overwhelmed by such a variety of conflicting emotions, spent a night of misery great as any she had yet endured. The increased sense of gratitude she owed lady Louisa Southwell, on the one hand, weighed her down in the most painful manner; while, on the other, she could not forget how painfully that lady's reproaches had wounded her feelings. She could neither resent nor submit, nor love nor hate; and in the tumult of her mind, but one thing appeared certain—that her life would be rendered miserable if she remained at Meadowscourt.

The





The following morning, all on lady Louisa's part was calm—that cold, sullen calmness which succeeds the storm, and which, when evidently forced, has an effect more dreadful than the storm itself.

By every attention—by every submission, but the one which alone would have satisfied her ladyship, Geraldine endeavoured to remove the heavy cloud that had intervened between them. In vain. Lady Louisa retired to rest, without bestowing a look or a word of kindness on her unfortunate protegee; and all the consolation that remained for poor Geraldine consisted in reading and rereading the letter of lord O'Melvyl, the original source of all this disquietude.

A week had passed on in this uncomfortable manner, and the affectionate heart of Geraldine was cruelly wrung by her friend's continued estrangement, when she observed an unusual degree of bustle and animation in the house. Gaiety, not unmingled with a considerable portion of solicitude, licitude, seemed to pervade every individual of the family; consequential whispers passed from one to the other. At length Miss O'Reilly disclosed the mighty secret. A viceregal visit was expected, and the heads of the family were busily employed making suitable preparations. Young ladies were sighing and imaging conquering aide-de-camps at their feet; while the servants, in their own humorous phraseology, congratulated themselves on this opportunity of judging, by ocular observation, "how the government looked." Anxious, depressed, and wretched, Geraldine became extremely uneasy at the idea of being obliged to bear her part in a scene of gaiety and magnificence. That night, being unable to sleep, she turned, as a refuge from her own thoughts, to a packet of letters with which lady Louisa, in the first effusions of confidence and feeling, had entrusted her. They contained the correspondence of Fitz-Clare with her ladyship, and she could not open one of





them them without meeting something that filled her mind with admiration of the probity, generosity, and elevation of character evinced by the unhappy writer. Still a tinge of romance ran through them all, and afforded perhaps a clew to the errors of his life. One passage, in a letter of rather recent date, most forcibly attracted her attention.





"With the fortune which I have left sacredly in trust for her, and entering life, her name unsullied by the mildewing blight which must for ever be attached to mine, it is just possible my poor Geraldine may marry early and well. When her happiness and respectability have been thus secured, as far as human means can secure them, yet, at the same time, the gay illusions of youth have given place to life's severer duties, then to her matured reason let her father's unhappy story be submitted—then, and not till then, 1" will put forth my claim to her affection: if, on the contrary, she should

• .'!- not





not immediately settle in the world, it is my wish that her time should be divided between her invaluable friends at Mea* dowscourt, and the house of her other guardian, the truly-worthy Mr. Rainsford. Thus she will be accustomed to the habits both of high and of moderate life, and be equally qualified to fulfil her duties, whichever may finally be her allotted station."

We have already mentioned Geraldhae's having another guardian, a merchant in Dublin. With his family she was but little acquainted, though she had spent one day with them during her last residence there, and had conciliated universal admiration by her beauty, urbanity, and unaffected sprightliness of manners; but she was.at .that time living with a very fine and very fastidious knot of fashionable people, who kept entirely within their own circle; and to visit, or receive visits out of it, was a task nearly as difficult as to take at once a trip across the Atlantic. As, however, we are apt to remember member our friends the moment we want them, Mr. Rainsford's house appeared now the asylum of peace to Geraldine; and she determined immediately to write to his wife upon the subject, after obtaining the consent of lady Louisa Southwell. —" I am no longer necessary to her happiness," she said, while bitter tears coursed each other down her cheek at the conviction; "and till her heart is changed to me, the sooner I remove out of her way the better."





Though accustomed, for several days, to the alteration in lady Louisa's manners, Geraldine was shocked by the extreme coldness with which she received the proposal of leaving her. It was soon decided. After a short and painful conversation— "At least, madam," said Geraldine, blushing and hesitating, "you will allow that it is not in search of any body—it is not for any reason, I mean, but to comply with my father's wishes that I propose * change of abode; for I hear his excellency is

expected expected at Meadowscourt, and, of course, some of his staff will accompany him."





"Possibly so," returned lady Louisa, with increasing coldness; "I am not in the secret of the movements of the staff; but when once hearts come to understand each other, the separation of persons is very immaterial."

This observation made Geraldine look a little foolish; she felt its truth, and experienced, at the moment it was uttered, a secret, exulting consciousness of happiness in the certainty of being beloved, which would not be repressed — which overbalanced her regret for offending—her pain at parting with her friend, and even that friend's continued and implacable resentment.

She received, by return of post, an answer from Mrs. Rainsford, who was charmed with the prospect of possessing an inmate of Geraldine's accomplishments, elegance, and taste; she only objected to the terms proposed as too liberal; and concluded





eluded, that, "as at this season all Dublin was out of town, she hoped to see her dear Miss Southwell, as soon as convenient, at her villa at the Black Rock."

Geraldinesmiled at this characteristic conclusion, and immediately began her preparations for departure. Attentive, even in the midst of her severest displeasure, to the decorums that politeness and hospitality required, lady LouisaSouthwell had arranged that her own woman, Mrs. Dillon, should travel with Geraldine, and consign her safely into the hands of Mrs. Rainsford. She was therefore surprised, on the eve of her departure, to see Katherine Lawless busily employed in buckling the straps of a trunk, as if she too proposed being of the party.—" It's a folly to talk, Miss Geraldine," she began, as in reply to our heroine's amazement—" do you think I'd be letting your mother's child go among strangers, and not be wid her to take care of her?" ;. ..

"lam sorry, Katherine, it cannot be," . -:. Geraldine Geraldine answered, rather seriously. "Dillon is to accompany me, and I cannot take you also. You are lady Louisa's servant, not mine."





"Hout tout! never you mind that," answered Katherine Lawless. "Didn't my lady give me leave to go in the stead of mistress Dillon, and why wouldn't she? seeing as how, when I'm entirely determined, the divel himself wouldn't be after hindering me, let alone my lady, who is nat like the divel at all at all, barring betimes when she's in a bit of a passion. And have you money enough for all your expinces, Miss Geraldine, dear?" continued Katherine, looking anxiously in her face; "for you know, darling, before this rumpus, you was very extravagant, planting trees, and building of dairy-houses and summer-houses; and I've a matter of forty pounds I could let you have in no time, and never feel it, jist, dear, to help bear your thravelling charges." "Be assured, my good Lawless, want of

money





money is not among my distresses," answered Geraldine, while she smiled at the picture the "ould follower" had drawn of her extravagance. "My purse," she added, with an altered voice and starting tear, "is, I can truly say, as heavy as— my heart! but I accept your offer of accompanying me."

"Except! none of your exceptions, if you please, child," cried Lawless, who, from a small mistake in sound, imagined Geraldine was going to put some new bar in the way of her expedition. "It's a folly to talk—wherever you go, I'll be wid you—so make up your mind to that, Miss Geraldine dear. Exceptions indeed! Did I nurse in these arms your own mother to be chicken-pecked by a baby like you with exceptions! Let me hear no more of your exceptions vourneen bawn—exceptions indeed!"

Geraldine was too well accustomed to the character and eloquence of Katherine Lawless to take any particular notice of this sally. She knew that this faithful creature, so deficient in respect, according to our ideas, would do what domestics more polished would not dare to do—have died, or (according to the common, but forcible expression) have cut herself in pieces to preserve or benefit her mistress.





This point settled to the satisfaction of all parties, our heroine next requested Katherine to be the bearer of a message to lady Louisa Southwell, soliciting the favour of a few minutes conversation with her before she bade her finally farewell.

The answer which Lawless unwillingly brought back was, that her ladyship was gone to bed, somewhat indisposed, and desired not to be disturbed. Geraldine got Lawless to confess she believed lady Louisa's indisposition to be only an excuse for refusing to see her. She then wrote, with a trembling hand, on a slip of paper— "Lady Louisa Southwell must be cruelly changed towards the object of seventeen years kindness, to deny her the melancholy choly favour of a last, sad farewell Oh her knees she reiterates the request—on her knees she entreats pardon for any involuntary offence, and implores blessings for every future day of the honoured life of her benefactress."





Lawless, of herself, undertook to be the bearer of this second application, and returned with the consolatory answer that lady Louisa would see her. Geraldine did every thing in her power, during this last interview, to recover the friendship and confidence of her benefactress in vain.— "I hope, madam," she said, as, preparing to withdraw, she held her handkerchief to her eyes, that overflowed with tears—" I hope we part in peace?"

"You know my wishes, Geraldine," replied her ladyship, in a softened voice, "and," she more proudly added, "my opinion."

Geraldine turned once more to gaze on her. A moment she stood irresolute; she paused, pressed her hands on her heart;

then then breathed the last sigh of expiring friendship, and closed the door of the apartment.





As Geraldine was always fond of early rising, she determined to take the day as near as she could towards the prime, and rest an hour or two during the more sultry period. Having only Lawless in the carriage with her, she was at liberty to give full indulgence to her feelings. Bitter and complicated they were; and the silent tears rolled, in a free current, down her cheeks. She reproached herself as she had never done before; for, so accustomed are spirits like hers to consider love as the highest reward of virtue, that they cannot help fancying they must have ceased to be deserving, when they find they are no longer beloved.

Lawless, observing her dejection, endeavoured, with native and untaught delicacy, to turn her attention to other subjects. —" Look at that beautiful sun, Miss Geraldine," she said, "that we could hardly

Vol. II. N see





see when we set out for the mists and the dew; and now the little lark is singing to it, for all the world like an angel in the sky leaning on a harp of gold: that's the way all your tears will be dried up, jewel dear, and you, and them you love, will yet be in pleasure and glory."

There is a tendency to lofty and figurative language among the Irish, and a sensibility to the beauties of country scenery, which often betrays itself amidst all the disadvantages of education, and shews that Nature, who is not an aristocrat, has imparted the gifts of observation, intelligence, and taste, more equally than we are apt to imagine.

Ever good-natured and attentive to the feelings of others, Geraldine suffered herself to be diverted from disagreeable retrospections by the artless observations of her attendant; and when she would have relapsed into melancholy, Katherine earnestly exclaimed—" Oh, Miss Geraldine, honey, jewel! it's not them that has no





thing to reproach 'emselves wid that should be sighing; think of me, that says prayers, and masses, and does pinance every day of my life, and is yet afeard to think of the past."

She then entered upon the only subject, perhaps, that could have laid a forcible hold upon Geraldine's attention. Though a harmless and well-meaning creature herself, she had been, from circumstances, too much concerned in the fearful scenes of the rebellion. She had a husband and a son deluded followers of Gerald Fitz-Clare, and Katherine Lawless had often been acquainted with the places of their secret meetings; and afterwards, when they fled from pursuit, with the spots where they were concealed.

Geraldine listened, and, from Katherine's story, reverted to the desolate condition of her father, and formed a thousand schemes, given up as soon as imagined, to force him to share with her a part of her fortune.

But But these plans, to succeed, must go through lady Louisa Southwell, and lady Louisa had given her up for ever!





END OF VOL. II.



Printed by J. Darling, l.eadenhall-Street, London.
