CLAN-ALBIN. 



VOL. IV. 



CLAN-ALBIN: 



J NATIONAL TALE. 



. .. — 



A cation fam'd for song and beauty's charms ; 
Zealous, yet modest; innocent, though freej 
Patient of toil ; serene amidst alarms; 
Inflexible in faith ; invincible in arms. 

Beattie. 



IN POUR VOLUMES. 



VOL. IV. 



LONDON: 

miNTET) TOR LONGMAN, HUHST, REE3, OHME, & BROWN, LONDON J 

MACBEDIE, SKELLY, AND MUCKERSY, EDINBUR6H; 

AND JOHN CUMM1NG, DUBLIN. 

1815. 



John ik ir, Printer. 



$2B 



CLAN-ALBIN, 

A NATIONAL TALE. 



CHAP. XLII. 

God and our cause to friend, the venture we'll abide. 

Scott. 

VV HO has yet forgotten the electric impulse 
which darted through this land of liberty, 
when the people of Spain, in arms for free- 
dom, first demanded the aid of England ? 
Who has ceased to recollect the ennobling 
sympathy which united all ranks, all parties, 
in friendly zeal for the success of a brave 
people, who, disdaining a base compact be- 
tween regal imbecility and successful perfidy, 
felt that they had still a country, rights, and 
character to rescue from as foul an insult as 
had ever been offered to a*ny nation ? No event, 
in the history of twenty memorable years, 
was more calculated to excite the enthusiasm 
of youth. When Norman knew that his sword 
was first to be drawn for Spain, it seemed a 
consecrated weapon. In the first struggles of 

VOL. IV. B 



2 CLAN-ALBIN, 

that country, his inflamed fancy saw the ge- 
nius of her ancient chivalry guiding the ener- 
gies of new-born freedom. Spain seemed 
roused from long, deep slumber, " like the 
strong man refreshed with new wine," power- 
ful injustice, — in that lofty confidence which 
spurns at the calculation of failure, — and ter- 
rible in the despair which, while it maddens, 
invigorates. To Macalbin it appeared base, 
dastardly, nay, almost sacrilegious, to doubt 
of the destinies of such a people ; and he 
loudly denounced the " craven scruples" of 
such of his associates as added to zeal know- 
ledge. He was, indeed, guided more by the 
aspirations of a high-toned and romantic 
mind, than by political sagacity or military 
skill ; and it was not till he followed the dis- 
astrous fortunes of the English retreating 
army, many months afterwards, that he r< - 
fleeted, with astonishment, on the generous 
credulity which looked for some miraculous 
regeneration of mind ; and expected, from a 
people emasculated *by slavish superstitions 
of all kinds, and the remnants of a court 
kneaded up in bigotry r and entrencl in 
doating forms, the intelligence, decision, and 
vigour of a responsible government, wieldin 
the strength of a free country, — a country, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 3 

that, in such a cause, would have added its 
heart to its strength. But Macalbin was, ne- 
vertheless, the soldier which Spain needed, 
and at length found, when her brave popula- 
tion, learning to despise and distrust her 
feeble and inefficient provisionary govern- 
ments, took counsel of their patriotism and 
national pride, and felt that something must 
be done as well as said, — their hitter foe caring 
little for denunciations by book and bell, the 
bones of their saints, or the fame of their he- 
roes, or paper pellets, though discharged in 
the name of Hernan Cortes, Barnardo, or the 
Cid himself. 

<; Gae bring to me a pint o' wine, 
And fill it in a silver tassie, 
That I may drink before I gae, 

A service to my bonny lassie. 

* * * * • 

The trumpets sound, the banners fly, 
The glittering spears are ranked ready ; 
The shouts of war are heard afar, 
The battle closes fierce and bloody. 
But it's no the roar of sea or shore, 
Wad make me langer wish to tarry, 
Nor shouts o' war that's heard afar, 
But leaving thee, my bonny Mary. ! 



j> 



So sang Drummond, and so felt Macalbin, as 



CLAN-ALBIN, 

they sat together on the prow of the vessel 
which wafted them through the romantic 
channels of the Cove; and it was still the song 
when the green shores of Ireland, loved as a 
portion of that country round which their 
hearts clung more fondly at the moment of 
perhaps an eternal separation, gradually re- 
ceded from tiieir strained gaze. 

A passage in a frigate had been offered to 

the young and noble s and their tutor; 

but it had been declined by the Earl. 

The military art was their profession, not 
their pastime; and they took their respective 
births in the suffocating transport, which con- 
tained, among other soldiers, Captain Drum- 

mond's company, the grenadiers of the 

regiment. 

It was early in July when they embarked ; 
the weather was delightful; and towards even- 
ing alight breeze, springing up as the sun de- 
clined, carried them smoothly and rapidly 
onwards. 

While the eves of Norman and his friends 
were still fixed on the hazy outline of an ima- 
ginary coast, the full moon rose from the bo- 
som of the sea. At this season, the air on 
deck, to young men braced with exercise, was 
soft and genial, even at midnight ; while be- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 5 

low it was already become close, and flaggy, 
and suffocatingly hot. Drummond brought 
his flute to a part of the deck of which they 
took possession, and they sat till very late, al- 
ternately playing Scotish airs, or talking of 
their friends, their country, and their pros- 
pects, and silently contemplating a very beau- 
tiful picture. The moon was shining in full 
lustre, shedding her quiet light on the gent- 
ly-curving waves, and silvering the sails of the 
vessels by partial gleams, as, crossing and re- 
crossing each other, they veered about to 
catch the fitful breeze, or glided stealingly 
onward, throwing long, fantastic shadows on 
the water. The bustle of getting under 
weigh had long subsided ; well-known duties 
were silently performed ; and no harsh sound 
disturbed the soothing repose of a scene, with 
which the humming song of the steersman, 
and the occasional whistle of the ship-boy, 
were in felicitous unison. 

" How fair the sight of our gallant little 
fleet, stretching out in the moon-light like a 
covey of wild swans on a Highland loch, 
resting but still proceeding,^ they fly to sun- 
ny regions," said Norman, looking rounds 
" Or wild geese ; what think ye ?" replied 
Drummond laughingly. 

11 2 



6 CLAN-ALBIN, 

" Beshrew the odious comparison," return- 
ed Norman, soliciting, and not in vain, his 
attention to a beautiful and rarely-seen ob- 
ject, a lunar rainbow. — " Beautiful ! beauti- 
ful !" exclaimed Drummond, really delight- 
ed, and suddenly turning round. " By the 
way, Paddy Leary, since you have the charge 
of our mess, can you give me any intelligence 
of the piece of * elegant bacon' you praised 
at dinner? We might contrive to eat our sup- 
per here, and thus fix two strings to our 
bow." — Supper was laid on the head of a 
barrel; and the sun rose as they still lingered 
over a cann of the piper's brewing. 

Next day the fleet of transports was be- 
calmed. It was a day of still, bright, burning 
sun-shine ; there was no ripple on the wave, 
no cloud in the sky. The sails flapped supine 
with the rolling motion of the vessels. The 
passengers on board the different vessels con- 
versed together at times, and the officers vi- 
sited each other in the boats. 

Macalbin, his pupils, and his friend, sat un- 
der the shelter of an awning on deck during 
the whole day. He had ordered Spanish 
books from Dublin before they sailed, that on 
the voyage they might commence the study 
of the language; and he now assigned tasks, 



A NATIONAL TALE. J 

and distributed his grammars. It was not 
easy to conquer the rattling vivacity of Drum- 
mond, or to tie down his attention to any ele- 
mentary literary drudgery. The day, there- 
fore, wore away, marked by no great progress 
either in the Spanish language or the voyage. 
The fleet still lagged where it had been on 
the preceding night. 

Immediately after dinner the students left 
the officers over their wine, and resumed their 
station. Hugh, who had mounted guard _on 
their studies, was now leaning over the side of 
the vessel, whistling up the breeze, and sing- 
ing snatches of Gaelic airs. 

'■' Ah, Hugh, there you call spirits from the 
vasty deep, while I must fag at this cursed 
Spanish," said Drummond, looking to Nor- 
man for respite. — " I have a notion it pre- 
vents digestion. ' After supper walk a mile, 
after dinner sit a while.' Do you know the 
proverb, Mr Macalbin ?" 

" 1 do, and another," said Norman, smiling. 
— " O deuce take the other," cried Drum- 
mond, guessing its import, and sitting down. 
But in ten minutes his head became confused; 
and, shutting the book with a smack, which 
made Hugh start, he exclaimed, " I'll haber 
no more." 



8 CLAX-ALBIN", 

" Lochaber, dear, do you love it ? Shall I 
croon it for you ?" said Hugh, who gave Drum- 
mond all his fondling Highland epithets. 

" Aye, do/' said Drummond, glad of the 
mistake, and speaking in Gaelic. — " That 
chief of ours loves a tcte-a- tcte by himself of 
all things; we will have a tete-a-tete by our- 
selves; and tell me now, piper, were you ever 
seriously in love ?" 

" O Lord ! Then you are a merry gentle- 
man," said Hugh, reddening. " It was on the 
Mohawks they told you that now r" — When 
stationed in Canada, Drummond had visited 
the United States, and seen the little colony 
of clansmen. — " Aye to be sure, — but tell me 
now how you felt, — were you all queer and 
God-knows-how, with an intolerable hatred 
of verbs, and nouns, and dead calms r" 

" Yes, darling, the queerness I had, — but 
for hating, I hated nobody, — not Allan him- 
self, thank God, — for had he not the best 
right to her, having oaths of her for ten 
years, and keeping by her for six years among 
the wild Indians, a prisoner after the wars 
were over." 

" Of whom r" said Drummond.- — " Why of 
Mary Bane, Ronald the smith's Mary, — 
Macalbin's own Moome I may say. And was 



A NATIONAL TALE. Q 

not the last letter he wrote from Cork, on 
Sun da}-, to Allan and her ?" 

" Surely, — Mary Bane," cried Drummond, 
adroitly seizing every hint ; — " a very fair girl 
,slie was, with blue eyes and light hair — 
Had she not ?" 

" My little mother," said Norman, invo- 
luntarily closing his book, " I live in the hope 
of seeing her one day !" 

In the course of the day Drummond had 
often burst into fits of half-affected passion at 
the provoking calm. 

" After all, I can't say what the deuce is the 
cause of my haste," said he, laughing at his 
own violence. " O ! I'll tell you how it is, — 
some beautiful predestined senora is waiting 
me, with eyes of diamond and locks of jet, and 
delicate little feet, playing bo-peep with men's 
hearts from under the fringed basquina. O 
heavens, the enchanting creature ! Of course 
she will fall in love with me, as she goes to 
church shrouded in her mantilla, or veil, — 
a heroine is nothing without a veil, — better 
want a shift to her back. Her ugly old Du- 
enna will be ordered to follow me home, and 
so learn that I am a brave English cavalier, 
ready to encounter men and bulls for her 
mistress's lovely sake. Then in due time 



10 CLAN-ALBIN, 

comes the interview on the moonlight bal- 
cony, when I must kneel, and complain of 
her cruelty — all the women like to be told of 
their cruelty ; so every thing will proceed 
delightfully according to rule. Next comes 
the tilting match with her dingy Don, under 
a grove of cork trees ; — you will be my second, 
and of course we will kill him off, and fly for 
life, as his uncle or father must be some bloody 
monster, high in power ; and then " 

" Til have no concern in so amiable a pro- 
ject," said Norman, smiling at his lc 

" You won't, — you shabby fellow, — then 
Hugh you will be my second ; — we know what 
love is, — so bring the flute that I may practise 
a serenade to my lovely senora." 

Hugh trotted away laughing at his gaiety. 

" Well, Captain Drummond, I must con- 
gratulate you on getting over your parting sor- 
row, — almost forgot your * Highland Mary,' 
said Norman, in a tone of gentle reproach." 

" Impossible ! Impossible that I should 
forget my Highland Mary. No Macalbin, 
my heart has at least one good quality, — its 
'polarity. It still turns for happiness to my 
northern home." 

To Macalbin there was something redeem- 
ing in the occasional bursts of deep national 



A NATIONAL TALE. 11 

and conjugal feeling which mingled with the 
light effusions of constitutional gaiety in 
Drummond. His pernicious military habit 
of raving eternally of flames and darts was so 
purely nonsensical, that it could not offend 
even the femininely delicate mind of his friend, 
though the latter sometimes became a little 
tired of the sameness of the details of his ro- 
mances, and sometimes wished him to think 
a little before he spoke so much. 

" Do your thoughts never turn from these 
Donnas and Mesdames to the formidable 
French army waiting our arrival ?" said Nor- 
man. 

" Poh ! That is the shop, — quite in the way 
of trade, — mechanical, — I never mind these 
matters. I just think we'll beat them, — beat 
them again, and again, if needful ; — as to the 
ways and means, I leave them to the wise 
heads who are paid to manage all that. When 
I was a young man like you, I used to puzzle 
myself, and plague others, about how and 
when certain things were to be accomplished ; 
but they would none of my counsel. I have 
a shrewd suspicion that great men leave more 
to the chapter of accidents than little men 
dream of. For my own part I know, that, 
like some great dramatic genius I have heard 



12 CLAN-ALBItf, 

or read about, I rush into the scene, and 
abandon myself to nature. That is the only 
way for a Highlander." 

" I know you have no appetite for glory." — - 
" None, certainly, for a morsel, — a nipperkin 
of glory, — a glory cut into ten thousand slices 
and every body putting in a better claim tiian 
my own. It reminds me of those days when 
I left the rough plenty of my father's home, 
(where we killed a bullock when we wanted 
meat, or sent a fellow to the hill for a sheep 
or two,) for a dainty English boarding school, 
in which a comfortable looking roand of beef 
was cut into so many delicate slices, that I felt 
inclined to grow sulky, and to say T , I'll none 
of it." 

" However, you drew to your plate," said 
Norman. — " O surely, — and to the gazette," 
replied Drummond, laughing, " for my share 
of the laurels. Though of small value at this 
moment, when I become an old grave gen- 
tleman, a little sprig stuck in mv wig will 
enable me to cut a figure in the eyes of the 
younkers, and make me formidable at road 
meetings. But let us return to my sweet se- 
ll 6 ra, and never mind Bonaparte." 

c Come on raw-head and bloody bones, 
c Here's a boy that don't fear yon.' 



A NATIONAL TALE. 13 

" And why should you, Sir r" said Hugh, 
advancing with the flute. 

" Why should I, piper ? — Think you, now, 
will he have one horn or two. Pray can you 
guess the length of his tail, — and then his 
prodigous saucer eyes ! As to the cloven hoof 
we won't see that, unless the board has order- 
ed us boot-jacks.' ' 

" Then you are a merry gentleman, Sir." 

" I am a very serious gentleman, Piper. — 
If you read newspapers, this is the precise 
idea you would have of the monster, — which 
I shall more fully set forth when I indite my 
loyal tragedy, that is to open thus : — Enter 
Bonaparte in the costume of the devils upon 
a halfpenny picture-book, snuffing up the 
air, and growling : 

c Fe, fa, fu, fum, 

4 I smell the blood of an Englishman ; 

c Be he living, or be he dead, 

* I'il grind his bones to make my bread,' 

Norman laughed, in spite of himself, at the 
voice in which these nursery lines were pro- 
nounced. 

" Don't you think it will be rather a taking 
piece now ? I'm sure some newspapers * will 
be happy to contribute their humble tribute 
VOL- iv. c 



14 CLAX-ALBIX, 

of applause to the never-enough-to-be-ad- 
wired diablerie of this gallant officer's piece/ M 
Drummond now practised his serenade 
with the piper, who played the violin, if not with 
the science, at least with all the spirit of old 
Gow. Macalbin had for some time indulged 
a vague idea that the cultivation of music was 
unmanly, — he could not satisfy himself where- 
fore, — it was fastidious feeling rather than so- 
ber reason. He had therefore abandoned his 
violin even when alone ; and his song, since 
lie had left his home, was only the reckless 
hnmoia pre-occupied mind. But in that song 
Drummond discovered the richest base tones 
he had ever heard ; and he now insisted and 
pleaded so warmly, that Norman would for 
once take a part in his concert with the piper, 
that for once he consented to chaunt the invo- 
cation of ' The sea-boy's call' 

Among the wild shores of the Hebrides, ti. 
only seas that Macalbin had ever navigated, 
he had often been charmed with the shrill 
whistle and chaunted invocation of the High- 
land mariner, as on a still sunny noon he 
called up the dying breeze. But on these 
shores, to him every thing was pleasing. 

They accordingly commenced their vocal 
concert. Drummond sang the stanza ; then 



A NATIONAL TALE, 15 

followed the long, shrill, quivering whistle of 
the piper ; and on its dying fall, stole the 
rich full tones of Macalbin's base voice, most 
musically deep as he chaunted the invocation ; 
and, with ' linked sweetness/ Drummond 
again caught the stanza. 

Thus passed the twilight hour, beguiled by 

THE SEA-BOY'S CALL. 

" O but I hate this dull delay, 

That cloudless sky, those molten seas : 
Up ! lagging breeze, and speed my way 

To those I love." 

Whistle s y and then chaunts, 

" SPRING UP, GOOD BREEZE! 

Strayest thou in ocean's crystal halls, 
Mid coral bowers and reedy leas, 
Deaf to the sea. boy's whistling call', 
Who sweetly wooes thee. 

UP FAIR BREEZE ! 

Aye, now I hear thee far behind, 
Like busy hum of moorland bees ; 
And now thou whistlest in the wind, 
Still fresher ! fresher ! 

BLOW, GOOD BREEZE 1 



lG CLAN-ALBIX, 

O merrily ! merrily ! now we go, 
Gay tilting through the sounding seasj 
Our gallant ship's side bending low 
To woo thy breath. 

BLOW, BLOW, FAIR BREEZE ! 

Welcome ! old Scotland's misty shores ! 
Welcome ! my hill-cot's tufted trees : 
Welcome ! the maid this heart adores ! 
O bless thee ! bless thee ! 

SOUTHERN BREEZE !" 

Whether the spirit came when they did call 
on it, or for some other cause, the breeze 
sprung up, — and on the tenth day after em- 
barkation they had the happiness to hail Cape 
la Roque, and the memorable village of Cin- 
tra on the heights beyond it. The troops in 
the various transports were now burning with 
impatience to land, — to find freer quarters, 
and a foe worthy of their steel. But, by some 
unfortunate omission, they were for some days 
kept beating about the coast, waiting permis- 
sion to disembark ; and Drummond, gazing 
on the land he durst not touch, alternately 
raved and laughed at his own impatience. 

The fleet was now in Mondego bav, and so 
near the shore that the troops could perceive 
the movements of the enemy's corps, col- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 17 

lecting on the heights, to oppose their land- 
ing. 

The Portuguese landscape lay stretched 
before them in inviting freshness as they 
crowded to the deck at the first peep of, dawn ; 
and as they still lingered, at sun-sec they 
could hear the chime of a distant convent 
bell, and the chaunted Ave- Maria's of the 
fishermen, who were permitted to cast their 
nets within a limited distance from the shore. 
The votary of the catholic faith has at least 
the merit of feeling no awkward shame in the 
due observance of its rites. He does not seek 
to bury himself in his burrow ere he perform 
duties which must otherwise remain neglect- 
ed. In spite of the sneers of the encircling 
soldiers, at the hour of vespers the hymn of 
the Portuguese pilots mingled its softer tones 
with their Bacchanalian carols. 

A week had now been consumed in tedious 
waiting. A lurid and sultry day was succeed- 
ed by a threatening evening. The burning 
disk ok the setting sun dyed the ocean, and 
streaked the skirts of the sulphureous clouds, 
which were fast gathering in the atmosphere, 
with fiery and portentous light. Every indi- 
cation of a violent tempest became more evi- 
dent as the twilight deepened ; and, when; 

C 2 



1 8 CLAN-ALBIN, 

darkness set in, thick and impenetrable, the 
breeze, blowing strongly from the west, made 
the pilots resolve on beating out to sea. 

The troops were now imperiously ordered 
below, with the exception of Norman and 
Hugh, whom the habits of a somewhat roving 
and dangerous life had endowed with supe- 
rior activity and presence of mind. The pi- 
per had indeed been a herring-fisher on the 
north-west shores of Scotland, and knew how 
to handle a rope ; and Norman, besides pos- 
sessing that intelligence which is fertile in re- 
source, had, every day of his life, sailed his 
little skiff on Lochuan, often agitated by wild 
storms, and rendered dangerous by sudden 
squ;ills rushing down the mountain ravines, 
which would have appeared formidable to 
BSBcfa older mariners. 

Considerable alarm, and proportionate ex- 
»ertion, prevailed on the deck till about two 
in the morning, when the wind fortunate- 
ly flitted round, and the clouds, which had 
begun to mutter overhead, rolled away far to 
the south. The rain, now falling in torrents, 
stilled the hurricane ; but Norman, too much 
excited to sleep, wrapped himself in a wutch- 
coat, and, at his earnest request, was permit- 



A NATIONAL TALE. ] Q 

ted to take the place of an exhausted sea- 
man. 

The wind whistling loud, and by fitful gusts, 
in the cordage,— the jetting motion of the 
ship, as in regular repercussive bounds she 
cut the opposing wave, creaking in every 
strained board which divided her sleeping 
crew from death and eternity, — composed al- 
together that melancholy music which may 
be called Danger's Lullaby. The pitchy 
darkness heightened terror more than it in- 
creased peril ; for the steersman, aided by his 
friendly lantern, studied that blessed instru- 
ment which enables the modern mariner to 
ride the midnight storm in comparative secu- 
rity. 

The musings of Norman naturally turned 
to those days when the seaman 

* Knew no north but when the Pole-star shone,* 

And more naturally still to the Hebridean 
mariner of this day, guiding his little bark 
among stormy channels and round mountain 
bays, and surprised by the midnight tempest, 
with no compass, save the Pole- star. With 
his thoughts wandering in this direction, he 
beguiled his watch, by repeating the follow- 
ing lines : — 



20 CLAX-ALBIN, 



TO THE POLE-STAR. 

Ci No gleam is on the roaring wave, 
No star is in the midnight skies ; 

The gathering tempests hoarser rare— 
Star of the Mariner, arise ! 

While wild winds blend their melodies, 
To thee our ardent vows we pour j 

guide us through the pathless seas, 

O guard us from the treacherous shore 1 

Star of the Brave ! pale Beauty's eye 
In wild alarm is rais'd to thee ; 

To thee she breathes the secret sigh,— - 
6 O save my true love far at sea ! 

1 From rock and shoal my sailor free ; 

6 Guide him from whitening waves afar, 
' O bring him to his home and me, 

c And thou shalt be my worshipp'd star P 

Brave Mariner ! Hebridean seas 

Have rock'd thy bark at summer's e'en ; 
When soft thou whistling wooed the breeze, 

And thought on thy young love between ; 
Or view'd th' appointed margent green, 

And wish'd that pale light would appear. 
And called it loveliest star, I ween, 

In all thy northern hemisphere. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 21 

Star of the North ! where'er he roves, 

To thee he turns in fond review ; 
Sweet beacon of his early loves, 

First seen 'mid * Albyn's mountains blue, 
When life and all its joys were new, 

And love and thou his only guides, 
As loud and shrill the night'l winds blew, 

And brave he stemm'd + Cor'vrekan's tides. 

Loved WaxNDerer \ from thy Highland home, 

Who crossed the deep for Indian gold, 
Condemn'd in sunny lands to roam, 

Where nothing but the heart is cold,— 
O ! well canst thou thy pang unfold, 

When sunk the Pole-star down on earth, 
Marking the liquid lapse that roll'd 

Between thee and thy father's hearth* 

But cheerly, cheerly, gallant heart ! 

Scotland and bliss await thee still : 
Well hast thou play'd the manly part, 

Spurning at temporary ill.—— 
Rise ! visions of his father's hill, 

And sooth him with the scenes afar; 
With lovely hopes his bosom fill, — 

Rise on his soul, thou Northern Star ! 

* The Highlander calls his country Albyn, not Scotland. 

f Corrievrekan, " the whirlpool of the Danish prince," is off" 
the coast of Lorn, and between the islands of Jura and Scarb3, 
where a great many opposing currents meet. 



22 CLAN- ALB IX, 

Fond will he watch thee o'er the bow, 

Steal from the blue and billowy main, 
And greet thee with the kindly gluw 

That xciles our wanderers back agen, 
Fr< m golden climes of stranger men, 

From toil, and strife, and grandeur far, 
To sun their age* in Highland glen, 

Then sleep beneath their Northern Star ! 



A NATIONAL TALE. 23 



CHAP. XLIII. 



A various host — from kindred realms they came, 
Brethren in arms, but rivals in renown. 

Scott. 



After tossing about the coast for fourteen 
days, the troops were at last all landed in 
Mondego bay, by the 8th of August; and 
ready and impatient for action. 

During the disembarkation, Norman had 
found sufficient employment. Happy at all 
times to perform the meanest service that 
could promote the general welfare, from dawn 
to sunset he occupied the post assigned him 

by General , and for five successive 

days assisted in superintending the landing, 
which was rendered very troublesome by a 
heavy surf. 

Macalbin had now the double duties of pre- 
ceptor and soldier to fulfil, — for himself and 



24 CLAN-ALBIN, 

r 

each of his' pupils discharged the duties of 

lieutenant in General 's regiment, which 

now formed part of the brigade under Major- 
General Ferguson. 

On the morning of the 9th, while buried in 
the deep sweet sleep which toil purchases, he 
was awaked by repeated strong embraces ; 
and found himself in the arms of Craig-gil- 
lian, who was laughing, and shaking him into 
recollection. Craig-gillian's regiment, which 
was landing at this time, had embarked for 
Portugal a fortnight later than Macalbin ; it s 
destination for India being suddenly reversed. 

The drum, which Norman was bound *o 
obey, immediately beat reveille : himself and 
his young friends flew to their respective 
posts ; but he had just time to learn that Flora 
was in Portugal, and in good health and spi- 
rits. On the following day, they all met at 
Leiria ; and Norman had at once the pleasure 
of embracing Flora, and receiving a packet 
from Lady Augusta, enclosing a letter from 
Monimia, written after his regiment was un- 
der orders for Spain. 

The bustle of actual service, and the note 
of preparation sounding on every side, afford- 
ed little time for social indulgence. None 
longed more anxiously to press forward to 



A NATIONAL TALE. 25 

Lisbon than Macalbin ; for, hoping against 
hope, he still flattered himself with discover- 
ing some trace of his father in that city. 

The morning of the 21st, the memorable 
and glorious harbinger of a brilliant succes- 
sion of victories, was now arrived ; and, in the 
course of the day, the battle of Vimiera was 
gallantly won at the point of the Highland 

bayonet. 
It was a day glorious to every individual of 

the army 9 — each outvied his fellow in the de- 
sire of honourable distinction. Victory was 
no doubt purchased ; but not so dearly as to 
make feelings of regret outweigh the triumph 
of conquest. Among the wounded was Craig- 
gillian, — his horse was killed under him, and 
his left arm shattered by the bursting of a ran- 
dom shell, as he led his men to a charge. It 
was near the close of the engagement, and 
several of his officers, and his Highland ser- 
vant, came to his assistance. — " On ! on !" 
cried he impatiently, — " why waste a thought 
on me ! Hector will do all for me." — They 
sprung away, and pursuing a flying enemy, 
soon left the spot on which he lay, deserted 
by all but Hector, who seemed to suffer more 
than his master. 

" Hector, my good friend, take your own 

VOL. IV. D 



26 CLAN-ALIHX, 

horse, and gallop to your lady, — permit no 
person to see her till Mr Macalbin reaches 
you, — leave your horse at a distance, and do 
not see her yourself. Send the first idle per- 
son you meet to me, — and charge the second 
to bid Macalbin come to me when he has done 
his duty." The man dared not disobey ; he 
mounted his horse, and took the road to a vil- 
lage about three miles in the rear of the army, 
where Flora had been left with some other la- 
dies that had followed their husbands abroad. 
Craig-gillian was soon surrounded by assis- 
tance ; and Norman hearing of the accident, 
as he led off his little party from a sanguinary 
pursuit, was soon by his side, — yet not till he 
had run to poor Hugh ; for the piper was al- 
so severely wounded, and no prompt assist- 
ance had flown to him. Craig-gillian, ten- 
derly alive to poor Hugh's misfortunes, or- 
dered the spring-waggon which waited for 
himself, to be sent for the piper. 

Norman and his pupils escorted them to the 
village of Yimicra, where quarters were got 
ready for Craig-gillian, while Hugh was con- 
veyed to an hospital. 

Both Craig-gillian and Hugh were serious- 
ly wounded, particularly the former; but when 
Macalbin heard that there was no present 



A NATIONAL TALE. 27 

danger, he was surprised, and even grieved, 
to feel how lightly he considered their suffer- 
ings. It was. found necessary to amputate 
Craig- giliian's arm, and he urged the sur- 
geon immediately to perforin the operation. 
Macalbin then began to feel that he still pos- 
sessed that heart, of which he feared horrible 
sights of carnage and blood had forever de- 
prived him. 

" We can easily manage all this, my dear 
friend," said Craig-gillian, speaking in Gae- 
lic, — " you have another dutv. I need not 
bid you be very tender with her." 

His collected features for the first time suf- 
fered a sligbt change. Norman pressed his 
hand; and tiie anxious husband, fearing for a 
dearer self, and half-ashamed to express his 
fears, smiled on him, and said, — " I know you 
will manage it cleverly. Tell her how I long 
to return, — to keep herself happy, if she loves 
me : — tell her she pretends to be very brave. 
Pardon, dear Macalbin, you know how soft- 
hearted and nervous her sex is. — Well, I wilt 
not detain you. bend Hector to tell me how 
you all get on. — I'll take care of our poor 
piper." 

" Colonel Monro, you exhaust) our strength," 
said the principal surgeon. Norman seized 



28 CLAN-ALBIN, 

his bonnet, pressed the hand of Craig-gillian, 
and casting a hasty glance at the alarming 
instruments and dressings the attendants be- 
gan to display, left the chamber. He ran to 
tiie hospital, and found Hugh under the hands 
of the surgeon — gave him one cheerkig smile, 
recommended him to every one round, and, 
mounting his horse, galloped to Flora. 

He found her on her knees, pale and tear- 
less. The house she inhabited did not com- 
mand a view of the scene of the battle ; but 
every explosion of the cannon, which was dis- 
tinctly heard, during the long engagement, 
overcame her heart, like the chill sickness of 
death. She hastily rose as he entered. No ! 
Hector was safe, — Norman's eye told her so ; 
and she was satisfied. " Flora, we are con- 
querors I" said he. — " I know that ; but from 
you I love again to hear it; you durst not 
tell me so unless Hector were well." Her face 
was already embellished with smiles ; — she 
had half forgotten the agonies of the day. 

Craig-gillian sends you his love, — in a day 
or two — " 

" Hector is wounded I" she exclaimed, 
clasping her hands involuntarily, and bitterly 
adding, — " Norman, Norman, can you wear 
that look ! — No, tell me truly !"— "My belov- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2Q 

ed Flora, so much glory is cheaply purchased 
by a slight wound." — " A slight wound ! — tell 
me not of glory ! tell me of Craig-gillian ! 
O, what is glory to me V 

" Craig-gillian bade me remind you, that 
in Scotland you loved to call yourself a sol- 
dier's wife," said Norman, smiling.-—" Craig- 
gillian bade you — alas, I am indeed a soldier's 
wife I" — All her pride in Craig gillian's fame 
yielded at that moment to exquisite appre- 
hension for his safety, and a general feeling 
of horror at war, and its inseparable miseries. 
" Tell me the truth, Norman, — and you never 
spoke but truth, — I can trust you." 

By gentle degrees he unfolded the truth, and 
she bore the intelligence with great apparent 
calmness, — shedding no tear^ — uttering no 
complaint, — though a slight convulsive twitch 
sometimes contracted her features. After a 
pause of a minute, she hastily rose. " Now 
let us go, Norman !" — and in vain, by entreaty 
and persuasion, did he attempt to dissuade 
her from this design. 

" I will go '. — while he lives, his wife will 
be welcome to him ; — do not fear me, Nor- 
man 1 I am weak in myself, but you will find 
me strong for Craig-gillian !" — He begged 
of her at least to wait till next morning, that 

D 2 



30 CLAX-ALBIN, 

he might have an opportunity of procuring 
some conveyance, — promising to return at 
midnight, and bring her news of Craig-gillian. 
She rose, and almost indignantly replied : 
" And whv not to-night r — Can I not walk r 
In Scotland I have walked much farther for 
pleasure : — Can I not walk to the bed-side of 
my wounded husband ? O Norman !" — She 
looked at him reproachfully, and wrapping her 
shawl hastily round her, tock his arm to drag 
him on. S-ie walked so quick, as to be soon 
out of breath, and obliged to pause. " I am 
not used to this country," said she, — " It 
crushes, it chokes me here !" — She pressed 
her hand upon her bosom. — " I was so 
proud, too, when Craig- gillian obtained this 
fatal promotion. Alas ! alas ! mat is very 
dreadful !" 

Norman's feelings were not in unison with 
despondency. His humanity, his affections, 
were interested in the sufferings of Flora; but 
not his sympathies ; — still, in the intoxication 
of victory, he lightly turned his eyes from the 
vlreadful price at which victory is too often 
obtained. 

Flora, nothing intimidated by the dangers of 
a night march, would still have pressed on to- 
wards Vimiera, reckless of danger, and faster 



A NATIONAL TALE. 3 1 

than her strength would permit : But strag- 
gling parties of Portuguese peasants, fresh 
from massacre — from glutting their fury, by 
burying their long knives in the bodies of the 
neglected dead or abandoned wounded of the 
enemy, — continually crossed their path ; and 
Norman compelled her to return, that the 
officer who had been left with the ladies might 
afford them the protection of a guard. They 
accordingly procured a pretty strong escort, 
and also a calash belonging to an officer, 
whose lady now kindly offered the use of it 
to Flora. 

Guided in part by the blaze of bivouac 
fires, round which the soldiers of Britain and 
peasants of the country were indiscriminately 
assembled, they reached. Vimiera about mid- 
night. 

Flora had little strength of nerve or of mind ; 
but her affections were all but invincible. 
They could import that fortitude which would 
have enabled her to smile on the rack for the 
sake of Craig- gillian. Macalbin conducted 
her to the chamber-door of her husband ; her 
late beautiful and blooming countenance ex- 
hibiting a pale, resolute composure, which 
astonished even him, much as he had seen of 
woman's passive courage. Hector, the chaolt 



32 CLAN-ALBIN, 

servant and namesake, stood guard by the 
door, which was left a-jar for a freer circula- 
tion of air, and that the noise of its opening 
might not disturb the patient. 

" 'Tis all well over with us, Madam," whis- 
pered Hector; " my master is asleep." — Flora 
raised her eyes in gratitude to Heaven ; and, 
making a signal of silence, glided forward to 
look on Craig-gillian as he slept. As she ad- 
vanced, a dreadful object met her eye; — 
with a convulsive start she turned shuddering 
round, but even then possessing an instinctive 
power of stillness, uttered no scream ; and 
Norman, catching her tottering frame in his 
arms, bore her quickly away. It was the se- 
vered arm of Craig-gillian, imperfectly co- 
vered — the arm which that morning had clasp- 
ed her to his bosom when he blessed and left 
her. 

Flora soon recovered. — " I have given poor 
proofs of my promised fortitude," said she, 
with a feeble smile. " 1 knew it must be so 
—yet I was not prepared — it was so sudden a 
shock. O my Hector, the dreadful pain !" 
She rose to return to the chamber. The ob- 
ject so terrible to her feelings had been re- 
moved ; and on her spontaneous promise of 
fortitude and composure, Norman sulTered 



A NATIONAL TALE. 33 

her to take her melancholy station by the 
bed-side of her husband. 

Colonel Monro slept long and easily ; and 
when he awoke smiled to see Norman, and 
immediately inquired for his wife ; — but ere 
he was answered he heard the hurried and 
suppressed breathing of Flora, and with his 
right arm, the only part of his body he could 
now move, pulled aside the musquitoe cur- 
tain which divided her from him. She fell 
on her knees by the bed-side, hiding her face 
in his extended hand. 

" Her courage has been admirable hither- 
to, » said Norman. mv wiil 11UC rall w i}UC 
you have need of her." 

" Yes, my love, you must be stout to nurse 
your wounded knight," said Hector, smiling, 
" since you are here : — Ah, little traitress, I rear 
you rejoice at an accident which must fasten 
me to a couch for some weeks, while my bre- 
thren in arms are exposed to all the dangers 
of an opening campaign." — This was the only 
tolerable view in which the present suffering 
of Craig-gillian could be presented to Flora. 
She repeatedly kissed lis hand, and hastily 
rising, acquainted the surgeon that Colonel 
Monro was now awake. The visit was paid. 
The surgeon expressed satisfaction and hope; 



34 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and enjoining silence and perfect quiet, gave 
his directions to Norman, and for the first 
time left the house. 

" Now, Flora, you must go to bed," said 
Craig-gillian. " I hope this house will aff. 
you a chamber." 

" This is my chamber," said Flora, quietly, 
but firmly. " If Hector can attend you more 
carefully than I can do, at least suffer me to 
look on you." — Her eyes filled with tears.. 

16 Nay, Flora, you know it is against all the 
canons of romance for the damsel to watch 
during the nig lit" said Craig gillian, smil- 
ing. 

" O Craig-gillian, this absurdity is cruel 
to me." — u Well, my dear love, you shall be 
indulged, till Norman write his letters. It is 
delightful to have you by me. But you must 
not play the nurse- tender, lest, like a little 
fondled child, I grow enamoured of sickness 
— though I feel quite strong." He smiled on 
them, and Flora's spirits revived more to the 
influence of that smile, than bv all the sooth- 
ing of Norman's consolations. Monro had ex- 
erted himself too much. Norman perceived 
his colour change, and begged him to be 
composed, and sat another hour by his bed- 
side, finding it impossible to procure writing- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 35 

materials. Craig-gillian, though awake, lay 
perfectly still, yet Norman could perceive 
his eye lighted up with languid pleasure as the 
silent step of Flora stole over the chamber ; 
and saw him smile when he witnessed the sup- 
pressed impatience with which she saw the 
Highland servant approach to do him any lit- 
tle service; so loving jealous was she of all 
who came near him. But the attentions of his 
faithful servant were awkward and unendearing 
when contrasted with the gentle and caivssing 
cares of Flora ; and when she perceived that 
she had no rival as a nurse, she apologized 
to poor Hector for having called him out to 
scold his rough voice and heavy tread* This 
was the first time Flora had ever scolded a 
servant. 

Craig-gillian's groom had now procured 
writing-materials; and Norman wrote a very 
few lines to the Lady, a longer epistle to old 
Craig-gillian, and a letter to the father of his 
pupils — those brave boys whose conduct on 
the preceding clay was his most grateful tri- 
umph. He then visited Hugh, who, reclining 
in state, was dictating to his Irish secretary, 
Serjeant Macdonald. As this despatch con- 
tains the only account of the battle preserved 



30 CLAN-ALBIX, 

among the papers of our group of heroes, 
we take the liberty to transcribe it. 

" Dearest Aunt Unah, 

" These few lines in all haste, from my 
bed, being to go home by Major Campbell, 
who takes over the other despatches to tell our 
good king and all the royal family how we 
beat the French to atoms yesterday the 21st. 
And am in good health at present, blessed be 
God for it, hoping this will find you in the same, 
with a confounded hole in the leg, and a cut 
in the cheek, honestly come by however. But 
what know you of wars and heroes, ould wo- 
man — the heights of Lourinha, and the brav- 
est of the brave, General Ranald Fergusson — 
a true countryman — long life to him. — c Give 
them the bayonet in style,' says he, * nry 
lads,' speaking to myself, ould woman — our 
regiment being in his brigades: — And so we 
did — I defy them to deny it — charging up hill, 
full tilt; drums beating, flags flying in the 
rcre 9 as I'm tould, not having a moment to 
look back ; and the young Macalbin, and the 
brave young lords, all swooi^l'm hind, pressing 
on before the foremost, warm and glowing, 
and their eyes flaming, as I'll shew you some 
night in Eleenalim — Myself now nailed to a 



A NATIONAL TALE. 37 

stone, with a confounded bullet in my leg, 
and the cut I spoke of in my near cheek, — 
playing, ( Give the rogues their fairing,' and 
giving a shout, to make our men lively. Con- 
found their bullets, if I had my own Andrea 
Ferrara I'd have one hit at them yet. And 
so, when all was over, comes the young Mac- 
albin flying to myself, being lonely then, 
and putting me in a waggon by Craig-gillian 
himself, like any gentleman — and making the 
doctor dig out the ball. It was a country- 
man did me that good turn too, God bless 
him.— But och, sister of my mother ! you never 
saw such a day— while our men mowed down 
the cratures as ever you saw flowers in the 
hay by Lochuan, — another and another row. 
My own heart sickens yet ; though sure the 
devil himself was in it then— sitting on a stone* 
not able to crawl. But I did not go back at 
any rate ; I defy them French or Lowlanders 
to say I did. But did I not tell you yet how 
Macalbin ran among the devils after the young 
lords— and the fulosiphers after him, for a res- 
cue,— or if not had both been killed dead, if 
not taken prisoner itself, — and how he got a 
wound above the left wrist, and never let on, 
less or more, till this morning, saying to the 
doctor, l You had no time for me — my owit 
vol. ly. F 



38 CLAN-ALBIN, 

dressing did till now;' — and shaking the hands 
of Ellis and Pat Leary, both wounded too, 
c Comrades,' says he, * I hope those who have 
been together in battle, will one day live to- 
gether in peace,' and with that the tear came 
in his eye, to my thinking, and he went awav, 
knowing he had no place of peace for him- 
self, poor fellow, let alone them ; though who 
knows but God himself may do this for us 
and more also. So don't be cast down about 
me, dear aunt Unah, seeing Leary lies in the 
next bed, and keeps me "merry ; his wife no- 
ticing both, and stealing in a drop of wine in 
the water canteen, unknown to the doctor, 
to comfort us; — a handy crature she is. — Cap- 
tain Allan Drummond Logievar, also visiting 
me himself, ' Och piper,' says he, ' the French 
have stolen your beauty ; what will Mary-bane 
say to this' — for somebody must tell him that 
foolish story. ' And your poor stump too ! — 
the ladies like a man to have the use of all his 
members. — You seem to have the use of vour 
grinders, however, Pat Leary. Pray did the 
surgeon recommend so hearty a breakfast on 
cold pork?' 

" * Sure he did, then, Captain,' says Leary. 
<We shall see that,' says the Captain, go- 
ing.—* Och, stay the moment,' cries Leary. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 3 9 

' Sure he did not just say, ' Paddy Leary eat 
could pork.' But, says his young jantleman, 
f you are in danger of a locked jaw,' which, 
your honour is smsiblc, was as good as say- 
ing, Pat Leary, lay in something before- 
hand." 

" It defied the Captain to be angry then. 
But what should he spy but the canteen, 
Leary not having put the blanket fair over it. 
i O ho!' says he, — for he has an eye like a 
hawk's, — ' this to keep the jaws open, I pre- 
sume;' and off he flies, and brings the doctor 
in a passion. But the doctor allowed Leary 
a little drop ; and Ellis and myself lying in the 
next bed Leary made us share alike, in spite 
of our own and the doctor's teeth. ( Och, bo- 
theration/ says he, f what's good for Peter is 
not. bad for Paul;' and surely, Unah, that 
stands to reason. So we drank the health of 
our brave commander : ' Give them the ba- 
yonet in style !' — but sure I told you before. 
Long life to hiin! Drink his health yourself 
in your best, Unah Macalbin, with the cam- 
momile steeped in it, that you keep for the 
good of the stomach. 

" But no more at present of the battle of the 
21st, Major Campbell being just going ; on- 
ly my heart grew great, when Norman read 



40 CLAN-ALBIN, 

in the letter how you all missed me, worthless 
as I was, and the Lady's love and commenda- 
tion to her poor piper. And hopes soon to 
meet, never to part again, having much to 
tell you ; and humble duty to the Lady and 
family in Glen-gillian ; and love to all coun- 
trymen that come the way. From your dutiful 
nephew till death, 

" Hugh Macalbin." 

" P. S. — If any of a certain name come the 
way of Eleenalin, push your thumb out be- 
tween your two fore-fingers. That defies the 
evil eye over all Spain I'm tould ; and why 
not in Glenalbin? And never mind the small 
trifle Craig-gillian will send, having paid it 
to Colonel Hector here; being only to buy you 
a shawl next fair, if you will condescend to 
wear it for my sake. " H. M." 

The armistice and the convention of Cin- 
tra followed. What had been gained by cou- 
rage was thrown away by mismanagement ; 
and the soldiers murmured and reposed. 
Meanwhile the wounded heroes did well. In 
a few days Craig-gillian was declared out of 
danger, which had been much greater, owing 
to the hot season, than his friends understood. 



A NATIONAL TALE, 41 

till this welcome declaration was made. But 
not yet did Flora's vigilance abate. Through 
the day her eye seldom wandered from her 
charge ; and when exhausted nature lulled 
her into disturbed repose, she started at the 
slightest motion. Craig-gillian at last con- 
trived to dismiss her from nocturnal attend- 
ance, under the pretext that he could not 
sleep while she watched by him. 

She was accordingly forced to wait in the 
an ti -room ; but through a recovery, which 
proved lingering, still, 

ii Flora was ready ere he named her name ; 
And though he called another. Flora came." 

Macalbin's regiment now marched for Lis- 
bon, which had just been evacuated by the 
French, in terms of the convention. Before 
he left Vimiera, he had the happiness to see 
Hugh out of the hospital, and lodged in 
Craig-gillian's quarters; still limping a little, 
and wearing a patch on his cheek, but other- 
wise quite brave, expecting to join the regi- 
ment in less than a week. Leary was able to 
march along with it, having happily recover, 
ed, notwithstanding what Drummond called 



E 2 



42 CLAN-ALB1N, 

his unwonted foresight in laying up provi- 
sions in case of a blockade of his jaw-port. 

Till the month or October the troops re- 
mained inactive. General Moore then arriv- 
ed, and life and motion were again communi- 
cated to this torpid and repining body. 

While his regiment was quartered in the 
neighbourhood of Lisbon, Norman had spared 
no labour in tracing the relations and con- 
nexions of Don Ignacio du Rocha. This 
gentleman was a very rich banker, connected 
with the court, which he had followed, and 
well known to the whole city, though no one 
knew any thing of the commission entrusted 
to him so many years ago. Again the oft-in- 
serted advertisement was repeated in the Lis- 
bon gazettes. Norman, sickening atiuappear- 
ance, and almost ashamed of the necessity 
which compelled him to blazen his misfor- 
tune, and hear it babbled in his ears by the 
cold, the curious, and the suspicious, endea- 
voured to banish his sanguine and hitherto il- 
lusive hopes, feeling that, what may never 
bestow the sober certainty of happiness, ought 
not to be allowed the power of inflicting dis- 
appointment so bitter as that which he now 
experienced. 
The army was now to march, under its new 



A NATIONAL TALE. 43 

commander, for the north of Spain. Before 
the last orders were issued, Norman was per- 
mitted to visit his friend in Vimiera, who was 
now almost convalescent. Craig-giliian was 
by this time able to ride out in the mornings, 
and to read to Flora in the evenings, while 
she tore down the bridal finery old Craig-gil- 
lian had lavished on her the preceding year, 
and made up a baby wardrobe for the expect- 
ed heir of Craig-gillian ; feeling that nothing 
could be too grand for so distinguished a per- 
sonage, — nothing too humble for herself. 
Colonel Monro was much disappointed that 
the positive injunction of his physician for- 
bade him to march with the troops ; but he 
hoped to overtake them. Meanwhile, the 
condition of Flora gave him considerable anxi- 
ety. Contented to be with him, happy to 
see him well, she seemed to have no future 
care for herself. 

Macalbin's pupils had now been presented 
with commissions by the commander-in-chief, 
accompanied with high encomiums on their 
conduct at Vimiera. Another light and sol- 
dier-like farewell was taken of the beautiful 
banks of the Tagus and the hospitalities of 
Belem, where they had been quartered, and 
again they marched on foot with the troops, 



44 CLAN-ALBIN, 

participating in that unmeasured confidence 
of triumph, which, in a powerful enemy, saw 
only a baffled and beaten invader. A spirit 
of enthusiastic resistance, they were assured, 
had broken out in every province of Spain. 
They loved to give it credence. They per- 
ceived, after the lapse of so many ages, the 
devoted heroism of Numantia and Saguntum 
rekindled in Saragossa and Gerona, and 
thought their confidence just. 

The regiment to which Macalbin was at- 
tached, formed part of the advanced guard. 
It was not till it reached Salamanca, that the 
1 bubble burst ;' and the British commander, 
indignant at the culpable misrepresentations, 
if not treacherous design, which had allured 
the arm) 7 onward to almost certain destruc- 
tion, found that they must immediately fall 
back on the coast. While the embarassing 
events which rapidly followed were in pro- 
gress, Craig-gillian, accompanied by his wife, 
arrived at Salamanca. Money had hitherto 
smoothed their path ; but now that Craig-gil- 
lian learned the real situation of affairs, — the 
storm gathering deeper and deeper in front, 
— retreat, or rather flight, undertaken in the 
depth of winter, on the other hand, — with the 
complicated disasters experience taught hiiu 



A NATIONAL TALE. 45 

to anticipate, — he thought on the condition of 
his wife with apprehension which amounted 
to agony. Again, and again, he consulted 
with Norman ; execrating the facility which 
had yielded to her entreaties, instead of leav- 
ing her in Lisbon. But even now, when the 
period of her confinement was fast approach- 
ing, she remained insensible to all personal 
danger, congratulating herself on sharing the 
fortunes of her friends, and fearing nothing 
for herself while they were around her. The 
army left Salamanca. It was now the depth 
of winter, — the weather severe, — roads, at all 
times wretched, now covered with snows. 
Every accommodation that could be procured 
in such a situation was still provided for 
Flora, not more from tenderness to her sex 
and condition than the universal regard felt 
for her husband. Still she necessarily endur- 
ed hardships which wrung the heart that ago- 
nised over her, in looking forward to evils of 
incalculably greater magnitude. 

Disaster and distraction rapidly followed 
each other : every fresh courier brought an 
account contradictory to the last, but the dan. 
ger was evidently great and pressing; and 
certain intelligence of the French advancing 
from Madrid in great force, made that retreat 



46 CLAN-ALBIN, 

be suddenly recommenced, the details of which 
exhibit so dark a picture of wild despair, des- 
perate courage, ferocious despondency, and 
horrors from which the human heart revolts, 
which are too shocking for the contempla- 
tion of pity. The route lay through a moun- 
tainous country covered with snows, broken 
with torrents, destitute of provisions : the re- 
treating army were also exposed to continual 
rain and tempests, embarassed by numerous 
sick and wounded, by miserable women, and 
children still more wretched. In the pro- 
gress of this retrr at, Macalbin had abundant 
reason to bless the hardy education which 
enabled him, not only to bear up against his 
individual share of its calamities, but also 
to succour his sinking friends ; and, by unre- 
mitted vigilance, to restrain, in some degree, 
in his own men, those abominable outrages 
which disgraced their reckless companions, 
and threw so foul a stain on the fair fame of 
British soldiers. 

Before the army reached Benevente, a ca- 
lasine, which Craig-gillian had procured for 
his wife, broke down on the impracticable 
roads over which it was dragged, and she was 
compelled to ride on one of the baggage- 
waggons. Overcome with fatigue and hall fro- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 47 

zen with cold, — still seeking change, and 
finding every new mode of conveyance worse 
than the last, — by the time they arrived at As- 
torga she was so seriously indisposed, that 
Norman entreated her, in pity to herself and 
all that loved her, to remain here, if she would 
avoid certain destruction, by continuing with 
the retreating army. As the wife of an Eng- 
lish officer of rank, should she have the mis- 
fortune to fall into the hands of the enemy, 
even they would protect her, — he was confi- 
dent they would. To the principal inhabi- 
tants of the town and its neighbourhood she 
would be specially recommended ; and in a 
convent, now half-deserted by its trembling 
inmates, she might find a temporary asylum. 
Macalbin had many other resources, but time 
was short : He embraced her hastily, and leav- 
ing her drowned in tears, flew to find Craig- 
gillian, who was pacing before the door of his 
quarters, in a state bordering on frenzy. 

He unfolded his plan. — Craig. gillian hesi- 
tated for a moment, then wrung his hand. 
" Yes, Macalbin, God bless you ; this must 
do, though it is like tearing my heart-strings 
to leave her thus." 

They entered the house. Craig-giliian 
could not speak j but Norman renewed the 



48 CLAN-ALBIN, 

pleading, which was sanctioned hy his pre- 
sence. " My dearest Flora," said he, " have 
the courage to save yourself, — your infant, — 
your husband. We may struggle manfully 
for ourselves, if you do not add to other mi- 
series the torture of seeing you perish with- 
out being able to give you aid. As lieute- 
nant-colonel of a regiment, Craig- gillian has, 
in this crisis, duties that demand all his atten- 
tion, which may force him to abandon all 
but honour, — to risk life, — even your life,—- 
dearer I am sure than his own." 

"OGod! OGod!" cried Craig-gillian. 

" Hector, I am prepared for every thing. I 
will remain. My presence shall not add to 
your other miseries," said Flora ; " too, too 
happy, if without me you reach — England." 

" Nay, dearest Flora, that is too much," 
said Norman. — " Duty may forbid the return 
of Craig-gillian ; but I will never leave Spain 
alive without you. When we reach our ships, 
I am a free man." 

Craig-gillian could only look his thanks, 
and again whisper, — " God bless you, Nor- 
man !" 

" Till then you will remain here in safety. 
The civil authorities, while they have any in- 
fluence, will extend their cares to you. The 



A NATIONAL TALE. 4Q 

sick officers of Romana's arm}-, who are here, 
will also protect you," continued Norman. — 
" But, in case safety and concealment be 
found incompatible, the Colonel of the Impe- 
rial Guard, whom we yesterday made prisoner, 
will give you letters to the French Marshal, 
advancing this way, and he will protect you. 
O do not fear it ; the whole of our staff, if 
necessary, will assist in these measures for 
your safety." — " I do not fear," exclaimed 
Flora, " for myself I have no fear ; waste no 
more thought or speech on me, — command, 
and I will obey you." 

Craig-gillian thanked her for this gentle 
acquiescence ; and repaired with Norman to 
head-quarters, to take measures for ensuring 
her safety, as far as it was possible. Several 
of the staff-officers, with the kindest alacrity, 
promoted the sctieme ; and the French offi- 
cer wrote, — rose from bed and wrote, the de- 
sired letters, with the gracious cordiality of 
ancient French politeness, which doubled a 
kindness by the manner of bestowing it. 
Macalbin ran to Flora with these letters, while 
Craig-gillian visited the convent which was 
to afford her temporary shelter. The nuns 
were in their chapel, at midnight mass, — but 
in this extraordinary time every thing gare 

VOL. IV. F 



50 CLAN-ALBIN, 

way ; — the abbess came to him at the parlour 
grate,' and renewed the promise she had given 
of affording protection to an English lady, the 
wife of a Catholic, while her sacred sanctuary 
afforded refuge to her own timid community. 
He hurried back with this intelligence. The 
troops were to march by day-break ; and Flo- 
ra would not permit her husband to rouse his 
toil-worn domestics from their short sleep to 
arrange her baggage. — " Let me work to- 
night," said she, " I shall have time enough 
to sleep." 

At Toro, Craig- gillian had abandoned the 
most of his baggage. He thought it cruel and 
unjust to occupy space, which might be de- 
voted to carrying food or clothing for his fa- 
mished men, with what his wife and himself 
might for a few weeks go without. With 
a womanish mixture of vanity and tender- 
ness, Flora had pleaded for the preservation 
of a basket, containing the wardrobe of her 
expected infant. It was all that she meant to 
keep ; and whilst Norman and Hugh awk- 
wardly folded her scanty raiment, she busied 
herself in selecting what linen, flannel, and 
shoes, she could find among the remaining 
baggage, and in tying them up for the march. 

" Yes, I saved that volume," said Flora. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 5 I 

now on her knees, fixing her parcels in a wal- 
let. Norman was turning over its leaves. It 
was a small copy of the M Pleasures of Hope," 
which had belonged to Monimia. " It is all 
that is left me now," said she, " I must keep 
it till I see you again." — Norman carefully 
placed this treasure in the trunk Hugh was 
packing. 

Macalbin and the Piper accompanied Craig- 
gillian and his wife to the convent. Till now 
earnest employment had supported her spirits. 
It was about three o'clock, in a dark and dis- 
mal morning, blowing rain and sleet, — the 
last day of December. At this time there was 
no night in Astorga, or rather none of the re- 
freshing repose which nights of peace be- 
stow. The inhabitants, alarmed and incom- 
moded by the army, and still more appalled 
by the dread of that which was rapidly advan- 
cing, were running about half distracted with 
their fears and sufferings. Weather-worn 
soldiers, intoxicated and riotous, were pour- 
ing to and from the wine-houses, — baggage- 
waggon*, horses and bullocks, stopping up 
the miry streets, — flambeaux, tossing round, 
suddenly flashing a strong light on this scene 
of disorder and misery, and as suddenly leav- 
ing it involved in thick darkness ; while the 



LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY OF (LUWOtf 



o2 CLAN-ALBIN, 

firing of a signal -gun, the abrupt roll of a 
drum, and the voices of the Spanish women 
imploring the Virgin, as they mingled with 
the murmurs and imprecations of the sol- 
diery, produced sounds as discordant as the 
sights were dismal. Flora's friends hurried 
her forward ; but by the time they reached 
the great square, in which stood the convent, 
her clothes were drenched with moisture. 

" Ah, Finagalla, how light and happy we 
feel in leaving you here. This little march 
is far enough for you," said Norman, screen- 
ing her from the wet with his arm. Flora 
could not reply. She leaned more heavily 
on Craig-gillian's single arm, with that con- 
fiding pressure which seems to repose the 
load of sorrow as well as the weakness of 
frame, on a beloved being. He whispered, 
" Yes, my love, I am indeed contented to 
leave you. Bear up a little while, and all will 
be well with us." — Flora restrained her tears ; 
yet she trembled in every limb from excess of 
emotion, while frequent shivering sighs burst 
from her bosom ; and she imputed to the 
chill damp air, emotion which owned another 
cause. 

Before they reached the convent gate, they 
were overtaken by Captain Drummond, seve- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 53 

ral of Craig-gillian's officers, and some other 
gentlemen, who came to bid Mrs Monro fare- 
well, each carrying the slender remains of the 
stock of English luxuries, which had been sa- 
ved for want of opportunity to consume them, 
—tea, coffee, sugar, wine, — whatever he hap- 
pened to possess, likely to add to the comfort 
of a female, in a place destitute of every com- 
fort, and indeed of every convenience. These 
little marks of kindness, at a time like this, 
acted as potent cordials to the fainting spirits 
of Flora. She burst into a flood of kindly 
tears, as those gay young men, whom she had 
so often seen round Craig-gillian's board in 
happier times, respectfully bade her adieu; 
and when Drummond assured her, that by 
next grouse season, in her own drawing-room, 
he would remind her of the elegant piece of 
sugar presented to her in the great square of 
Astorga, she smiled through her tears, and 
her heart clung to ever-springing hope. 

At five in the morning the drum beat. Nor- 
man reiterated his promise, and clasped her 
in a parting embrace, while Hugh pressed 
her hand between both his own, and, in his 
native language, fervently recommended her 
to the protection of heaven. 

At nine o'clock the last of the rearguard 

F 2 



54 CLAN-ALBIN, 

left the town. Craig-gillian committed his 
beloved wife, sunk into insensibility, to the 
care of the lay sister appointed to attend her; 
and, pressing her death-cold lips frith a lcn 6 , 
lingering, farewell kiss, tore himself away. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 55 



CHAP. XLIII. 



Merciful God ! Low horrible is night 
Upon the plain of Atzlan ! There the shout 
Of battle, the barbarian yell, the bray 
Of dissonant instruments, the clang of arms, 
The shriek of agony, the groan of death, 
In one wild uproar and continuous din, 
Shake the still air. 

Socthet. 

.1 fe army reached Villa Franca before 
Macalbin heard any tidings of Craig-gillian. 
Every passing hour increased the miseries 
of the troops. The)? r were now labouring 
through a track of mountain-country, naked, 
open, covered with snows, but of unequalled 
wildness and sublimity. The road cut in 
the side of the mountain, following all its 
windings and defiles, often stretched along a 
chain of frightful precipices, or overhung 
some winter torrent. An imagination at ease 



50 CLAN-ALBIN, 

might have loved to picture the beauty and 
variety of this scenery, when 

" Peace was on the cottage and the fold;" 

when the groves of hazel, poplar, and ches- 
nut, which girdled the base of the mountain, 
were in verdure ; when the blossoms of the 
wild apple, the wild olive, the cherry, and the 
mulberry adorned its ledges and cliffs ; and 
the tender buds of the vineyards that hung on 
its sunward slopes and cultivated terraces, ex- 
panded into foliage. How appalling was the 
contrast it now displayed ! Norman could ne- 
ver recollect the scene he witnessed here 
without a shuddering sensation of indefinable 
norror. 

After toiling many miles up the mountain, 
— now wading knee-deep in half- melted 
snow — now climbing over steeps exposed to 
the bitter and suffocating showers of mingled 
sleet and snow-drift — he halted on the heights, 
to look back for a moment on the Golgotha 
stretching far behind. He saw the last divi- 
sion of the army slowly ascending the dismal 
road he had passed, their route tracked by 
dead bodies, " reddening the snow in spots ;" 
or by those who, abandoned of hope and help, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 57 

had stretched themselves out to die. He saw 
the animals which dragged the baggage-wag- 
gons dropping down at every step ; and the 
miserable load they carried — famished and 
frozen women and children, the sick and the 
wounded — given np by their wretched com- 
panions to the death they almost envied. — 
" Would that all the lovers of war stood here 1" 
thought Norman, closing his eyes in torpid 
despair. Happily the incessant care neces- 
sary for individual preservation, by fixing the 
attention of the most disinterested nature up- 
on self alone, blunted that, sensibility which, 
at another time, might have tempted a man, 
surrounded b}^ such objects, and exposed to 
such suffering, to curse existence, and long 
for madness or death to snatch him from evils 
incomparably greater. 

About this time Macaibin was informed by 
a Glen-gillian Highlander, that Colonel Mon- 
ro's horse had dropped, and that, fatigued 
and indisposed, without the prospect of get- 
ting to quarters for that night, he seemed 
ready to yield to despair. Macaibin instant- 
ly turned back, and, after walking above a 
mile, found Craig-gillian, who had turned off 
the road, and was resting beneath some trees; 
that fatal torpor stealing over his mind and 



58 CLAN-ALBItf, 

senses which is the fore runner of death, as 
he reposed his benumhed frame in a kin 1 of 
tranquil listlessness, from which he seemed 
unwilling to be recalled. With a constitution 
somewhat enervated by long residence in In- 
dia, recent indisposition, and a min I bowed 
down by many cares, he was peculiarls suscep- 
tible of the hardships to which every soldier 
was now exposed. 

With great difficulty Norman procured 
him a small quantity of wine, and persuaded 
him to enter a waggon, drawn by some of the 
few bullocks that still remained. Much time 
was lost, and night had now set in, — a night 
of tempests and thick darkness. Macalbin, 
with a miserable woman hanging on his arm, 
and her child on his back, — creatures that he 
had snatched from death, — again waded 
through the snows, stumbling over the dead . 
bodies of men and horses at every step, but 
still endeavouring to keep pace with the wag- 
gon, and to cheer his drooping friend with 
the sound of his friendly voice. And this ge- 
nerous effort was twice blest; — it support- 
ed his own spirits, while it communicated 
comfort. Yet dreadful was that night; and 
long, long did Norman remember it. As 
the breeze howled among the leafless trees, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 5Q 

and whistled through the overhanging cliffs, 
it fell on the ear of gloomy fancy like the 
moanings of damned spirits ; and the dark- 
ness, which veiled shapes of horror, made 
him listen more intently to the groans of the 
dying, and the curses of the desperate, which 
were heard in its pause. This was a night to 
quell the stoutest heart, — to wean the wildest 
enthusiast from war and glory. 

Macalbin contrived to place the miserable 
female he had dragged on in a bullock wag- 
gon, which they overtook ; and not without 
great difficulty was this accomplished ; but it 
was not till he reached Lugo that he discover- 
ed this frozen creature to be that Maria Gor- 
don, whom, two years before, he had seen at 
Dunalbin, in all the elegance of modern fa- 
shion. She was now the wife of a poor lieu- 
tenant, disowned by her family, without ener- 
gy, and without recourse, vainly clinging to 
what she had been, and disguising what she 
was. Lady Gordon rigidly persisted in leav- 
ing her " to the fate she had chosen ;" — her 
sister was equally inflexible ; and Sir Archi- 
bald, a moralist as stern as either, left her 
" to the fortune she had made for herself," 
Mansel alone was her anonymous friend. 
When he was plenty of cash, and when she 



do clax-albi: fj 

came into bis head, he, from time to ti 

her a twenty-pound note. Whatever delect 

of prudence was in her <ze\ 

no want of gratitude, either f^r the kind i 
Macalbin had displayed, or the attentions he 
still paid to her condition ?.\\d her ^2\, and, 
perhaps, to herself; a forlorn creature, nursed 
in the lap of luxury, with the helpless ha- 
bits of high life, and the misery of the 
lowest. 

While they halted at Lugo offering battle 
to the enemy, — finding courage and comfort 
in the hope of vengeance, — Craig.gillian 
recovered strength, and again assumed the 
command of Lis regiment. 

During the halt, numerous friends crowded 
to the same house ; a dismal and dismantled 
place, but which now wore the air of a palace. 
Maria Gordon and her child occupied the 
corner of a fire-place, from which green wood 
emitted more smoke than heat. Drummond, 
Macalbin, and his pupils ran now to their 
posts, and now to superintend the culinary 
operations of the poor, bewildered and heart- 
broken piper, — in whicb a long fast made 
them take peculiar interest ; — while their sur- 
ly Ellis stormed the wine-houses, his musquet 
on his shoulder in case of a pudden surprise. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 6\ 

Though poor Hugh was skilled in every man- 
ly art, he had no science in cookery. In vain 
Drummond quickened his operations — "Ne- 
ver mind, don't be nice, piper," said he, " I 
can eat any thing if it be clean, and if not, I 
can take it dirty. Let us have it. Hunger is 
good sauce." 

Flora's parcel of linen had long been lost; 
and, during the hours allotted to sleep, poor 
Hugh washed, or at least thought he washed, 
the last remaining shirts of his friends, while 
they slept ; and as these dried, he diligently 
mended various pairs of boots and shoes. 
Even this was a luxury denied to many offi- 
cers of the highest rank. 

It was the wish of the Commander-in-chief 
to force the enemy to action, but they shrunk 
from a conflict with the desperate valour of 
the English. During the succeeding night, 
therefore, the latter kindled fires along the 
line to deceive the enemy, and resumed their 
march to Corunna. 

On many occasions it was found necessary 
to enforce the temporary requisitions made 
by the commissariat ; for the people of the 
country, fearful alike of friend and foe, and 
suffering equally from the outrages of both, 

vol. iv. e 



02 CLAN-ALBIX, 

were found most tardy in bringing forward 
their slender supplies. 

The humanitv and moderation of Macalbin, 
his conciliatory disposition, and the know- 
ledge which he had now gained of the Spanish 
language, peculiarly fitted him for services 
of this nature ; and he was often employed 
to accompany foraging parties, hy orders of 
General ; and also on more delicate oc- 
casions, when accuracy of observation, fideli- 
ty of report, and the keen vision of an eye ac- 
customed to expatiate among wild and wide 
scenes, enabled him to advance the interests 
of the service to which he was devoted, and 
to gain the esteem of his officers. 

On an expedition of this latter kind. Mac- 
albin was dispatched to some heights on the 
banks of the Minho, the same morning that 
the troops left Lugo. He rode, — and Pat 
Leary, generally a straggler, wandered after 
him, espying a cottage smoke, round which 
cottage some fowls might be stravin^. At 
this period Leary was by no means delicate 
or confined in his notions of property ; he had 
no scruple in thursting into his pouch what- 
ever ammunition he could (u\S, — fowls, — 
bread, — indeed food of any kind, — clothing, 
— or even money. Macalbin said stealing; — 



A NATIONAL TALE. 03 

Leary said lifting ; — and on this point they 
differed, about terms, like other philoso- 
phers. " Sure we came to sarve them, the 
souls," said Pat, indignantly. " And if we 
did, shall we rob them," said Macalbin. " I 
command you not to approach that house/' 
Macalbin had gained the heights, and Leary 
was scrambling after him, when both were sud- 
denly alarmed by a party of the enemy's 
cavalry dashing down the opposite heights, 
while, before the rest, one man furiously pur- 
sued an English officer. He soon far out- 
stripped the speed of his fellows, and gained 
fast on the man he pursued. 

" That is Colonel Gordon, I have knowed 
him by that stump of an ostrich feather ever 
since we left Salamanca. The Frenchman 
will give his plumes a tussel any way." Care- 
less of personal safety, Leary, with delight he 
sought neither to suppress nor conceal, en- 
joyed the probability of Sir Archibald's being 
made prisoner, while Norman eagerly looked 
round for some bridge, some ford on the rapid 
river; but seeing no marks of either, spurred 
down the steeps, and plunged into the stream, 
— struggled with its violence, and, at the 
risk of life, reached the opposite bank, — saw 
the sabre of the French officer descending on 



04 CLAN-ALBIN, 

the head of Gordon, and joined the cry he set 
np for quarter — mercy. That voice seemed 
to arrest the death-stroke that hung over Gor- 
don. The Frenchman, however, unhorsed 
him, tossed his sword into the river, and ex- 
claimed, " You are are the prisoner of France." 
All this passed in the twinkling of an eye, and 
before Norman, recollecting for the first time 
that he was in danger of being surrounded 
by a party of French dragoons, knew which 
way to turn. Yet, to his prostrate countryman 
he instinctively turned and alighted- At this 
moment' the officer, on whom he had not 
yet looked, sprung from his horse, dashed 
sabre and helmet on the frozen snow, and 
leaped forward, exclaiming — 

" Embrace me, Macalbin ! I am Bourke ! 
I am a man again !" 

" Gracious God !" cried Norman, receding 
one step, overcome with astonishment to find, 
not only in life, but in an officer of the French 
Imperial Guard, apparently of high rank, and 
decorated with the splendid insignia of the 
Legion of Honour, his lamented comrade 
« Phelim Bourke." 

" Yes, I urn that Bourke whom the English, 
— for whom I fought and bled, — insulted, de- 
graded, mangled with brutal stripes. Cow- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 65 

ard and slave," lie turned fiercely to Gordon, 
" you shrink beneath me now ! I am that 
Bourke whose country, kindred, family, and 
faith, have for six hundred years suffered 
at the hands of the English every species of 
cruelty, indignity, and oppression ; massacred 
in hot, murdered in cold blood, — proscrib- 
ed, — exiled, — tortured. I am that Bourke 
who shed my blood for the destroyers of my 
race, whose heart lacked gall to make oppres- 
sion bitter, till their chains corroded my indi- 
vidual soul." 

Norman looked on this traitor, Bourke, 
with a mixture of vexation, pity, and asto- 
nishment ; his heart recoiling, and yet drawn 
towards him by the force of sympathies which 
were felt before man knew political duties, or 
lapsed into political sins. Their eyes met 
momentarily ; each suffered a slight feeling 
of embarrassment ; but Bourke, as if eager 
to preserve a friend, ajid to vindicate his ho- 
nour, again resumed discourse. It would 
neither be agreeable, nor perhaps very pru- 
dent, to relate that story of country and family 
which Bourke rapidly and vehemently sketch- 
ed \ and still less so, to detail all those motives 
and imaginary necessities by which he lulled 
his better genius to sleep, and fortified, him.- 

G 2 



f)Q CLAX-ALBIN, 

self in error. Yet let it not be imagined that 
he thought himself a traitor. He said, he 
vowed, that his heart glowed with love to Ire- 
land, of which those who live in her bosom 
can have but a faint perception; and pervert- 
ed as was that love, Norman could not doubt 
of hs existence. This passion seemed even 
more ardent than the burning hatred which 
made him pant to avenge his own and her 
wrongs on those whom, in bitterness of soul, 
he termed " the English." 

A thousand feelings and ideas filled the 
mind and heart of Macalbin, as Bourke, with 
impetuous eloquence, poured his confidence 
into a bosom in which he wished to find sym- 
pathy, and feared to meet aversion. It was 
the confidence of a pent-up, corroded, miser- 
able heart. Bourke, become a reckless man, 
had fallen iuto desperate courses. 

Macalbin had much to say, — much to inquire; 
but the trampling of the horses' feet of that 
party whom Bourke had out-rode, were now 
heard rapidly advancing, tho' the steep banks 
of the river still screened them from view. 
" Hark I" cried Bourke,—' 4 Fly, Macalbin !— 
cross the river ! — It will not be known that it 
is practicable. — Fly ! or I cannot save you ! ,J 
He eagerly waved his hand. Norman leaped 



A NATIONAL TALE. 6/ 

on horseback, exclaiming as he went — " I have 
left a friend in Astorga, the wife of Colonel 
Monro, in the convent of — . See her, protect 
her, — tell her her husband, is well. She will 
tell you who I am, — the claims I have on your 
family." — " I will — I swear I will : — Fly, Mac- 
albin ! — that is a vile word, — gallop though." 

Macalbin plunged into the stream, and got 
over before the party came up. 

The whole interview had not occupied ten 
minutes ; in that short space Bourke had spo- 
ken volumes. When he saw Norman safely 
over, he turned for the first time to his pri- 
soner, who- stood at a little distance, sullen, 
and apparently abashed. The dragoons came 
up, — they had missed their officer, and had 
been seeking him. They would now have 
fired their pistols across the river they believ- 
ed it impossible to cross. Bourke ordered 
them to desist, — to secure their prisoner, and 
resume the route from which they had diverg- 
ed in pursuit. His orders met with prompt 
obedience. Sir Archibald was ordered to 
mount behind one of the soldiers, and form- 
ing a circle round him, they gallopped off, 
leaving Bourke by the river's brink, and Mac- 
albin on the opposite bank. Bourke twisted 
his hand into the flowing mane of his beauti- 



63 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ful and high-bred Andalusian war-horse, as if 
about to vault into the saddle. Macalbin held 
up his hand imploringly, and repeated the 
charges he had given, — the roaring of the wa- 
ters drowned the tones of his voice. Bourke 
replied, but he could not distinguish his words. 
— He placed his hand on his bosom, and 
Bourke repeated the action, — and, for the 
space of a minute, they gazed on each other. 
As Bourke, in the attitude of deep and bit- 
ter thought, leaned his head on the neck of his 
horse, Macalbin fancied that he had never 
seen features, or form, or manner, which de- 
noted so rare a union of intellectual energy 
with physical strength and manly beauty. — 
Lines of deep thought and bold decision now 
contracted his capacious forehead, and stole 
over the gay open countenance of that gal- 
lant and light-hearted soldier who had been 
every man's delight and every woman's love. 
Pride, and scorn, and painful jealousy, now cur- 
led and compressed the bland lip round which 
love and mirth had once sported in wreathed 
smiles. The roving vivacity of his brilliant 
eye was exchanged for the watchful scruti- 
nizing glance of anxious penetration, — or that 
abstracted gaze, straining on an imaginary 
point, which seems, in indifference or con- 



A NATIONAL TALE. Og 

tempt, to withdraw from surrounding objects, 
to fix its contemplation more keenly on the 
mightier world within. It was a powerful, 
and to Norman it was a painful physiognomy. 
He sighed more in sorrow than in anger ; and 
when those strong features underwent a sud- 
den change, cleared, brightened, smiled, as 
the echoes, in a genuine Connaught brogue, 
rung the name of Macalbin, Norman, with a 
thrill of deiight, exclaimed, — " Ah, this is 
Phelim !" 

Leary still came whooping on, though un- 
seen by both. Macalbin could hear Bourke 
cry, — tC Ha! Pat Leary !" He threw his purse 
across the stream, — perceived that picquet of 
cavalry, which Leary with running, and bawl- 
ings, and signals, had drawn to this spot; and 
vaulting into the saddle, waved his sabre 
to Macalbin in farewell, and was instantly 
over the steeps. Norman reached the heights 
where he had originally stood, and saw him 
overtake his party. 

Sir Archibald Gordon was then a prisoner; 
and Macalbin was congratulated on his nar- 
row escape, as Leary had bawled, and truly, 
that in dashing forward to assist Gordon he 
had himself been surrounded. Norman said, 
that he owed his liberty to the generosity of 



70 CLAX-ALBJX, 

the officer into whose power he had so im- 
prudently thrown himself, without the small- 
est means of defence, — without even a sword ; 
for that he had lost when, in danger of drown- 
ing, he had caught by some busies as he 
forded the river. 

" Long life to him! who let you go, Sir, 
and kept . He is a gay fellow 1 war- 
rant him," cried Leary, as the picquet scour- 
ed off in another direction, and left him alone 
with Macalbin. " Now, Sir, I must make 
bould to say, you went much out of your way 
in running after Colonel Gordon. Why not 
let him be recoinnoitring ? Sure he knows 
better about it than you, — aye, or the Com- 
mander-in-chief himself, as he does, with his 
defensible positions." 

It is well known that great discontents pre- 
vailed in this army. Sir Archibald Gordon, 
among others, assumed to himself the right of 
censuring every measure adopted by his com- 
manding officer. He took notes ; he com- 
pared them with those taken by others, as ig- 
norant and assuming as himself, and he re- 
connoitred. Among the growlers was Colonel 
Grant; buthis strict notions of discipline made 
him only grumble in his gizzard, or at most 
in the ear of his nephew. His deference to 



A NATIONAL TALE. ?1 

military authority, indeed, cost him dear; hut 
he contrived to indemnify himself hy unstinted 
abuse and execration of the civil power, whe- 
ther in Spain or elsewhere. Drummond al- 
most worshipped the Commander-in-chief; 
and, during the whole march, he was engaged 
in a succession of quarrels about the proprie- 
ty of his measures. He could have fought 
with the Spaniards, — with the wind, --and with 
his discontented brother. officers all round. In 
vain Macalbin represented to him the indeli- 
cacy, the shocking impropriety, of acting as if 
his feeble sword was needed to defend the 
character of the Commander-in chief. For a 
few days this restrained his violence ; but on 
the night they left Lugo, he swore, " that if Ge- 
neral Moore could tolerate such abominable 
insolence he could not — that he would fight 
Gordon the moment they reached the coast, 
and there was the end on't." He according- 
ly challenged this champion of the discon- 
tented. Macalbin remonstrated, — he became 
sulky, and " would not be treated like a boy." 
Fortunately for Drummond, Sir Archibald 
fell a victim to his own foolish presumption 
before they reached the coast. 

Though Macalbin was uniformly silent, 
respectfully silent, on the measures which 



72 CLAN-ALBIN, 

occasioned so much impertinent discussion, 
violence, and ill blood among his companioi 
he could keenly sympathize with that great 
mind who thought and felt for all ; — who, 
spite of themselves, preserved those violent 
and refractory spirits, and with sublime mag- 
nanimity forgave their irritation ; feeling that, 
like angry children, they knew not what they 
did. 

As the troops approached the coast, Mac- 
albin and Craig-gillian began to concert fu- 
ture measures. Norman, devoted to a higher 
duty, gave up the charge of his beloved pu- 
pils — endeared by mutual sufferings noblv 
supported — to General ; and the Gene- 
ral, expressing a fervent hope of yet callii, 
him his officer, released him from every spe- 
cies of engagement. 

It was settled, that an Irish priest, educated 
at the Irish college of Salamanca, and well ac- 
quainted with the country, should accompa- 
ny Norman back to Astorga. This priest, 
partly spy and partly guide, bad been with 
the army for three months; Craig-gillian fan- 
cied he might depend on his fidelity. It was 
also deemed expedient for them, if they suc- 
ceeded in their mission, to pass, if possible, 
into the Atisturias. That province was still 



A NATIONAL TALE. 73 

comparatively quiet; and Craig-gillian hoped 
that they might find some English vessel ho- 
vering off the coast to convey them to a friend- 
ly port, however distant. 

It was now the 16th of January, that ever- 
memorable day, when the British army, goad- 
ed to desperation, like a lion at bay, turned 
on its fierce pursuers. It would be waste of 
words to attempt any record of the triumphs 
of that day, when General Moore, by a death 
of glory, closed a life of honour and virtue. 

Macalbin's regiment, forming part of the 
brigade of Lord William Bentinck, perform- 
ed prodigies of valour. On the courage and 
steadiness of this brigade, the fortune of the 
day depended ; and the meanest soldier was 
inspired with the soul of a hero. It may na- 
turally be supposed that they greatly suffer- 
ed ; but every expression of private sorrow was 
hushed in that irreparable loss, which each 
man felt as a citizen, and wept as a soldier. 

The shattered remains of the regiment to 
which Norman was attached, and in which he 
still had a lieutenant's command, were retiring 
from the sharp trial it had been honoured to 
sustain, when the soldiers received the heart- 
striking intelligence, that he, whose voice had 
a few hours before sent them on to victo- 

▼OL IV. II 



74 CLAN ALBlxV, 

ry, was no more. They had already heard 
that the Commander-in-chief was wounded ; 
but they hoped, because they wished, that his 
wound was not mortal. While Norman's spi- 
rit still trembled beneath the stroke which 
laid low the object of his earliest and fondest 
enthusiasm, — that great captain and gallant 
soldier, whose brilliant career had first awa- 
kened his ambition, and given aim and value 
to the ennobling impulse, — he was met by 
Craig-gillian's servant. 

" O, Sir, my master !" cried the apparently 
distracted Hector, wringing his hands. 

" Is Craig-gillian dead?" said Norman, 
with the calmness of one familiar with death. 

"Alas, Sir, no, — I hope — I fear — O my poor 
master! — how shall I return to Glen-gillian 
witbout my master !" 

Norman found it necessary to command 
coberence. He learned that Craig. gillian 
bad been severely wounded in the beginning 
of the action by a grape-shot. He had fallen 
from his horse ; and the soldiers had carried 
him out of the way of the cavalry, and left 
him by the side of a dike, till assistance could 
be procured. It was a critical moment. He 
was left alone; and when Hector returned 
with a spring- waggon, his master was gone. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 7$ 

Some soldiers said the English had carried him 
off; and others, — wounded men, scattered 
over the field, and some of them near to the 
spot, — affirmed that he had been carried oil 
by a party of the enemy's cavalry. Unwilling 
to admit this belief, Hector, neglectful of his 
duty, had run to Corunna, inquiring at every 
one he met for Colonel Monro. Silence con- 
firmed the testimony of the wounded soldiers. 
This had happened about five o'clock in the 
afternoon, it was now between ten and ele- 
ven. The embarkation of the troops had com- 
menced; and the town exhibited such a scene 
of tumult, confusion, and misery, as has sel- 
dom been witnessed. Norman's duty was now 
at an end, — he embraced his pupils, — and 
those brave boys, boys only in years, who 
had so nobly borne up against danger and 
hardship, for the first time, melted into tears 
as he held them to his war.n heart. He took 
a short, kind farewell of the soldiers that ga- 
thered around, — gave Pat Leary the Napoleon 
d'ors Bourke had thrown to that " gay fel- 
low," and told him they were a countryman's 
gift. Leary had time for thanks, but no time 
for conjecture. Djra was missing ; and, like 
many other half- distracted men, who ran a- 
bout looking for wives and children-, be was 



Jf) CLAX-ALBIN, 

forced to run, exclaiming, u God bless vour 
honour, and be wid you till I see you again 
myself! If I should have lost the cratur now, 
and little Paddy, after dragging them this 
length." 

Macalbin next repaired to Craig.gillian's 
quarters. The short conversations he held 
with different officers he met on the way con- 
firmed his worst fears. His friend, if alive, 
was certainly in the hands of the enemy. At 
Craig-gillian's quarters he found Hugh, and 
also the Irish priest, who had been diligently 
employed all day in procuring equipments for 
the projected journey to Astorga. 

Overcome by the complicated miseries which 
gathered round him, for a few minutes he 
leaned on Craig. gillian's bed. But this was 
no time for the indulgence of grief, however 
justifiable its motive. He must act as well 
as feel. He listened to the detail of arrange- 
ments made by the priest, and gave what far- 
ther directions were necessary. He received 
from Craijr-<>illian's servant a card, which his 
master had written before he went to battle. 
It contained a short adieu, — Craig- gillian 
foreseeing the probability of duty preventing 
a future meeting, — an earnest recommenda- 
tion of caution, and care of the health vaiu- 



A NATIONAL TALET. 77 

able to so many. Craig-gillian did not neecf 
to recommend Flora and her infant, — if she 
had lived to see her child, — to the kindness of 
Norman. He farther gave Norman directions* 
where he might find his pistols, his watch, his 
purse, and a will written on this same morning. 
He entreated him to sell the watch whenever 
sale was practicable. Craig-gillian's purse 
was almost exhausted, — Macalbin's did not 
contain a single sixpence, — but they had left 
a considerable sum with Flora ; as much as 
would perform the purposes for which it was 
required* Craig-gillian farther begged of 
Norman to preserve this will : he said, that, 
at the time of his marriage, they were all too 
happy to think of settlements, — but now, 
whatever might occur, he wished to secure an 
independent provision for his wife and his 
aunt Margaret, — and also to secure the little 
annuities he gave to many poor and almost 
incalculably distant relatives. His father 
would fulfil his wishes. 

When Macalbin had ended reading Craig- 
gillian's card, he went into the streets. Many 
straggling soldiers and some officers gathered 
round him, inquiring tidings of his deservedly 
popular friend. " Who with me will volun- 
teer a forlorn hope for Colonel Monro/' cried 

H 2 



78 CLAN-ALEIN, 

Norman. " I will," cried every soldier. "Och 
and myself too : I seen a Connauglit man of 
the 50th says Dora and Paddy the rogue is 
embarked already." 

This forlorn hope, led by Craig- gillian's 
faithful Hector, marched for the spot where 
his master had been left. It was almost a 
league from Corunna. The English picquets 
which kept the ground challenged this party, 
and they declared their business. " Then 
God bless you, you may go home," replied 
a shaking voice : " A deserter came over to 
us a little ago, who says the wounded Eng- 
lish colonel died before he reached the French 
head-quarters. We have sent him — the de- 
serter — to head-quarters ; you may question 
him yourself, Mr Macalbin." — " Ellis ! is it 

you, Ellis ?" cried Norman " It is, Sir ; I 

was permitted to take this picquet for a poor 
fellow who has lost his wife somewhere. In 
England I can easily find our regiment." 

" Long life to you, Ellis, English though 
you be , . ,, cried Paddy Lcary. 

Macalbin could not at this moment speak, 
even to the surly, generous Ellis. He turned 
aside to the spot bathed in the blood of Mon- 
ro, and hung over it in agony, to which all 



A NATIONAL TALE. 7Q 

former feelings were blessedness. Death had 
never yet shut out hope. 

The soldiers and Norman returned to Co- 
runna. They were told, that the Commander- 
in-chief had been buried in the citadel two 
hours before. Macalbin gathered voice suf- 
ficient to exhort Leary to get on board of any 
vessel as quickly as possible. He begged 
him to share his gold with Colonel Monro's 
servant, assuring him of ample remuneration. 

" Is it myself you ask a second time," 
said Leary, reproachfully. " Not half, but 
whole ; for sure from yourself I got it all." 

The soldiers ran to the boats ; and Norman, 
unseen, glided to the citadel. The grave he 
sought was already solitary. He stretched 
himself on the cold wet earth, and at that 
moment felt that it would have been happi- 
ness to have died there. A figure approach- 
ed, and he started up to retire. 

" Macalbin! my dear young friend." 

It was the voice of General , always 

gracious when addressing those he liked, 
but now tender and thrilling. Norman felt 
all its power. The General, closely engaged 
in superintending the embarkation, had stolen 
unobserved to pour the tribute of deep — deep 



80 CLAN-ALBIN, 

unavailing sorrow, over the grave of his bo- 
som-friend — over that last home, 

" A cold, a silent, and a lone, 
Where kings have little power.*' 

He bore ordinary losses with a soldier's 
spirit, though his was the softest of brave 
hearts ; but this, alas, was no common loss. 

Macalbin never even attempted to answer , 
he bowed, and moved away. 

" Meet me an hour hence," said the Ge- 
neral. " I am with the embarking troops. 
We have lost Craig-gillan," continued he, 
in a softer tone. " But in the greatness of 
our country's loss, — yet why should our tears 
dim the brightness of his triumph : He died 
as heroes love to die !" 

Norman seized the short interval to visit 
his friend Drummond, who early in the ac- 
tion had been carried from the field severely, 
but not dangerously wounded. Severe but 
not dangerous wounds met but slight atten- 
tion, and excited no sympathy. Drummond's 
chief distress seemed to be impatience — im- 
patience to see Macalbin, after whom he sent 
every body who looked near him— -though 



A NATIONAL TALE. 81 

none thought it necessary to fulfil the pro- 
mise made of finding his friend. 

" I was afraid I was never to see you," said 
Drummond. " Aye it is an ugly wound — 
but never mind that. Poor Craig-gillian ! 
I feel it, Norman, like a brother's loss I — Poor, 
poor Mrs Monro ! I fear it will be very hard 
on her, so devotedly she appeared to love 
him." 

Drummond was groping below the pillow. 
' Yes, Norman, — it was this I sought, my 
ancient heir- loom, — some Jew will take it off 
your hands." It was his favourite watch. 
" You don't know what's before you ; better 
be provided."— Norman absolutely refused 
this generous gift. — " Pray now, dont fret me, 
'tis bad for my wound. Surely you don't 
think me so selfish a scoundrel, as to balance 
betwixt a bauble like that, and a friend ex- 
posed to want, in a strange land." Macalbin 
still refused, and Drummond became so angry, 
that he thought it best to accept of the watch, 
which he gave to the care of Drummond's 
attendant, to be restored after they reached 
England. He, however, gratified his friend, 
by accepting a few of his very few remaining 
dollars. Norman had yet another duty. The 
husband of Maria Gordon had gone to Vigo, 



82 CLAN-ALBIX, 

— she was here alone and in want. Norman's 
party had succoured her all along. By Drum- 
mond's bed-side, he now wrote an order on 
the agent of the regiment, for a small sum 
indeed, — yet it was great for him, — and, when 
landed in England, it might enable her to 
reach some friends in the Highlands, who 
were not too great to be kind, nor too moral 
to be unrelenting to the imprudent sufferer. 

At the appointed minute, Macalbin, having 
taken a sad farewell of his friend Drummond, 
went to the General. 

" These are for you, Mr Macalbin," said 
the General, giving him a parcel of letters, — 
brief letters of introduction to various Spani- 
ards in Gallicia, Zamora, and the Austurias, 
through which provinces he had lately travel- 
led. — " My name is known in Spain : wher- 
ever it can be of use employ it, I beseech 
you. In every Englishman and true Spaniard 
you will find a friend. Tiiink of yourself a- 
lone - of your poor friend's widow. The soon- 
er you leave this the better. It shall be my 
care to write to Glen-gillian, to Lady Augus- 
ta ; — her address is — " 

Norman mentioned it, and the General 
wrote it down with a pencil. — " On ship- 
boar 1 I shall have abundant leisure for those 



A NATIONAL TALE. 83 

melancholy duties. Time presses now. But 
I shall remember all you ought to perform, 
and cannot. Lord Glanville's family will be 
glad to hear of your safety." 

Norman's eyes spoke all his gratitude. He 
would now have gone away. — " Stay one mo- 
ment. Yes, I have some gold left. I am go- 
ing to England — no refusal. It is for another, 
not for you. Old Craig gillian will ten times 
repay me."— Norman took the money without 
farther resistance. They shook hands. — 
" God bless you. See, the day dawns. Hea- 
ven prosper your enterprize !" — They parted. 
Norman returned to Craig-gillian's quarters. 
Hugh, Luath, the Irish priest, all were ready. 
The latter had provided a sort of ecclesiastic 
habit for Norman, to be worn above his wea- 
ther-beaten uniform j and for Hugh, the dress 
of a Gallician peasant. He had procured a 
large leathern bottle of wine, some linen of a 
very coarse sort, a couple of pairs of common 
soldiers' shoes, and a small quantity of Eng- 
lish ship-biscuit. Such were their prepara- 
tions. Norman secured his papers, fastened 
Craig-gillian's pistols in his girdle, gave his 
companions a cup of wine, and, taking Hugh's 
aim, whistled his wolf-dog, and wandered 
from Corunna. 



84 CLAN-ALBIN, 

The priest was well acquainted with the 
different roads. They took a circuitous route 
to avoid the out-posts of the enemy, and, as 
far as possible, those picquets of cavalry, 
which, in every direction, were scouring the 
already exhausted country. About ten o'clock 
they gained some heights three leagues south 
of Corunna, which commanded an extensive 
view of the bay and the ocean. Macalbin 
paused a little while, and his companions 
passed on. Those transports were now get- 
ting under weigh which bore home the most 
wretched freight that ever touched on a land 
of liberty. Yet, to a soldier, there was tri- 
umph in that sight. The army had retired to 
their ships unmolested, and in the teeth of a 
thwarted and beaten foe. 

He stretched his clasped hands towards the 
sea, now mottled by the sails of England, the 
only object that spoke of home. — " God be 
with the remnant of my countrymen," was his 
fervent ejaculation, — rt though the best and 
bravest sleep in Corunna !" 

The priest advised that they should make 
one day's march due south, — to the people of 
the country declare themselves pilgrims go- 
ing to the shrine of St Jago de Compostella ; 
and to the French, should they have the nils* 



A NATIONAL TALE. 85 

fortune to meet any straggling party, boldly 
proclaim themselves spies, — demand assist- 
ance, and produce despatches with which they 
were charged from Marshal Soult. With 
these despatches the priest was already fur- 
nished. Indeed he did not appear new to 
such adventures. 

His counsel was implicitly followed, for his 
companions knew no better plan ; and though 
doubts of his good faith sometimes darkened 
the mind of Norman, he was aware of the im- 
prudence of betraying any symptom of mis- 
trust. The first day passed on, heavy and 
cheerless. They made a long march, though 
they had all more need of repose from severe 
fatigue than a renewal of toil. Fortunately 
they met with no interruption, though in the 
course of the day they occasionally encoun- 
tered wandering houseless peasants, eagerly 
inquiring after the fortunes of that war which 
had produced all their calamities. 

In the evening, the travellers were received 
in their alleged character of pilgrims, at the 
house of a substantial peasant. They were 
invited to partake of the family supper, — a 
mess stewed in rancid oil, and poisoned with 
garlic, which hunger made delicious. There 

vol. IV. I 



86 CLAN-ALBIN, 

are situations in which Lochiel's pillow of snow 
becomes luxury. The priest was lively and 
voluble ; he cbaunted Ave Marias, and then 
sung tiranas ; and their host in return played 
some provincial tunes on the sort of bag-pipe 
known in Gallicia. Macalbin's mind was 
neither attuned to mirth nor music, nor could 
he tell the news of the war. But the priest 
was apropos to every thing. Yet the night was 
not without its pleasures to Norman. The good 
woman brought water to bathe the feet of her 
pilgrim guests. It is a Highland custom, and 
led to his cherished home, — that home from 
which he had not heard for five long months. 
He also saw the little children kiss the hands 
of their parents, and repeat their prayers be- 
fore they retired to sleep. Many travellers 
have been struck with little traits of resem- 
blance between the Scots and the Spaniards. 
It was long since Norman's heart had been 
refreshed by the contemplation of quiet do- 
mestic affections and duties. He drew his 
hand fondly over the little heads : 

c God bless their happy faces, smiling; in the light 
' Of their own cottage hearth ; — fair subduing 



1 sight.' 



A NATIONAL TALE. 87 

This combination of words did not then ex- 
ist, but the sentiment was Norman's. 

The family gave up their own beds to ac- 
commodate their guests ; and, more generous 
still, concealed a sacrifice which Norman 
would not have permitted. On this night, 
after many nights of watching and days of 
toil, he slept long and profoundly, and awoke 
refreshed and invigorated. He offered pay- 
ment to his good hosts, but their feelings of 
honour seemed hurt by the proposal. " I 
cannot offend these good people," said he to 
the priest. " No, sure, besides it would be 
quite out of character." 

At Salamanca, Norman had bought two of 
those charms called in Spain numezuela, — the 
miniature model of a hand made of jet, with 
the thumb thurst out between the finger.s, 
which mothers in Spain tie round the wrists 
of their little children, for the same purpose 
that Moo me had tied a charmed thread round 
Norman's wrist, to ward off the bad effects of 
the evil eye. He bound these pretty toys 
round the wrists of the two younger children 
as he kissed them. He knew this charmed at- 
tention would gratify their parents, and it 
could harm no one. They were indeed high- 
ly pleased and gratified ; and they took leave 



88 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of each other with mutual kindness and ci- 
vility. 

It would be tedious to dwell on the adven- 
tures of the travellers, by flood and fell, during 
the suceeedingpdays. They struck into a new 
route, carefully avoiding the few towns on the 
way, till at Villa Franca they were compelled 
to hah to procure new shoes, and also to fabri- 
cate fresh passports and despatches, at which 
the priest was wonderfully dexterous. Their 
situation here was extremely hazardous, — the 
town was completely under French influence, 
and filled with sick French soldiers. During 
the evening of their stay, while the priest was 
abroad in search of provisions, a large parcel 
was brought to their quarters in the outskirts 
of the town, addressed to the youngest of the 
three travellers bearers of despatches. This 
was Norman. u Hugh we are discovered T' 
cried he, opening the parcel. It contained 
some clothes, linen, shoes, and a billet, in 
.which was written, " By the Bierzo, without 
the loss of a moment." 

It was the warning of friendship, — of 
Bourke. Norman would not avail himself of 
all his kindness, — he left every thing as he 
found it, but he lost not a moment in flying, 
with Hugh and Luath only, leaving some 



A NATIONAL TALE. 8Q 

money for the priest, and "a message bidding 
him pursue the route he thought safest. They 
were somewhat acquainted with this part of 
the road, but entire strangers in the Bierzo, 
a beautiful and romantic track of country, but 
now exhibiting many of the ravages of war, — 
vineyards destroyed, — houses and villages 
burnt in every direction. Still they got on ; 
faint and weary sometimes, and sometimes 
thinking of the olla podrida of their good Gal- 
lician peasant as very delicate fare. 

Hugh was pleased that they bad got rid of 
their travelling companion, as his presence 
was a continual restraint on confidential con- 
versation. Norman was indeed little inclined 
to talk even to Hugh, yet he told the Piper 
the story of Bourke, whom he fancied dead, 
having escaped from prison by the aid of a 
priest, whom Norman imagined to be Father 
Ullie, though, in the abrupt narrative of 
Bourke, no name had been mentioned : That 
he had gone to France, having relatives, — 
exiled relatives, — in that service : That he had 
been received with great kindness, distin- 
guished and promoted. Those interested in 
the discovery had found, that the strength 
and decision of his character, when develop- 
ed by favouring circumstances, equalled the 

I 2 



90 CLAN-ALBIN, 

flexibility of his universal genius ; and that 
the soldier, who excelled all his companions 
in the ranks, was likely to surpass all rivals in 
the field. Promotion, to a certain extent, he 
rapidly acquired. — It was the policy of the 
person at the head of the French government 
to conciliate those discontented Irish gentle- 
men, who retain great family influence among 
the lower Irish. Bourke was honoured but not 
trusted ; the eye of suspicion was upon him ; 
he felt it, — baleful and blighting to his open 
and generous, though perverted nature ; he 
feared that he seemed an object of suspicion, 
and was miserable. He had the firmest con- 
viction of his own integrity ; yet he never 
heard the words traitor, deserter, rebel, pro- 
nounced, without mingled shame and bitter- 
ness. 

All this had Norman gathered from the 
broken conversation he had with Bourke, — 
Bourke whom he loved, pitied, and condemn- 
ed. 

Hugh was all amazement ; and for some 
hours permitted his generally-silent compa- 
nion to sigh in silence, without using any of 
the kindly, soothing arts he employed to ba- 
nish sorrow, and which Norman valued for 
their innocent motive. Norman could not do 



A NATIONAL TALE. Ql 

less than listen when Hugh sung him doleful 
Gaelic ditties, and told him the long tale of 
Cean O'Cathan : But when he simply talked of 
home, and the young lady of Dunalbin, and 
good things to come, Norman loved to listen ; 
to hear from the lips of another fond follies 
with which he durst not trust his own imaei- 
nation. But still he sighed. — " Then dear 
don't," would Hugh sometimes say. " You 
know yourself, for Moome has often told 
you, a drop of blood falls from the heart at 
every sigh. I heard her once say so to the 
lady Monimia herself, and to poor Flora, once 
she rode over to see us, few weeks after Ma- 
jor Hector came home, and would be sighing 
every minute without thinking. Alas, its not 
yet two years." 

" O Hugh, how can we announce his loss 
to our poor Flora ; — this is the hardest pull, — 

yet for that we must prepare To-morrow, I 

hope, w r e shall reach Astorga." 

Towards sunset on the following day the 
worn travellers perceived the castle and towers 
cf Astorga, which formed a striking object in 
the distance. 

It was dark before they ventured to ap- 
proach the town, which was at this time the 
head quarters of the French Emperor. With 



Q2 CLAN-ALBIN, 

some difficulty they escaped the military pa- 
troles. Norman left Hugh and poor Luath in 
an obscure street, and glided to the great 
square with the swiftness of a spirit. A blaze 
of torches round the quarters of the Emperor 
discovered the convent centinelled ! It was 
now partly an hospital and partly military 
quarters. Norman looked round in anguish ! 
Whither was he now to turn. His distinguish- 
ed figure, and natural air of superiority, ac- 
coutred a3 he was in the motley garb of 
wretchedness, only rendered him more obvi- 
ous to suspicion. He ventured to that quarter 
of the town in which a gentleman dwelt to 
whom Flora had been recommended. Again 
the blaze of lights and the figures of soldiers 
met his eye. — The dwelling of Flora's protec- 
tor was now occupied by an officer of Bona- 
parte's staff, and he had himself fled to join 
the Junta, to which assembly he was a deputy. 
This, Norman learned from a Spaniard, a man 
of a gentlemanlike figure, whom in these de- 
sperate circumstances he ventured to interro- 
gate. — " The Carmelite nuns ?"■ — They had 
been permitted to retire to a convent in Na- 
varre, by special favour of the Emperor. A 
Spanish nobleman of the highest rank, who 
had embraced the interest of the usurper, be- 



A NATIONAL TALE. Q3 

ing nephew to the abbess. — " Navarre/' re- 
peated Norman. The Spaniard turned quick- 
ly on him: " You are English, Sir!" — "Alas, 
I am." — " Follow me, — with confidence, — I 
am a Spaniard." Norman obeyed, glid- 
ed after his conductor through several bye- 
streets ; and entered a lone house in a de- 
serted quarter of the town. It was now too 
late for partial confidence. He told his storj?. 
His unknown friend placed some bread and 
wine before him, and left him without saying 
one word. Before Norman had time to ar- 
range his scattered thoughts, or to form any 
plan for the future, his conductor returned 
with Hugh and Luath, and he was convinced 
that his confidence was not misplaced. It ap- 
peared that this gentleman recollected seeing 
him with Craig-gillian, and an officer of Ge- 
neral Moore's staff, soliciting the Spaniard 
who had now fled, to protect the deserted wife 
of an English colonel. By an artifice which 
the situation of his country alone could pal- 
liate, this gentleman affected to be a zealous 
friend of the French interests, that he might 
the better serve his native land. 

This generous Spaniard had sufficient ad- 
dress and influence to obtain all the intelli- 
gence the wanderers needed. On the day the 



94 CLAN-AL13IN, 

English left Astorga, the English lady had 
born a son ; two weeks afterwards, when the 
religious community with whom she found re- 
fuge retired to Navarre, she had been ear- 
nestly urged to accompany them by those 
Spaniards who had pledged themselves to af- 
ford her that protection they could no longer 
extend even to their own female relatives. 
The English lady, and those of the nuns who 
remained with the abbess, were accordingly 
accompanied to Pampeluna by several French 
officers returning home in bad health ; so that 
there was no doubt of their safety. 

This information v\as to a certain decree 
consoling. The Spaniard was not kind by 
halves : — for a week, the longest period they 
would remain, he, with infinite hazard to him- 
self concealed his English guests. This was 
a most seasonable repose. They recovered 
strength to prosecute their journey to Navarre. 
By means of their kind host, they also pro- 
cured clothes, necessaries of various kinds, 
and one mule. Wrapped up in his capa, some- 
what like his Highland plaid, Norman now 
looked like a young and noble Castilian ; and 
his host assured him, that he might with all 
Frenchmen very safely report himself to be 
what his forged passports bore, — a Casti- 



A NATIONAL TALE t 05 

lian gentleman, accompanied by his ser- 
vant an Austurian, — travelling to Pampeluna 
from Astorga, on business for the Emperor. 
This was a bold measure, and, as Norman felt, 
a base resource, which he hoped never to em- 
ploy. 

At midnight their host led them through the 
same labyrinth by which they had entered his 
house. They passed the patroles, found 
their solitary mule beyond the town on the 
road to Leon, — took leave of their generous 
host, and again set out in dread of adventures, 
— the squire and the baggage mounted, and 
the wandering knight on foot followed by his 
dog. 

It was now the middle of February. The 
snows were fast melting on the lower chains 
of the mountains. The rains were violent, 
the roads wretched, the rivers swollen, and e- 
very circumstance was so adverse, that when, to 
add to their misfortunes, poor Hugh was at- 
tacked by a violent fit of rheumatism, Norman 
was compelled to wait for a more favourable 
season. 

Between Leon and Manchilla they had the 
good fortune to fall in with several stragglers 
from Romana's broken army, who were return- 
ing to Biscay, their native province, to wait a 



Qb* CLAN-ALB1N, 

more favourable opportunity of rejoining their 
respective corps. As they had a common e- 
nemy to avoid, and a common interest to pur- 
sue, they agreed to travel together for greater 
security and comfort. By the representations 
of these soldiers, and from invincible dislike 
to stratagem, Norman was induced to change 
the plan of his route, and to reach Olite, the* 
town nearest the point of his destination, 
through the mountainous parts of the Astu- 
rias and Biscay. This route was no doubt 
circuitous, but it was safe. The open coun- 
try was on all sides over-run by the invader, 
who, like a repelled wave, now rolled on with 
accumulated force ; but the mountaineers of 
Biscay and the Austurias still cherished the 
hope of mountain liberty. 

At a mountain-village, near one of the 
sources of the Ebro, the whole party waited 
the recovery of the Piper, and more favour- 
able weather. In the meanwhile, Norman 
made the requisite preparations for their fu- 
ture pilgrimage. He had hitherto minuted 
down every observation on the country through 
which he passed, which he hoped might 
one day be of use to the cause of Spain, — At 
this dnrk moment abandoned of all but hope, 
and honour, and a generous ally. By mean< 



A NATIONAL TALE. Q7 

of a peasant, he procured from pow- 
der and shot, writing paper, and pencils. 
Here he also bought some skins for a shelter 
in those nights when he expected to sleep 
wherever Heaven directed ; — in the cabin of a 
shepherd, or under the friendly shade of a 
pine-tree or a rock. Thus, in preparing for 
the future, and striving to make the best of 
the present, passed an irksome fortnight. 

This was the first winter that Norman had 
ever passed without the pale of a domes- 
tic hearth. Now cut off from all intelli- 
gence with home; smarting under the recent 
loss of a very dear friend; far as ever from 
accomplishing the object of his hazardous 
journey; and but too much under the influ- 
ence of an imagination haunted by despond- 
ing images, — the fortnight in which he watch- 
ed by his sick friend, comprehended an age of 
misery. 

But this season was not gloomy to him a- 
lone. Winter is also come in Eleenalin, and 
winter is gone, — the dreadful winter of 1808-9. 
Yet Monimia was there, though Norman had 
not the happiness to know it. 

The preceding winter, which he had passed 
in Ireland, was one of great hardship over all 
the Highlands and Isles of Scotland. The crop 

VOL. IV. K 



Q8 CLAN-ALBIN, 

had been scanty, the season wet, and the har- 
vest very late. Lady Augusta had made many 
exertions of forethought and wisdom to aid 
the few poor families remaining within her 
reach. As spring advanced, the poor High- 
landers, having almost everywhere consumed 
the seed which was to sow the ground, began 
to destroy their famished cattle, for want of 
fodder to keep them alive. Young Craig- 
gillian had early foreseen these hardships, 
and consulted with his father. 1 hey had no 
command of money, as they had builded, 
planted, and improved, to the utmost extent 
of their capital. They, however, contrived to 
raise cash for a purpose so necessary ; and the 
produce of the Transatlaritic GUn-Albin 
wheat, and Indian corn, sent down the Mo- 
hawk and Hudson rivers, rc-shipped at New 
York, landed at Fort- William early in spring, 
and conveyed across the country by long 
trains of panniered little horses, nourished 
the people of Glen-gillian and the surround- 
ing districts, while too many Highlanders 
suffered all the miseries of famine. Craig- 
gillian's was a cheap but most useful charity . 
These poor people had all money, hard-sav- 
ed money, but they could not convert it in? 
bread: But " while the famine was sere in 



A NATIONAL TALE. 09 

the land/' his people had bread, and blessed 
him. 

But the miseries of the desolating winter 
of 1808-9, no foresight could avert, no kind- 
ness alleviate : — they were those of war. 

There is no family in the Highlands of Scot- 
land which is not closely connected with the 
army, generally by the nearest and dearest of 
all ties, and always by those of kindred, and 
ancient and friendly neighbourhood. In that 
country, after a severe campaign, in every 
glen, and in every dwelling, is heard " the 
voice of weeping and great lamentation." 
To them every occasion of national triumph 
is accompanied by a visitation of the severest 
domestic affliction. There is something in 
triumph and victory which has power to as- 
suage or suspend the sorrows of the stronger 
sex ; but what can console tiie tender heart, 
whose agony is increased by the shout of pa- 
triotic exultation, who " refuses to be com- 
forted,' ' bitterly reflecting, that " it is pur- 
chased bv the blood which was dearest to me." 

The experience of twenty years of warfare, 
will unhappily have taught too many to sym- 
pathise in those feelings of anxious suspense 
with which the inhabitants of Glen-gillian 
and the lonely dwellers in Eleenalin, ex- 
pected the arrival of the post in the depth 



100 CLAN-ALBIN, 

c;f this sad winter. Too many can still recol- 
lect those dreadful days when the mere co- 
lour of a seal had power to raise the soul to 
momentary bliss, or overwhelm it with des- 
pair; — too many can understand the dreadful 
hope with which this insulated people tore 
open their long delayed letters and newspa- 
pers, — compelled by their situation to apply 
the poisoned chalice to their own lips, — to 
read first with their own eyes what might prove 
the death-warrant of their dearest hopes. The 
situation of the army had excited great anxie- 
ty, which the long absence of intelligence did 
not tend to lessen. In those days, Lady Au- 
gusta would fix her powerful eyes on Moni- 
mia, who read their letters and papers, as if, 
in the countenance of the reader, she looked 
for life or death. — " Thank heaven !" would 
Monhnia say, sitting down, and fetching her 
breath with a long sigh : " Thank heaven ! we 
may still hope, — there is no news." In the mere 
»nd momentary absence of confirmed mis- 
fortune, she felt something like reviving hope. 
The lady never spoke; but Moome would re- 
ply, — " Blessed be the Highest for this one 
day, darling. No news is good news now.* 1 

" Ah, Moome, how miserable are those 
days when no news is good news." Moni- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 101 

mia was already dissatisfied with what had 
just excited her gratitude, — anxious, and al- 
most as unhappy as ever. 

The battle of Corunna was at length fought : 
Craicr-gillian had fallen ; — and Norman had 
gone to poor Flora, — with what hope of suc- 
cess no one could tell. The General, from 
time totime,till he again left England, sent the 
kindest letters, and forwarded in the safest 
manner all that they sent to him, — but he 
could give no intelligence of the wanderers. 
Spring, summer, autumn, passed away, and 
still no intelligence. Not one of the many 
notes Norman had written in Gaelic, and en- 
trusted to peasants, muleteers, Guerillas, and 
spies of the Spanish government, ever reach- 
ed Scotland. 

While Norman is still seated by the sick- 
bed of the Piper, reading and re-reading the 
minutes of his journey, and revolving bitter 
fancies, we will return to Monimia, and ac- 
count for her present residence in Eleenalin, 
which she said she was never more to leave. 

When Lord Glanville went from Ireland to 
attend his duty in parliament, the ministry, 
having floundered on from blunder to blun- 
der, were at a dead-set ; clinging to the frail- 
est reed for support, and almost without a reed 

K 2 



102 CLAN-ALBIN, 

to which they could cling. Some question con- 
nected with Ireland was to be agitated, in which 
the countenance of a nobleman, interested in 
the fortunes of that country, was peculiarly 
desirable. Lord Glanville, at this time sorely 
pinched by poverty, talked more than ever of 
the depreciated currency . His lady said, " Non- 
sense ! — the persons who played at her con- 
certs took a fifty-pound note for fifty pounds, 
and thanked the Swiss who paid them j unless 
they happened to be very fashionable, in 
which case they still took the note at its no- 
minal value, but omitted the thanks. For a 
fifty-pound note", she said/' her people could 
buy fifty pounds worth of exotics, — artificial 
flowers, — lights, &c. &c. ; — and she had no 
doubt but the butcher, mercer, and uphol- 
sterer, would be equally complaisant, though, 
she owned, they had not for some time back 
been tried. It was nonsense to talk more." 

His lordship explained, and her ladyship as- 
serted. He quoted his big books, and she 
brought her little instance. 

Something, strongly resembling a quarrel, 
often ensued, and Monimia withdrew; but 
in vain ; both parties appealed to her as a last 
resort. — " My dear Monimia, you have some 
understanding, — Lady Glanville is as obsti- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 103 

nate as a pig ;" — and his Lordship entered in- 
to such a labyrinth of currency, credit, and 
national wealth, that the share of understand- 
ing he allowed Monimia became completely 
bewildered. 

" My dear Mrs Montague, I'll give you a 
case in point. Last night I lost fifty guineas 
at picquet to that Lady Gordon — you'll see 
if she refuse a bank of England note for that 
sum, — which I hope your Lordship has to 
spare ; it is little I lose in this way. I hate 
play. I can't indeed be troubled with it." 

" If your ladyship lost fifty guineas last 
night, you must find them, if you can, this 
morning — 1 have no money." 

" Is this well-bred, Mrs Montague ? I refer 
it to you." 

Mrs Montague played with her tea-spoon 
for a half-minute, and then said, " Will your 
Lordship permit me to be your banker on this 
occasion ?" — " Faith, with all my heart," re- 
plied the smiling Lord, who formerly used to 
assure Monimia that he would ruin her, but 
now laboured to allay all pecuniary fears, if 
she had any. — " I'm sure you are a dear, good 
creature," said Lady Glanviile, " and I don't 
know how much I'm obliged to you. I'm 
sure I shall never know how to live without 



104 CLAN'-ALBIX, 

you."— " You must though," said Lord Glan- 
ville, sitting down again. " Moniniia, I must 
scold you now, for persisting in the cold, re- 
served manners you carry into public, — be- 
lieve me, it won't do. Thank God, Lady 
Glanville has no daughters ; she could do no- 
thing for them ; and till you give up that 
mortified air, you can do nothing for yourself. 
Every body says Lord Glanville's niece is 
charming, fascinating; — but so proud, so cold. 
Believe me, I know the world, — the modern, 
masculine world : — The tables are fairly turn- 
ed on the sex ; — men don't fall in love, now- 
a-days, will she, nill she, — especially in the 
bustle of London. Dr Johnson remarks, that 
no man is apt to fall foolishly in love in Lon- 
don : — variety, distraction, give the cool- 
ness necessary to weigh all the pros and 
cons of fortune, connection, family inte- 
rest, &c. &c." — "Every thing but the qua- 
lities of the ladv, and I don't wish it other- 
wise," replied Monimia, smiling ; " I have 
no ambition to inspire a foolish love." 

" O, an understood thing !" cried Lord 
Glanville ; — " you must pardon the foolishly, 
however ; I should have said desperately. 
However, you must look about, — not anxious- 
ly, not eagerly, but with a certain disengaged 



A NATIONAL TALE. 105 

* 

air. There is that girl Lady Gordon has 
produced this season, — since I am forced into 
these matters ; — see you how flourishing a 
game they play, without your beauty, ta- 
lents, or accomplishments ; — she takes prodi- 
giously ; — in the lobby of the House I have 
heard her name." 

" Indeed, my Lord, I have no desire to be 
brought before the House in any shape," said 
Monimia, smiling. — " Pob, nonsense ! in the 
shape of a rich commoner's wife it might do 
very well ; but as a peer's, admirable !" 

" Yes, indeed, admirable !" repeated Lady 
Glanville. " I'm sure I would be so happy 
to seeyou handsomely established, my dear!" 
Monimia, as became her, was all gratitude. 

Indolence prevented Lady Glanville from 
having any enjoyment in the expensive crowds 
assembled round her ; for the gratification of 
her personal tastes, she would far rather have 
lain en dishabille on her lounge, sipping her 
chocolate, and seeing, i wave before the half- 
shut eye,' the plates of the dresses for the 
month, ana\ the pages of the almanacks des 
gourmands, the only work she ever read ; tho' 
as all the world now reads, when asked if she 
had seen such fashionable poems and novels 
as obtained notoriety, — " She had of course 
seen them." 



100 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Nature had fitted her for the indolent sul- 
tana queen of a Turkish harem ; but habit had 
made her consider minute attention to every 
part of her establishment, — -dress, equipages, 
and entertainments, — as her bounden duty. 
To be without any expensive luxury posses- 
sed by persons of a certain rank, seemed a 
crime against her family ; for she was noble 
and English. Thus a mind, languidly re- 
volving round the decencies of station, — with- 
out the ambition of notoriety, or the love of 
fashion, — rendered her as expensive as their 
most enthusiastic votaries-. 

The wasteful habits, rather than the ex- 
pensive tastes of Lady Glanville, combined, 
with slighter causes, to throw her lord into 
very serious embarrassments in the course of 
this season. He often appeared anxious, and 
sometimes miserable ; while his lady, serene- 
ly slothful, increased ever)" day in beauty and 
embonpoint. 

Her fine complexion became more brilliant- 
ly transparent. The exquisite proportions of 
her form expanded into that voluptuous lux- 
uriousness which high modern taste has de- 
clared the perfection of female loveliness. 
"When this mature, sleepy, and luxurious 
beauty, decorated by the hands of graceful 



A NATIONAL TALE. 107 

negligence in the tempting demi-exposure 
of fashionable matronly costume, appeared in 
public, leaning in helpless elegance on a pale 
but lovely girl, with a face all mind, and that 
mind all care, it is not wonderful that the lat- 
ter was often overlooked, while the former 

was declared a Barri, a Montespan, a . 

About the close of the session Lord Glan- 
ville's affairs, more and more involved, were, 
by the accelerated motion of compound inter- 
est, hastening to a crisis. The ministry were 
also becoming more and more odious and 
alarmed ; and a circle of clever young men, 
attached to Lord Glanville's party, were (in 
private) laughing more than ever at those long, 
lean, pedantic, set speeches, larded with 
scraps of Greek and Latin, which evidently 
were not his own, and at those skip-hop-and- 
jump replies, which as certainly were the un- 
doubted offspring of his own brain. Lord 
Glanville's principles might have withstood 
the temptations of poverty, but wounded vani- 
ty was a sorer evil. Lady Gordon, upon this, 
contrived to let him hear many of the sayings, 
and much of the ridicule of the young pro- 
teges of his party, and even produced a writ- 
ten document, — an epigram. There was no 
standing this. At her parties, to which he 



108 CLAX-ALBIN, 

now occasionally went, lie met with a cer- 
tain Secretary , a Scotchman, and her 

relation. The gentlemen sometimes convf 
ed together ; and by and by Lord Glanville 
began to talk at Monimia, about something 
he chose to call the hereditary Toryism of their 
family. 

The great question was now to be discuss- 
ed. Solicitation, flattery, and promises on 
the one hand, wounded vanity, neglect, and 
poverty on the other, produced the desired 
effect. Yet it was not Lord Glanville that 
swerved an inch from the faith he had ever 
followed in public life. The situation and 
interests of the country, — any thing, — every 
thing, was altered, except Lord Glanville, 
whose consistency remained unshaken, even 
when he went over to the other side of the 
house on the important day, with the exact 
air and manner of Mr Mathews in Sir Fret- 
ful Plagiary, restless and conscience. smit, — 
sending round a fearful scanning glance, for 
censure and suffrage, afraid to look manful- 
ly round. — Even then, vanity found it more 
easy to affirm that the great sun revol\ 
round this little O, the earth, than to admit 
that the splendid, life-giving luminary stood 
firm, the centre of revolving worlds. The 



A NATIONAL TALE. 10Q 

state of the country was totally changed, — 
Lord Glanville stood immoveable. 

Tnis wonderful revolution broke upon Mo- 
nimia one evening as she entered the draw- 
ing-room of Glanville-house, where a small 
party of gentlemen were waiting the sum- 
mons to dinner. She was in succession pre- 
sented to Mr Secretary , Mr , an 

envoy, and half a dozen noblemen and gen- 
tlemen, all statesmen and courtiers. Moni. 
mia quickly perceived her country, — and the 
end of all Lord Glanville' s endless speeches 
and prophecies, while struggling with a sense 
of right, yet submitting to act against his 
conscience, — bribed and betrayed by va- 
nity. 

Her first feeling was surprise; and while 
under its influence, from a convenient dis- 
tance, she examined the distinguished per- 
sonages with whom she had the honour to be 
thus unexpectedly associated. They were 
wonderfully like other walking gentlemen — 
a little more pompous, and a good deal more 
formal perhaps, yet every one completely his 
own man — except the new-made courtier, 
whose honours appeared most irksome to the 
wearer. Poor Lord Glanville fidgeted about, 
blew his nose, rubbed his hands, stirred the 

VOL. IV. I. 



110 CLAN-ALBIN, 

lire, pulled the bell-rope, and in his heart 
cursed the cook for prolonging this awkward 
and nearly silent meeting. There is some 
piviot in the neck of an Irishman, which the 
gentlemen of Great Britain appear to be con- 
structed without, and which is in perpetual 
motion when his spirits are agitated, whether 
by gaiety or anxiety. Lord Glanville could 
neither look to the right nor the left, nor 
straightforward ; but his head following the 
motion of his eyes, he snatched little start- 
ling glances in every direction, and could no- 
where fix his eye. Vanity, which in all cases 
ultimately bore him out, had not yet triumph- 
ed over sensibility. The stolen glances he 
turned on Monimia, whom his own feelings 
erected into a judge and condemner of his 
conduct, were as distressing to her as morti- 
fying to himself. His conduct had been con- 
temptible, his distress was almost ludicrous; 
and yet Monimia, without any esteem for hi^ 
character, or much affection for his person, 
felt that he was her father's brother ; and w ith 
a mixture of chagrin and sorrow, viewed the 
pitiful figure he now made, destitute alike I 
the dignity of fair principle, or the collect; 
effrontery which supplies its place, so far as 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 1 1 

to give at least the imposing semblance of a 
man. 

A splendid cage in this drawing-room hap- 
pened to be inhabited by a large and beauti- 
ful grey parrot, which, in the days of other 
years, Lady Glanville's Swiss had most un- 
luckily instructed in politics, about the same 
time his lord was pompously announcing 
to the world that he was initiating the heir 
of the house or Glanville into the principles 
of the illustrious man he affected to call 
his " illustrious friend Charles James Fox." 
The bust of that illustrious friend, and some 
others, Monimia perceived had this morning 
been removed from their places, to prevent 
all awkward meetings or recollections. Un- 
luckily, the same care had not been taken to 
remove the pet-parrot; and still more unluc- 
kily, the parrot, unacquainted with the late 
change of affairs, saw no necessity for re- 
nouncing old principles and practices. When 

Mr Secretary approached, therefore, 

with the manifest design of making its ac- 
quaintance, it croaked proud disdain ; and in 
an evil hour, Monimia drew near for the ami- 
cable purpose of negociating a peace. At 
sight of her — a great favourite— in the loud- 
est and most discordant tones it screamed 



112 CLAN-ALBIN, 

forth its usual political creed, throwing a bold 
defiance in the teeth of statesman and courtier, 
squalling, " Rope for Pitt" — " Walk rogues" 
— " Coach for Fox:" and over and over, with 
might and main, it screamed the eternal sum 
of its political opinions, in defiance of threats 
and remonstrances. 

The group in the drawing-room might, at 
this moment, have furnished a subject worthy 
the pencil of Hogarth. An old courtier, stately, 
and affronted, affecting not to hear ; — a states- 
man, and ci-devant lawyer, looking as if he 
was hesitating whether or not to have an 
ex officio information filed forthwith ; — while 
arch humour and official gravity struggled in 
the countenance of the elder secretary, — 
and the younger, with his handkerchief, 
strangled a burst of laughter, which at last 
proved unconquerable. Poor Lord Glanville, 
affecting, like his guests, to hear nothing, ex- 
hibited twenty varying faces and positions in 
as many half-seconds, while Monimia, crim- 
soned to the temples, her cheeks tingling 
with shame, in vain tried to allay the patrio- 
tic fervour of the parrot, with all the elo- 
quence of gestures and inarticulate sounds. 
Lady Glanville, exhibiting a picture of mau- 
"kish distress, raised herself upright in the so- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 113 

fa, exclaiming, " La ! Poll, be quiet ; will 
you ?" and as tlie Swiss entered to trim the 
lamps, " Le Brun, how shall we quiet that 
screaming thing r" — " Give him one sop, mi 
ladi; — give him one sop," cried the Swiss, 
darting to his lamps. Though provoked with 
herself for not sooner thinking of this natural 
remedy, Monimia could not now heighten the 
ridicule of the scene by giving that sop, at 
the mention of which Lord Glanville had be- 
come black in the face ; but the politeness of 
the young secretar}', who, by a strong effort, 
recovered composure of countenance, spared 
her farther pain. He fed the parrot; and 
practically found that the politician had his 
price. 

The vanity of Lord Glanville, which taught 
him to believe every part of his conduct an 
object of infinite importance to the world, 
made him suffer martyrdom for a few days j 
for, in spite of his incessant affirmations of 
the change being none of his, he was consci- 
ous that the fact remained exactly as before. 
In due time, however, these first agonies were 
overcome ; the parrot, persisting in opposi- 
tion principles, was presented to Monimia's 
maid, who sent it to board in the country till 
William's opened the inn on the Inverne^ 

L 2 



1 14 CLAN-ALBIN, 

road. LordGlanville attended the levees ; — 
Charles James, with the first part of his bap- 
tismal name, dropt those constitutional prin- 
ciples, which his father used to say, " had 
grown with his growth, and strengthened 
with his strength." Lady Glanville was or- 
dered to christen her French grey satin dress 
by the more courtly name of Windsor grey, 
and to change her Chronicle for the Post. 
Such were the radical changes of opinions 
and measures in this noble family. 

The combined- influence of vanity and no- 
velty for a short time supported the spirits of 
Lord Glanyille ; but he soon became small 
and insignificant with his new associates, 
and his former friends did not even do him 
the honour to resent his desertion ; — that in- 
dulgence which habits of social intimacy and 
respect for good intentions had hitherto pro- 
cured for his weakness, and vanity, and im- 
pertinent activity, was displaced by cold con- 
tempt for a character too feeble to be dan- 
gerous, too insignificant to be dreaded. Lord 
Glanville had a tolerable share of feeling — 
for himself. He smarted under the sense of 
the littleness into which he now crept. Va- 
nity may endure, nay, find gratification in all 
things but neglect : — censure or praise, — ha- 



A NATIONAL TALE, 115 

tred or amity, — from sentiments the most op- 
posite, its alchymy can extract pleasure ; un- 
der neglect alone, — though slow to believe 
in neglect, — like an animal in an exhausted 
receiver, it languishes, gasps, and dies, — but 
happily revives again with the faintest breath 
of notoriety. 

Lord Glanville had done his job. There 
was no probability of his small talents being 
required for some time. He was offered the 
government of one of the colonies, and gladly 
accepted of this honourable kind of banish- 
ment, pleased with the idea of sway, and of 
acting the monarch iu little. Lady Glanville 
was by no means so fond of leaving England, 
even to be created a vice-queen and supreme 

arbitress of fashions in . Yet rich variety 

of tropical fruits, to be carried on peoples 
shoulders, — fanned by black servants in fine 
embroidered dresses, — wear a great many dia- 
monds, — and have her train borne up ? — all 
this superadded to English luxury and com- 
fort, — and it never came into her head to 
doubt, that English people of fortune, in tro- 
pical countries, have not the same enjoy- 
ments as at home, — atoned for a removal from 
London : And when solemnly assured, by a 
fashionable physician that she would not be 



llG CLAN-ALBIN, 

sick at sea, she agreed to accompany her hus- 
band. 

Lord and Lady Glanville had never doubt- 
ed but Monimia, principal lady of honour, 
was to follow in the wake of the demi- royal 
train. Her decided refusal stood all the va- 
riations of surprise, anger, and sorrow ; and 
though Lady Glanville " really did not know 
how she could get on without her ;" and Lord 
Glanville was " infinitely astonished, — exces- 
sively sorry, — quite at a loss to guess her mo- 
tive," — her resolution to return to Eleenalin 
remained unshaken. 

In the month of August, Lord Glanville and 
his suit embarked for India; and Monimia, at- 
tended by her late servants, Williams and Sa- 
rah, now become husband and wife, set out for 
Eleenalin. Lord Glanville found it impossible 
to restore that part of her little fortune which 
he had applied to his own uses ; but he assur- 
ed her that the interest would be punctually 
paid ; yet how she was to live he could not 
devise, as that Highland lady,tho' wonderfully 
respectable, he understood was excessively 
poor. Monimia said she had no fears, and he was 
glad to hear it; — told her, that though he died 
to-morrow, James could not be such a wretch 
as not to consider this debt as a claim of ho- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 11? 

nour ;— on the contrary, he hoped to live to 
hestow on her a handsome fortune. The in- 
significant Glanville,— he had not for months 
called himself by this favourite appellation, — 
might yet become somebody. Native princes, 
guards of Seapoys, elephants, palanquins, 
treaties of alliance, lacks of rupees, and buls- 
es of diamonds, danced before his eyes in 
brilliant confusion ; and in high spirits he left 
England. The last words of Lady Glanville 
were, — " Mrs Montague, I'll send you a cou- 
ple of shawls ; don't mope yourself, my dear." 

Monimia resolved to profit by this good- 
natured advice, — to be perfectly happy, as 
her uncle ordered her, — if possible. 

At Edinburgh she stopped a few days, for 
the sake of poor Montague. She had been in 
the habit of writing to him frequently ; but as 
his letters only contained the needful, and had 
long been submitted to the revisal of his high- 
blooded dame, she was not in the least pre- 
pared for the unpleasant change visible in his 
person and manners. , 

His rubicund person was become thin and 
flabby ; the rosy hue of temperate maturity 
had completely vanished ; he looked very old 
and care-worn. To use his own phrase, " he 
had fallen quite out of his clothes ; and to use 



118 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Hughs, " He looked like a beaten cur con- 
jured, hut feeling submission galling. Instead 
of his former vulgar facetious familiarity, — 
proud of his tradesmen-like independence, 
and shewing it with ill-bred, obtrusive eager- 
ness, — he never now hazarded a sentence, with- 
out stealing a look at his wife, as degrading to 
himself as vexatious and provoking to Mo- 
nimia. " How can the pride of human nature 
endure those abject crouching looks?" thought 
she. " I would not have a domestic slave, 
study my eye, consult my smile, bow the pride 
of reason and of manhood beneath my frown, 
for all the sway that woman ever coveted. Is 
it possible to love the thing on which we seek 
to trample ?" It is not altogether impossible, 
certainly ; — but this inconsistency had nothing 
to do with the present case. 

Monimia had not been ten minutes in the 
house of her brother-in-law, when Mrs Miles 
Montague began to expatiate on the " infi- 
nite absurdity of a young woman withdrawing 
herself from the protection of her family, to 
throw herself into the bosom of strangers. She 
was astonished that Lord Glanville should 
have permitted so extraordinary an arrange- 
ment. Briefly, Mrs Miles used and exhausted 
all her rhetoric to persuade Monimia to follow 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 1 9 

her family to India, in which case, she did not 
commit herself; but she insinuated that Mr 
Montague, or more properly Mrs Miles Mon- 
tague, would contribute handsomely to her 
out-Jit. Monimia begged to be excused on 
this topic ; what had been refused to Lord and 
Lady Glanville, could not be yielded to any 
other person, would not be expected, she trust- 
ed, when this refusal was known. Rage unre- 
pressed now swelled every feature of Mrs Miles. 
" Did Mrs Edward Montague imagine that she 
possessed any fortune which entitled her to 
the indulgence of those extravagant caprices ?" 
Monimia, with admirable temper replied : 
" That whatever her real fortune was, her plan 
of life was, for the present, fixed rather below 
than beyond what she already possessed ; for 
she held that it was easier to extend than to 
retrench." 

" Aye, right, right, that it is, Monimia," 
escaped poor Montague, ere he was aware. 
" Extend ! 'Tis probable that trouble may be 
spared," said Mrs Miles. — " We shall see, 
Ma'am," replied Monimia calmly. 

" See, — see !" repeated Mrs Miles, quickly 
and violently, and with a very peculiar ex- 
pression of countenance, — " May I beg to 



120 CLAK-ALBlJf, 

know what you mean by seeing, — irhat I 
presume is very evident already." 

" I mean that I shall know the precise ex- 
tent of my fortune, when the legal period ar- 
rives for ascertaining that and other points." 

" Legal period! — but I am glad to find 
you have such expectations. I had no notion 
of them till now, — had you, Mr Montague :" 

" Me, why me, Ma'am ? I'm sure you know 
best : What notions should I have ? I assure 
you I have no notions about any thing." 

Here the conversation dropped. Mrs Miles 
seemed fearful that her husband should be left 
alone with his young sister, for whom all his 
affection revived the moment he again beheld 
her. Stratagem, as usual, defeated tyranny. 
Monimia had some business to do in the Old 
Town, and went out unattended. She was 
way -laid by poor Montague, who urged her 
so earnestly to accompany him on his walk 
round the Calton hill, that she complied. An 
awkward siienceon the part of Montague fol- 
lowed, — he wished to complain, and feared to 
begin. At last he abruptly broke forth : 

" To be sure she has blood, high-blood, — 
nobody can doubt that ; — but what's that to 
me, if my substance is to be consumed by her 
tribe of poor relations, and the life of me fret- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 2 I 

ted out with her temper. — I can trust you, 
Monimia ; I know this will go no farther ; 
God forbid it should. — A dog in my own 
house, — a stranger at my own table, — laughed 
at to my face by those who eat my bread. 
Do they think me blind? — do they think me 
deaf ?— but what care they. I have no blood, 
I'm not of the ' lordly line of high St. Clair:' 
. — If it had been God's will that I had never 
beard of it ! But for heaven's sake don't let 
this go farther, Monimia, — should it come to 
Mrs Miles' ears. O Monimia, what had I to 
do, to — . Fat and fair, and at my ease, worth 
half a plum of as well told money as in Bri- 
tain — might have walked ahout with my cane 
in my hand for the rest of my life. But it is 
all along of you, Monimia, and that is ail my 
comfort. Had you not gone to your quality 
friends, I never would have thought of mar- 
rying, and that you know." 

Monimia could see no necessary connexion 
between the alleged cause and effect; but she 
was not so harsh as to deprive her poor bro- 
ther-in-law of this slender source of consola- 
tion. 

" A cook '. she is no cook now, Monimia," 
resumed the distressed husband. " Not a 
morsel that I can taste with comfort; — all mv 

VOL, IV. M 



122 CLAX-ALBIX, 

hours reversed, up late and dowD early ; not 
a soul I can speak to — to tradesfolk, if there 
were any in this town ; but there are none, — 
all blood. I durst not look — a pretty word 
for a free-born Englishman, Monimia. If it 
were not for one or two reasons, I'm sure I 
would not care to hang myself." 

Besides the pleasure of complaining, Mon- 
tague had another aim in view, namely, to in- 
duce Monimia to advise him to elope with her- 
self to Glenalbin. But this she would not 
understand, and he became exceedingly an- 
gry. He had set his heart on escaping ; but 
to venture alone he durst not. Now, " all 
women were alike ; after she had left him, 
and given him up to Miss Sinclair ; and it 
was all her blame, yet she would not think it 
best to take him with her." Monimia remain- 
ed inflexible on this point, and Montague be- 
came sullen and dogged. 

At last, when about to part, he said, with 
more feeling and less humour, u I did not 
think you would have given me up, Monimia; 
you, whom I have known qince you were 
fourteen years of age, and loved better th .n 
any other creature, and you know it ; — but to 
be sure I'm tu/g<ir,l don't deny it. I haw no 
blood: I may be an honest man for all that. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 123 

thank God, and I hope you will one clay see 
it. Mrs Miles can't make me a gentleman, 
to he sure: She says she can't. — I hope she 
can't make me a ro^ue either. I'll do jus- 
tice to you, Monimia, and to all the world. 
She may consume my suhstance in part, and 
no doubt she will ; but sign these papers I 
will not." 

Monimia did not enquire what papers ; and 
since she had withstood all Montague's en- 
treaties when pleading in his own behalf, she 
would understand no hint that leaving him in 
the power of his wife might prove dangerous 
to her pecuniary interests. She therefore left 
him with the shrew who had proved the bane of 
his life, and the destroyer of his comforts ; 
who daily inflicted on hi in the misery of see- 
ing his fortune squandered, without even per- 
mitting him to share in the short-lived glories 
attending this unprofitable waste. 

Two days afterwards, Monimia saw the 
consequential Mrs Williams called to the 
bar of the Northern Inn ; and, still attend- 
ed by Williams, at the end of the fourth day, 
she was folded in the embrace of Lady Au- 
gusta. 

" Never to leave you more, dearest Lady," 
said she, her fine eyes gleaming through joy- 



124 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ful tears. — " Daughter of my affections, be it 
as you say," replied the Lady, " Never/' 
cried Mary Fitzconnal : — " Never, never." 
And already she was flying over the little in- 
sulated territory, — every slope and bay so 
well remembered, — so joyously greeted, — wild 
with the delight felt by that happy childhood 
whose first ideas have been rural, when it es- 
capes from towns and tasks to natire wood* 
and native liberty. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 125 



CHAP. XLIV. 



No life^to ours I 
Up to the mountains ! he that strikes 
The. venison first shall be lord o' the feast. 

Come, our stomachs will make 
What's homely savoury. — Weariness can snore upon 

the flint, ' 
When resty sloth finds the down pillow hard. 

Now, peace be here I 
Poor house, thou keep'st thyself. 

Shakespeare. 



I he beginning of March found Norman still 
watching by the sick couch of the Piper, 
whose health was now, however, tolerably re- 
established. The uncomfortable season was 
now also gone, and the weather become not 
merely good* but delightful ; the most plea- 
sant time of the year in Spain. A speckless 
expanse of sky, deeply and brilliantly blue, 
and the green earth, her verdant glories still 
unswarthed by the heats of summer, were 

M 2 



126 CLAX-ALBIN, 

the grand features of a rapid spring. The 
activity of hope succeeding the torpor of 
lassitude, — the springy feeling of universal 
nature at this fresh, young, enchanting season, 
were the emotions of Norman, when, followed 
by his straggling party, he traversed the 
mountains of Biscay. Escaped from a suffo- 
cating narrow hut, he bounded along, revel- 
ing in the sweets of the mountain breeze and 
mountain liberty ; gay as a school-boy in the 
first of his holidays. There was no enemy, 
no danger here, nothing to suspect or dread ; 
and he felt, in the expansive lightness of his 
heart, that he had reached a Highlandcountry, 
and experienced a temporary rapture from 
the mere force of contrasted local circumstan- 
ces, aided by the capricious undulation of 
youthful spirits ; for, as Hugh, on the first day 
of the march, sagaciously remarked, " We are 
just as we were before, darling." Worse in 
some respects, for news of the surrender of 
Sara^ossa had reached them ; and also a re- 
port that the French interest being every- 
where predominant, Bonaparte was returned 
to Paris. Many other contradictory rumours 
were afloat; and the absence of all intelligence 
on which reliance could be placed, was not 
the lightest evil of their situation. The only 



A NATIONAL TALE. 127 

printed papers they saw were false and flatter- 
ing proclamations of the French government, 
which, by the uncommon address and activity 
of its agents, had found a way into these soli- 
tudes. 

Bearing towards Navarre, they still slowly 
proceeded, — their roving company from time 
to time increasing, till it amounted to twenty- 
five effective soldiers, inured to toil, and of 
tried courage and fidelity. This little band 
of humble patriots paid the young Englishman 
the compliment of chusing him for their tem- 
porary leader. It was the object of most of 
these stragglers to join some one of the Guerilla 
corps, which were now forming in Navarre, 
Arragon, and Catalonia; in the meantime, it 
was the general wish to render every possible 
service to the common cause, by intercepting 
couriers, cutting of supplies, and otherwise 
harassing the enemy, as far as their slender 
means permitted. It was the wish of their 
young commander to inspire his companions 
with that noble enthusiasm which identifies the 
patriot with his country, and places its salva- 
tion in the strength of every single arm ; and 
the genius of Spaniards rendered this no diffi- 
cult task. 

At this, the season of returning plenty, any 



128 CLAN-ALBIN, 

cottage in a mountain village afforded the 
hardy band an occasional draught of milk, 
and sometimes, though more rarely, a crust of 
brown bread ; and when a clear stream pro- 
mised fish, or game of any kind sprung in 
view, a sumptuous repast was provided, with- 
out consulting either the game laws or the 
lord of the manor. 

s By the first fine spring Hugh kindled his 
fire, and produced his bag of skin, filled with 
barley-meal, and his rude earthen cooking u- 
tensils. His fellow-travellers collected fuel ; 
and, though their sylvan cheer was not dress- 
ed with all the delicacy and variety of a city 
feast, good spirits gave zest to the short re- 
past, which hunger often rendered delicious. 
Supper over another blazing fire was heaped 
when the common safety permitted such an 
indulgence ; and the warriors, gathering 
round, devoted a few hours to social relaxa- 
tion ; at the same time repairing their arms 
and dress, and holding a council of war, at 
which 'every one freely delivered his opinion ; 
and the whole was summed up and weighed 
by the chief, and adopted or rejected as the 
merit of the counsel appeared to deserve. 
When the council closed, the bivouac fire was 
largely heaped, and the watch of the night 



A NATIONAL TALE. 12Q 

appointed. The Spaniards muttered their 
prayers, beat their breasts, and crossed them- 
selves to a man, with equal fervency and des- 
patch, and were asleep in five minutes after- 
wards; nor were the Highlanders less prompt. 
Norman and Hugh, stretched side by side on 
their friendly bear-skins, Craig-gillian's pis- 
tols for their pillow, and Luath for a cum- 
brous coverlet, slept in peace, Providence 
their protection, and the wide heaven their 
canopy, — slept in bliss, for they sometimes 
dreamed of their home, of their friends, of 
Eieenalin, where sleeping fancy treasured all 
that was loved. O softly may the dews of 
night, and the visions of slumber, descend on 
the unpillowed head of a wandering soldier! 

In the mountains of Biscay they continually 
obtained views of manners and society, which 
to them as Highlanders were highly pleasing. 
They again heard the music of the bag-pipe; 
they saw the women in a sort of dark Celtic 
costume, spinning from the truly primitive 
distaff, or churning their milk in skins, as 
they walked about in pastoral ease, convers- 
ing with their neighbours. Everywhere .they 
encountered wandering Merino flocks, stray- 
ing through those Alpine solitudes, in their 
way to the higher mountains ; — driven from 



130 CLAN-ALBIN, 

the plains in this sad year, before the stated 
period of their annual journies, by those 
wolves, from which their defenders could nei- 
ther protect their flocks nor their country. 

The imagination of the Piper was most a- 
greeably excited by objects a-kin to all that 
was best known and most prized. — " It puts 
home in my own head, dear," would he say. — 
" In the heart, Hugh," replied Norman, whose 
cultivated and enriched fancy was still more 
powerfully awakened by the contemplation 
of this fine scenery, and its various home-like 
accompaniments. Its suggesting charms set 
free his imagination to range in unrestrained 
pleasure, amid the fondly recollected images 
of early delight, and beauty, and sublimity ; 
and the associated feelings of early days im- 
parted to the surrounding manners and scenes 
their own peculiar character of joy and pu- 
rity. 

His little corps had hitherto no opportu- 
nity of performing any very important ser- 
vice. They had, indeed, wherever they came, 
destroyed all vestiges of French proclama- 
tions, and prevented the itinerant agents of 
that active government from disseminating hi 
those regions that subtle poison, destructive 
of every principle of loyalty and patriotism, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 13 L 

which had proved but too deleterious in other 
countries. They had also, on several occa- 
sions, intercepted provisions, as well as small 
herds of cattle, and liberally distributed, a- 
mong the half famished inhabitants of Spain, 
what was intended to sustain her triumphant 
invaders. 

But the time now arrived, when this band 
was compelled to divide. They had reach- 
ed the open country ; all the surrounding 
towns and villages were garrisoned by French 
soldiers, and every advancing step was preg- 
nant with danger. The Spanish soldiers, 
who, during their rambling sojourn, had 
formed a strong attachment to their chief, 
took an affectionate leave of him, about twelve 
leagues in the rear of Pampeluna, some of 
them expressing a fervent wish tnat he might 
yet join the standards of Spain, and lead them 
to victory. They now advanced with increas- 
ed vigilance and circumspection ; and on the 
same evening Hugh spread the last contents 
of his scrip by the side of one of those foun- 
tains which, in warm climates, the traveller 
finds so delightful. 

"If we are as near Flora as you say, Sir, 
we may now reach her without entering house 



132 CLAN-ALBIN, 

or hold, and then God help us; though if ever 
we leave Spain it is more than I think." 

Norman endeavoured to inspire better 
hopes; and when they had ended their sea- 
sonable refreshment, they retired into one of 
those woods of evergreen oak which cover 
so much of Spain, and slept by turns, till the 
lengthening shades of the succeeding evening, 
checquered by the moon-beams, permitted 
them to proceed with safety. Their exhaust- 
ed condition prevented them from making so 
much progress on this night ; and when they 
halted next day, no table sprung up in the 
wilderness to furnish the refreshment they so 
much wanted. 

Imperious necessity now compelled them 
to seek the aid of their fellow-creatures, to 
procure food, and information concerning 
their route. From inscriptions on monumental 
crosses, several of which they had seen that 
morning, Norman, indeed, guessed where 
they were ; but this was not an affair to be 
left longer to conjecture. It so happened, 
that Hugh, like some other English travel- 
lers, while abroad never could understand a 
sentence of any foreign language ; though, 
when he returned home, he contrived to in- 
sult with impunity the ignorance of his neigh- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 133 

bours, and excite the admiration of Moome, 
by calling her senora ; addressing her with 
the salutation common to Spain, and pom- 
pously repeating the celebrated couplet, 

" Con todo el mundo guerra, 
Y paz con Inglaterra," 

But these fine acquirements were entirely 
nugatory where he now stood ; and generally 
when any thing was to be done, and always 
when any thing was to be said, the wandering 
knight was compelled to take upon himself 
the duties of the squire. 

So well in the present instance did he ac- 
quit himself, that several peasants, whom he 
met returning from a fair ', without being di- 
rectly questioned, announced that the dark 
towers which rose in fine relief on the glow- 
ing horizon of midsummer's eve, were those 
of Pampeluna; and the chateau on the brow 
of the neighbouring hill, was the residence of 
the fugitive nuns from Astorga. 

vol. iy. n 



134 CLAN-ALBIN, 



CHAP. XLV. 



Be thou her comforter. 



Who art the widow's friend ! Man does not know 

What a cold sickness made her blood run back, 

When first she heard the tidings of the fight : 

Man does not know with what a dreadful hope 

She listen'd to the names of those who died : 

Man does not know, or, knowing, will not heed, 

With what an agony of tenderness 

She gazed upon her children, and beheld 

His image who was gone. — Oh, God ! be thou, 

Who art the widow's friend, her comforter ! 

Southiy. 

JLt was as dark as a midsummer eve ever be* 
comes, before Norman, who bad hovered for 
two hours round the hioh wall which inclosed 
the gloomy abode that he hoped was Flora's, 
ventured to knock at a wicket door. 

The English lady dwelt there ! — she was 
well; she longed for her friends ! — The throb- 
bing bosom of Norman, till now agitated by 
indefinable fears for her safety, felt momen- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 135 

tary lightness. The fearful joy thus snatch- 
ed was short -lived indeed. By the direction 
of the abbess, the travellers were admitted 
into the outer-court of the chateau. Here he 
paused for a few minutes, to summon that 
fortitude which must enable him to appear 
the messenger of irreparable misfortune. As 
he stood with Hugh, beneath the grated case- 
ment of Flora, who inhabited a detached 
tower that flanked the building, they could 
hear the subdued melody of her soft and 
flexible voice, while, in stilling her infant, she 
breathed forth the air of the sweetest lullaby 
of Burns. No word was articulated ; but Nor- 
man could well understand those feelings of 
shadowy unconscious association, which sug. 
gested the beautiful air to which those en- 
chantingly tender lines are appropriated : — 

c< My blessing upon that sweet wee lippie ; 
My blessing upon that bonny ee.bree; 
Thy smile is sae like my dear soldier-laddie, 
Thou'rt aye the langer the dearer to me." 

Surely there was never any combination of 
mere English words half so expressive of lisp- 
ing endearment. As the sweet, low, liquid 
tones, languished into the wild symphony of 



130 CLAN-ALBLV, 

a Highland nurse, poor Hugh looked so wo- 
fully in the face of his companion. 

The porteress, who stood sheltering her 
open lamp) was impatient of further delay; 
and thy followed her up the narrow, spiral 
stair- case of the turret. Flora had a pretty 
little dog, called J/imi, which Craig- gillian 
had brought from abroad, and presented to 
her in the days of their early loves. It had 
been the cherished, though troublesome com- 
panion of her hasty {light. Muni set up a 
joyful bark ; and the ear of Flora, morbidly 
intent on every sound, caught the noise of 
advancing footsteps. Her door, — her wel- 
coming arms, flew open ; for Norman, the ear- 
nest of all good, stood before her. 

" O, Norman, my heart's best brother ! you 
are come at last !" — She threw herself into his 
arms, in the boundless confidence of happi- 
ness. — " You are come to take us to Craig- 
gillian : And see, here, dear uncle Hugh," 
added she, lightly, throwing down the man- 
tle that shrouded the sleeping innocent, — 
" here is his little son." 

Norman hastily knelt down beside the cradle, 
and buried his face in the lap of the babe, 
glad for one moment to spare its wretched 
mother this bright and farewell gleam of joy. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 13^ 

and himself the pang of bidding it set in the 
blackness of darkness forever. 

It was with tender jealousy that Flora 
saw Norman, dearly as she loved him, gather 
from the lip of her babe the little kiss she 
treasured for Hector ; yet, now that the deed 
was done, she, too, kneeled down beside him, 
carefully shading the lamp, that he might see 
how beautiful, beyond all infant loveliness, 
was that dear little one, and then, for so her 
heart whispered, he would tell her how close- 
ly it resembled Craig-gillian. Mimi also 
^tood up on its hinder legs, and leaned against 
the cradle, claiming share in that joy and tri- 
umph which Norman durst not confirm, — 
could not destroy. ' 

Poor Flora believed that Colonel Monro's 
son, and Craig-gi Man's heir, was an object of 
very great importance to all her countrjmen; 
and she felt that her first-born child must be 
a creature very precious indeed to Norman.. 
Her feelings were also- in a wild tumult of 
pride, hope, and delight; but when a 'mi- 
nute had elapsed, and Norman did not raise 
his head to look on her, to speak to her, a 
sudden chill struck to her heart, and arrested 
its gladsome bounding : She turned her eager 
gaze on the wo-struck countenance of Hugh,. 



138 CLAN-ALBIN, 

crying, " You do not speak ; you do not tell 

me ." Her quick ear caught the sup. 

pressed and convulsive breathing of Norman ; 
clasping her hands, she sunk upon the floor, 
exclaiming, " Oh, I am a wretch indeed !" 

No answer could have been so dreadful as 
the deep and solemn silence that followed. 
With supernatural energy she sprung up, 
wildly exclaiming, as she clasped the arm of 
Norman, " Is it then — O where is — where is 
my husband ? — Is he not gone home ? Is he 
not in Scotland with his father V 

" With his heavenly Father, dearest of crea- 
tures !" said Hugh, in Gaelic, " in whose 
hands you are also/' 

With a deep, shuddering groan, she fell in- 
to the arms of Norman, seized with something 
that seemed to fluctuate between violent con- 
vulsive spasms and mental distraction. A phy- 
sician from the adjacent town, who had al- 
ready attended the infant Hector, was imme- 
diately summoned to the bed-side of his un- 
happy mother. 

There is a horrid and an unnamed state, 
when hideous sensation combines with mental 
agony, — when the sudden expansion of intel- 
lect, and pr< tei ui'.ural strength of frame, deep- 
en the struggle that alike involves both, — 



A NATIONAL TALE, 13() 

when one overpowering idea, wild and indis- 
tinct, yet intense and absorbing, throbs in the 
brain, flashes before the eyes, sings in the 
ears, — while the heart is alternately com- 
pressed with a sick, sick crushing load, or 
palpitating with a thousand lives, and tortur- 
ed in them all. To the very verge of this in- 
describable condition, — which probably rea- 
lises whatever superstition has feigned or fan- 
cied of demoniacal possession, — sleepless 
nights, and anxious days, irritated nerves, 
high-wrought hopes, and the imprudent an- 
nouncement of a dreadful catastrophe, had 
urged a nature, too gentle to combat with 
such horrors. Exhausted, however, by this 
struggle, and the feverish irritation of her 
frame somewhat subdued by the judicious 
management of the physician, she at length 
sunk into the torpor of that dumb inflated 
sorrow, which finds no outlet, and the fears 
entertained for her reason gradually abated. 
The sickness of her child, which was seized 
with fits, in consequence of the feverish nou- 
rishment it imbibed, while the attendants im- 
prudently permitted it to rest on the bosom 
of its unconscious mother, first recalled her to 
a sense of the few, but tender ties, that still 
bound her to an aimost insupportable exis- 



140 CLAN-AI.B1N, 

tence. In the first moments of alarm, she 
clasped the infant to her bosom, with a des- 
perate joy, whispering to herself, — " we will 
die together." — But the continued contem- 
plation of its sufferings, soon had a natural 
and happy effect on her overstrained feelings ; 
and the floods of tears that fell on its little 
bosom, assuaged the labouring heart, and 
cooled the burning brain from which they 
sprung. 

The etiquette of the convent had torn 
Norman from her side in the first period of 
her misery ; and together with Hugh, he found 
a heaven-provided refuge in the house of the 
benevolent physician who attended her. He 
instantly recognised those friends for whose 
appearance his patient had so long pined ; — 
and felt that the calamity in which they were 
involved gave them a claim on the kindness 
of every Spaniard. 

The first inquiry that Flora made, was for 
their safety ; that ascertained, she appeared 
to dismiss them from her mind : and even 
when Norman visited her, her eye, rivetted 
on her sick infant, took no cognisance of his 
presence. His soothings were received with 
cold silence, - his tears flowed unnoticed, — for 
she felt that his sorrow "was not like unto her 



A NATIONAL TALE. 141 

sorrow." The finer joys of life had blazed 
upon the orphan youth of Flora, like the sud- 
den and resistless effulgence of a tropical 
sun ; more rapidly still had their splendours 
been swallowed up, and all around consigned 
to chilling solitude and blackness. He rose 
to withdraw. Her heavy eye was slowly lift- 
ed to his face. Those dear and familiar fea- 
tures produced a sudden revulsion at her 
heart. A thousand soft images crowded 
through her fancy : Exclaiming, — " O Nor- 
man i" — she dropped her head on his bosom, 
and wept for a little while in tender agony. 

Several interviews followed of nearly simi- 
lar consequence. The grief of her hopeless 
and bereaved heart was already subdued in 
every visible expression, and struck the more 
deeply for this fatal struggle to conceal from 
every human eye its rancorous activity. Ever 
regretting that abrupt communication, which 
had nearly broken the heart of the repen- 
tant Piper, Norman tenderly, and without 
solicitation, unfolded the story of that me- 
morable day, so glorious to her country, and 
fatal to herself. Flora had not yet reached 
that point, when a gentle sorrow loves to 
linger on every minute circumstance connect- 
ed with a sad event. It was enough that he 



142 CLAN-ALBIN, 

was gone, and her fate sealed. She therefore 
made no comment on this mournful narrative, 
though the shivering, stifled sigh, evinced the 
deep interest she already took in its details. 
But when Norman adverted to the brave men 
who had so gallantly volunteered to rescue the 
living, or seek the departed Craig-gillian, she 
burst into tears at a testimony so welcome of 
that matchless worth which, living or dead, 
was embalmed in the heart of every soldier 
who had the happiness to know its beloved 
possessor. " O Norman/' cried she, " and 
this Craig-gillian was mine ; and 1 was so 
proud, so happy, so beloved : I thought no 
ill could reach me ; and of life itself I saw 
no end. O ! I was a presumptuous creature ; 
and the hand of God hath fallen heavily upon 
me, humbling and chastening. Siill I live — 
and that brave and manly heart — that heart 
that never beat but for those it loved, and for 
honourable fame — has forever stilled its beat- 



»> 



ings. 

These were among the first sentences that 
Flora addressed to her friend ; and they were 
the last on that melancholy subject. Her's 
was a grief to be felt, not talked of. He la- 
mented ihe gloomy turn which her embittered 
mind had taken ; yet he hoped that the same 



A NATIONAL TALE. 143 

pious self-distrust which deepened her recent 
and bleeding wounds, would lead her to the 
Fountain of all Consolation, there to seek the 
;' only healing balm for the bereaved and bro- 
ken heart. 

In the first moments of powerful sorrow, 
the sympathy of friendship does too often 
only exasperate the sufferings that in a sub- 
sequent period it might share or mitigate. 
Still more irritating is the composure affliction 
must assume, to receive the cold common- 
place condolements which the usages of life 
exact from strangers. To poor Flora, ' a wi- 
dow indeed, and desolate,' the formally an- 
nounced visit of the abbess, on the second 
week of her distress, was as annoying as any 
thing now could be. From this lady she had 
received great attention, and all the scrupu- 
lous regards of a hostess, but little heart- 
reaching kindness. Descended of a noble 
family, and educated in all the pride of Spa- 
nish nobility, and the rigours of monastic se- 
clusion, — cold, stately, and severe,— her mind 
revolving in tedious monotony round the ce- 
remonial of her station, and her heart un- 
touched by the sweet charities of domestic 
life — Flora felt that she could have no com- 
munity of sentiment with her, who had never 



144 CLAN-ALBIN, 

joyed nor sorrowed, nor wept nor smiled, like 
devoted and endearing woman. 

Delicately alive, however, to all the neces- 
sary and graceful, though sometimes painful 
proprieties of life, Flora, even at this season, 
was far from expecting ' pity for grief, cr par- 
don for neglect ;' and the effort was made. 

What was her remorse, when the woman 
who looked so frigidly, and moved so statehlv, 
embraced her with maternal tenderness, say- 
ing, " Weep, my daughter ! these walls have 
been taught to listen to the groans which mi- 
sery extorts from nature. Weep, my daugh- 
ter ! — it is your privilege — weep and pray" 
By a strong effort of self-control, the abbess 
banished the traces of human sensibility that 
played round her lips, resumed the wonted 
severe dignity of her demeanour, and kiss- 
ing the pale brow of her guest, pronounced 
a sole am benediction over the meekly -bend- 
ed bead, and slowly withdrew. 

Though nunneries had been formallv sup- 
pressed by an act of the new government, 
the ladies who inhabited this dwelling still 
followed the routine of recluse life, and be- 
came even more zealous in the discharge of 
their vowed duties, since they had been, a> 
they imagined, sacrilegiously absolved from 



A NATIONAL TALE. 145 

their observance. As a high mark of respect 
and regard, the abbess wished to have mass ce- 
lebrated in the chapel of the chateau for him 
who had died in the bosom of the true church. 
She had, however, the delicacy to request the 
consent of the fair heretic to whom he had 
been allied. This was gladly given ; and Flora 
expressed a desire to attend the ceremony, 
which was as willingly complied with. After 
the strictest sect of presbyterianism she had 
been educated a presbyterian ; but in the pre- 
sent state of her feelings, she pined for the 
soothing comfort of social worship. There 
is a grief which heaven alone can assuage, 
as there is a virtue which heaven only can re- 
ward. In "a sanctuary consecrated by the 
prayers of those who, like her, once help- 
less and desolate, were now removed to the 
abodes where all tears are wiped from all eyes, 
Flora longed to commend herself to the mercy 
of the Divinity. 

She entered the chapel, supporting her 
tottering frame on the arm of her attendant; 
and approaching the outer railing of the altar, 
knelt on the steps, and, with a broken and 
contrite heart, poured forth to the Friend of 
the friendless, the Hope of the desolate, the 
VOL. iv. o 



240 CLAN-ALBTX, 

Husband of the widow, the silent prayer of 
faith and humiliation. 

It is to be feared that strong sensibility and 
a glowing imagination may, at particular sea- 
sons, become daring rebels against some of 
those tenets with which Buchanan had imbued 
the mind of his daughter. Flora was at first 
hardly conscious of the ceremonial that was 

ft 

going forward ; and when attention was a- 
wakened, she could only conjecture its na- 
ture from the scope and intent of so solemn 
an institution. She thought of the state of 
the dead as fixed, unalterable ; cf a destiny, 
sudden and overwhelming, which men, nor 
saints, nor angels, could neither change nor 
mitigate. She doubted, shuddered at her 
doubts, a*\d doubted still.- 

To meet the community in the chapel was 
the only social intercourse to which the spi- 
rits of Flora were equal ; and without during 
to scrutinize her motives, still, as the hour 
vespers came round, she glided into this san 
tuary, and took her silent station in a w tired 
spot, evidently wishing to remain unnoticed, 
and indulged in that wish. She could not join 
in a ceremonial she did not even understand; 
but with increasiug resignation, and ha ed 
submission, she here breathed the hidden tie- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 147 

votion of her heart to the God who seetli in 
secret, and looked with complacency on be- 
ings of a kindred nature kneeling around her, 
all met together to worship in his name. There 
was, however, a part of the service at once im- 
pressive and grateful to her feelings, — the 
sweet expressive music and accordant voices 
of the nuns, which dissolved, in a rapture of 
holy love, the soul it stole from earth to hea- 
ven. To those celestial strains her purified 

r 

tears flowed more softly; and the dying and 
tremulous close of the anthem descended on 
her soul like the sweet influences of the bene- 
diction for which she prayed. 

Except the stolen visits of Norman, this was 
the only intercourse that Flora now maintain- 
ed with the living world. Her delicate health, 
and the wavering and enfeebled sfcHe of her 
ruin J, made her at this crisis peculiarly sus- 
ceptible of all, in the imposing ritual of the 
catholic church, that touches the h^art or a- 
wakens the fancy ; and this little chapel and 
its congregation of vestals, — beautiful forms 
kneeling in meek devotion, — -were even more 
attracting and dangerous than the gorgeous 
solemnities of cathedral worship. 

About this time she found several books of 
devotion in the French language quietly plac-- 



148 CLAN ALBIN, 

ed on her table, and from an observer she 
became an inquirer. Reflection loudly sug- 
gested how inferior was this system of blend- 
ed superstition and dogmatism, to the vigor- 
ous and intellectual reformed faith in which 
she had been so sedulously nurtured. But 
to her the fair side only was presented. She 
saw that many of the abominations she had 
been taught to impute to the catholic religion 
were as false as injurious. In the present 
overawed and gloomy state of her mind, that 
bold spirit of respectful inquiry which forms 
one of the best distinctions of the protestant 
religion, and is indeed its very essence, seem- 
ed to border on unhallowed daringness and 
presumption. Thus a contrariety of opinions 
divided her mind, till the vesper hour came 
round, and then stealing into the chapel, she 
felt that those varying modes of faith were all 
instituted for the same divine purpose, — that 
they all tended to the same grand end, — the 
honour of God and the salvation of man : 
And her widowed heart warmed and clung to 
Crttig-gilliarCs faith, — that faith so tender 
and beautiful! — so congenial, and as she now 
thought so necessary, to all the soft affections 
of the female heart, — which lulls the God of 
mercy as a little child upon the bosom of a vir- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 14& 

gin mother ! This seemed the most exquisite 
medium through which human weakness could 
unfold the wants, and implore the blessings 
needful to humanity. Flora no longer doubted. 

Norman could not fail to perceive whither 
her devotional feelings tended, but he knew 
that her heart alone had betrayed her under- 
standing, and hoped that, as soon as her feelings 
recovered their tone, her principles would re- 
gain their original firmness. In the mean- 
while, he was almost rejoiced to find that 
her fancy was touched by any thing beyond 
the gloomy circle misery had drawn round 
her heart. It was indeed In a catholic 
chapel, and among the votaries of a differ- 
ent religion, that she found the only earthly 
consolation she could now receive ; but rus:- 
ged indeed must that heart have been, who, 
in the season of deep unutterable sorrow, 
could have denied the bruised spirit the com- 
fort of hearing another say Amen, when we do 
say God bless us ! 

It was absolutely necessary that the strength 
of Flora should be somewhat recruited before 
a long and hazardous journey through Arra- 
gon and part of Catalonia was attempted ; 
for by this route Norman hoped to reach one 
of those English vessels which were cruising 

O 2 



150 CLAN-ALBIN, 

off Barcelona, Rosas, Gerona, and other ports 
in the Mediterranean. On his arrival he had 
written streral letters which his protector en- 
gaged to forward hy a safe channel ; and he 
had also apprized some of the persons whom 
the General pointed out as a medium of com- 
munication, of the place of his present resi- 
dence. But three weeks elapsed, and brought 
no intelligence to Norman, and no accession 
of strength to his drooping friend. Every 
day left her more languidly delicate than the 
former. On the least exertion of mind or 
body, the wan hue of settled grief was dis- 
placed by a bright pink spot burning fitfully 
on the top of her cheek, — that baleful bloom, 
which, like roses around a sepulchre, veils the 
deadly decay that lurks beneath. 

Norman had fortunately little experience 
in the symptoms of disease ; but the tender- 
ness that rendered him watchful soon made 
him perceive that Flora had the same uneasi- 
ness in her bosom of which he had heard her 
complain during the heats of the months they 
had passed in Portugal. But now she never 
complained. While he nursed the little child, 
or read, or talked, and endeavoured, by every 
method affection inspires, to sooth or amuse 



A NATIONAL TALE. I 5 I 

her mind, she sat in perfect stillness and si- 
lence : 

Patient as the brooding dove 

Ere yet her golden couplets are disclosed ; 

or, at most, acknowledging his kindness with 
a sad smile. The health of her child, and the 
safety of her friends, could still, however, rouse 
her affections, and summon back her mind 
from the rapt visionary musings she loved to 
indulge, — on death, the grave, immortality, 
and those mysterious ties that connect the 
visible with the invisible world. 

The extreme anxiety, which daily grew up- 
on Flora, to see her child and her friends in 
Scotland, combined with indifference to every 
other object that usually engages the cares of 
the living, and entire neglect of her own 
health, suggested the most distressing ideas 
to Hugh. 

" O Norman," said he, one evening that he 
had been permitted to visit the serene mour- 
ner, " I could not, to-night, look on our 
poor Flora She is become the living image 
of her mother, — a young dying creature ; — 
yes, to die at home is all her wish, — I see it, 
Norman : Alas, alas, she knows, she hopes, 



152 CLAN-ALBIN, 

that she is going to those who can never 
come to her." Inexpressibly alarmed and 
shocked, Norman immediately communicat- 
ed these fears to the friendly physician, whom 
he remembered to have seen bestowing si- 
lent scrutinising looks on poor Flora, when 
her cheeks glowed with feverish bloom, and 
her eyes shone with delusive brilliancy ; and 
when, as he thought, she looked so much 
better, indeed, so uncommonly well, — till the 
wan visage, and hollow cheeks, and languid 
air of the succeeding day, baffled his calcula- 
tions, without, however, awakening his fears. 
The Spanish physician frankly acknow- 
ledged', that he was not sufficiently skilled 
in the peculiar delicacies of the insular con- 
stitution, to pronounce with certainty on 
the event he anticipated. He, however, 
prescribed the usual simple remedies, con- 
triving to fasten some slight complaints 
on the patient, and concealing his serious 
fears ; and as her only wish was to reach her 
home, he hoped that the journey, it under- 
taken by easy stages, and still more the voy- 
age, might have a beneficial influence on her 
health. The journey, so long deferred, was, 
therefore, hastily agreed on. And now the 
cares of Norman were fast multiplying. Day 



A NATIONAL TALE. 153 

followed day, and brought no intelligence of 
his friends. His money, as well as that which 
Flora had saved, wasnownearly exhausted; and 
as an Englishman, he was exposed to hourly 
danger, that might extend to those who had so 
generously protected him. But he had youth, 
health, character, prospects, resources ; and 
though those who greatly love must greatly 
fear, he was blest with that delightful hope, 
which sooths in the present, and charms in 
the future. Thus, temporary ills, though of- 
ten felt as vexatious and irritating, dwindled- 
into insignificance before the steady eye of 
reason, and the animating confidence of 
youth ; till the anguish of witnessing the gra- 
dual decay of a creature, entwined with every 
fibre affection had wound round his heart, ex- 
cited those feelings of unappeasable regret, 
which the mind can at best oppose only by 
sad, if not sullen resignation. 

Those only can conceive his feelings of a- 
larm, who have seen the insidious foe steal on, 
ambushed in smiles and roses, — who have 
hung in unavailing tenderness over the loved, 
the young, the ardent, the amiable, — who 
have cherished the hope they felt to be falla- 
cious, — inspired the confidence in which they 
could not participate, — smiled even in agony 



154 CLAN-ALBIV, 

over »he thousand projects formed for long 
life and returning health, to which the un- 
subdued spirit ever sanguinely clings : — Those 
who have done ali this, and have thci turned 
the eye to weep, can well conceive the feel- 
ings of Norman, when the symptoms of di- 
sease became more decided, and he felt almost 
assured, that the period was not far distant, 
when no living voice would ever again claim 
his fraternal kindness, and repay it with the 
endeared and familiar greeting of " ^oruman 
ma braithur^ 

It was the end of July when Flora quitted 
the place of her refuge, and Norman bade* his 
generous friend fareweii. They parted with 
a mutual promise of future correspondence ; 
and the physician most reluctantly accepted 
that slender remuneiation for his disburse- 
ments and professional attendance, winch Ids 
will disdained, and his poverty made necessa- 
ry ; lor medicine, in this part of the world, 
was by no means that lucrative and honour- 
able profession which in refined and enligh- 
ted society it ever becomes. This good friend 
had procured passports for the travellers un- 
der an assumed character. He had also hired 
for them a couple of stout mules. Tne finan- 
ces of Norman could have reached no other 
conveyance, though the town had afforded it, 



A NATIONAL TALE. I 55 

and the habits of Highland life made Flora 
an excellent horse-woman. The other mule 
served to carry the baggage and a female 
attendant, who had agreed, for a high reward, 
to attend the English laHy to the coast. 

The weather, which at this season was ex- 
tremely sultry and oppressive, and the deli- 
cate habit of Flora, necessarily rendered their 
progress as tedious as hazardous. 

<£ Remote, unfriended, melancholy, slow," 

they wandered through Navarre, and entered 
Arragon on the first week of August. They 
followed an upland track, led by a guide, who, 
till the late disturbances had broken up all 
regular intercourse, had been a carrier be- 
tween Pampeluna and Saragossa, though his 
journies had sometimes been extended to the 
Basque sea, and sometimes to the opposite 
coast, in a more equivocal character. On 
these occasions he had found it prudent to 
take the route of other smugglers, and his ac- 
quaintance with this wild and unfrequented 
road proved of singular service to them he 
now conducted. Wherever the brown hills 
opened their bosoms they found a little ham- 
let; and the introduction of the well-known 



156 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Pedilla never failed to procure a gracious re- 
ception ; and not seldom, as natives of Eng- 
land, their arrival was hailed with all the fire 
of the Spanish character, and the enthusiasm 
of patriotic sympathy. Travelling proved a 
grateful vicissitude to Norman ; and he some- 
times flattered himself, that since Flora en- 
dured the exercise, which his tenderness made 
very gentle, she also profited by it. Their 
daily progress seldom indeed exceeded eight 
leagues ; the greater part of which was ac- 
complished before the intense heats of noon 
enjoined and promoted repose. 

They entered on wide-spreading downs ; 
and the country which had gradually become 
more lonely, was now almost a solitude, — a 
lovely wilderness. Flora seemed invigorated 
whiie inhaling a pure and balmy air, perfumed 
with the delicate sweets of innumerable wild 
flowers that inlaid the short elastic turf. Here 
the vagrant breeze scattered the fresh fra- 
grance of thyme, spike- lavender, sage, rose- 
mary, and great variety of other aromatic 
plants, the culled darlings of the English gar- 
den, which nature spreads over these wilds in 
a wasteful profusion, that regales the sense 
and charms the fancy. Here and there, too, 
a grove of chestnuts, mingled with ever-green 



A NATIONAL TALE. 157 

oaks, relieved the loneliness of a prospect 
that gave no token of human inhabitation, 
save the rude cabin of the roaming shep- 
herds, who were sometimes discerned at a dis- 
tance, stealing timidly across those open 
downs, as they guided their flocks to richer 
pastures or a clearer brook. 

At noon the travellers usually made a slight 
repast under the refreshing shade of the in- 
tervening thickets ; and while Flora and her 
little child rested on skins, and Hugh and the 
muleteer slept soundly on guard, N >rman, like 
a true knight, in this the region of romance, 
retired deeper into the grove, sighed and 
mused on his lady, or spoiled his penknife in 
engraving her name on many a fine tree, 
where, of course, it remains to this day, a mo- 
nument of love or idleness, as the young or 
the old traveller shall please to decide. 

From these aromatic pastures, and this dry 
and balsamic air, they passed into a higher 
range of hills, where no view of life cheered 
the weary traveller, or beckoned him onward 
in hope. The far-orf baying of the watch-dog, 
the sheep-bell, or the chime of the convent, 
were never heard here. No flocks were stray- 
ing through the steep interposing vallies, 
whose rugged sides were gloomily shaded 

YOJ-, IV, P 



158 CLAN-ALBIN, 

witli juniper, savin, and a clingy and stunted 
species of cedar. In plunging into these in- 
gulphing hollows, Flora often started, and 
her blood run cold, at the appalling sight of 
a monumental cross, and a gathered heap, 
marking the spot where some unhappy travel- 
ler had met his fate from the banditti that 
haunted these mountains'. The preshyterian 
Piper never failed, on such occasions, to foilow 
the example of the muleteer, and the custom 
of his own country. He threw a stone on the 
cairn of the murdered man, whispering, '"'God 
rest him !" — The marvellous stories of the lo- 
quacious guide, who was familiar with all the 
bloody tragedies these monuments recorded, 
deepened their effect on the unnerved mind 
of Flora. — The image of death was to her be- 
come almost welcome. — She was in that state 
a when worn-out Hope reposes on the tomb." 
Yet she recoiled with constitutional and in- 
stinctive horror from a death of violence ex- 
tending to her infant and her friends. 

Too inconsiderable to excite alarm, and in 
far too sad a plight to tempt avarice, the pray- 
ers of their muleteer, fervently put up at every 
cross and convent, or some higher cause, had 
hitherto warded oil the dangers he so unceas- 
ingly prognosticated ; and instead of French 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 5Q 

soldiers and Spanish banditti, they had en- 
countered no greater evil than a swoln flood 
or a lack of provisions. But fortune was at 
length ashamed of thwarting the prophecies 
of Pedilla. A shrill whistle rung among the 
crags that overhung the path, and Flora look- 
ed round for the lurking murderers, shrieking 
with agony as powerful as could have agitated 
the being most attached to life. Her maid 
raised a loud accompaniment, and down on 
his knees fell Pedilla, in the very middle of 
a humourous story. Norman sprung back to 
support Flora on her mule, not without his 
own share of apprehension, though he sooth- 
ed her with the belief that this was the whis- 
tle of a hunter or a mountain shepherd. He, 
however, gave the child, which he often car- 
ried, to the maid, and walked by the side of 
Flora. 

" Would that these wilds were past,'' said 
Flora, looking sadly on the declining sun. 

u In my own life I never longed to see the 
Lowlands," replied Hugh, in a tone of half- 
affected cheerfulness, but at the same time 
falling back a pace to adjust a famous Doune 
pistol which he had lugged to the wars, tho' 
somewhat in the condition of his countryman's 
gun, which required the repairs of a new 



IGO CLAN-ALB IN, 

stock, a new lock, and a new barrel. Hugh 
possessed, however, another weapon, of proof, 
a skicn or dirk, of the workmanship of that 

well-known Highland family in Glen , in 

which this craft has been hereditary for many 
real and perchance for some fabled ages. 
This blade, in the course of the last thirty 
\ears, had often done Hugh yeoman's service. 
It was consequently somewhat roughish in the 
edge ; but let the foe look to that ; to him its 
hacks and venerable rust were far more pre- 
cious than the highest polish of Birmingham; 
for be it known, that this was the most cele- 
brated skicn of modern times, and had per- 
formed one of the latest exploits which Low- 
land whigs and Lowland laws permitted a 
Highland blade to achieve. It were long to 
tell " the adventures of a dirk," and how it 
passed into the hands of the Piper, though un- 
questionably that identical skicn which, when 

u Rob Roy from the Highlands came, 
Unto the Lowland border, 
And all to steal a lady fair, 

To haud his house in order," — 

Ronald, an elder brother of the unfortunate 
freebooter, and the wily instigator of his fatal 



A NATIONAL TALE. l : Gl 

enterprise, coolly employed to cutoff the ruf- 
fled cuffs of the lady mother, while the young 
heiress, shrieking in despair, clung to that 
piece of ancient garniture. The dirk was not 
the less precious on that account; nor dkl 
Hugh hold up his shoe to polish it into sharp- 
ness, without remembering that it had been 
stained with other blood besides that of sheep 
and of goats. 

A few minutes elapsed, and the whistle was 
not repeated. Pedilla, who shrouded his cow- 
ardice under the ample cloak of religion, 
made several hemming attempts to resume the 
narrative, to which, sooth to say, Norman had 
given little attention, though it related to the 
frolicks of the mules, and levity of conduct, of 
which no man, from their staid demeanour, 
could ever have suspected them, unless Pe- 
dilla had made the charge himself. 

Meanwhile Norman was pondering his plan 
of defence; but his calculations, though pro- 
vident, were unhappily useless. He now led 
the van of his party, and consequently, on 
rounding a projecting bank, was the first to 
discover a long train of soldiers in the uniform 
of France. Bv an involuntary motion, his fl- 
gure towered into prouder strength ; his brows 
knit, his lips closed, his sinews stiffened, bis 

P 2 



1 02 CLAN-ALBIN, 

eye kindled, yet its look became intensely fix- 
ed ; and even when quick thought reverted to 
the impossibility of defence, his hand instinc- 
tively grasped his arms. He receded one 
step, as if to plant himself more firmly ; and 
Hugh and Luath, comprehending the danger, 
and in the same mood for battle, were instant- 
ly by his side. 

The officer who headed the French party, 
was already advanced. He saluted Norman 
with military frankness. " It was understood 
that Monsieur and Madame had the honour to 
be of England. Apparently they intended to 
make the tour of Spain. The new govern- 
ment had a particular wish that they should 
do the same honour to France. Such was the 
fortune of war ; now Monsieur's turn, next 
mine." — The Frenchman shrugged his shoul- 
ders, and put up his lip a la Francois. If 
eager attitudes could comprehend unknown 
tongues, the Piper bending earnestly forward 
would have understood all that was now said. 
A-i it was, he consulted by a glance the coun- 
tenance of Norman. It expressed haughty 
composure, mingled with disdain. They were 
then prisoners of war 1 

No demand was made for Norman's arms ; 
but Hugh's Donne pistol, and the bloodless sti- 



A NATIONAL TALE. lfi3 

letto of the poor shivering Pedilla, were or- 
dered to he surrendered. Hugh again con- 
sulted the eye of Norman. It rapidly glanced 
from the array before them to Flora and her 
infant, and expressed sullen acquiescence. 
Hugh would not yield ; but he passionately 
threw down his arms, muttering, — " It would 
ill become me to say nay to you or yours ; but 
had I that little gentleman where the black- 
cock is laird, we should see which is the best 
man ; — that's all. Fifty of them to us two ! 
No doubt their masters thought the very sio-ht 
of two Highlanders would frighten them to 
death." 

Norman returned to where Pedilla held 
Flora's mule. He walked with a step more 
measured and stately than usual, and foidino- 
his arm round her and her child, drew them 
gently towaids him. " We are prisoners, it 
seems, Flora: — Well, a certain danger will at 
least cure us of dismal apprehensions. We 
are fallen into the hands of i gallant men and 
cavaliers." — He smiled, but there was bitter. 
ness, and even wrath in his smile. 

" O Norman, but for you, how light an evil 
were this I" cried Flora. This brief speech 
went far to restore his mind to its natural 
tone j he led forward her mule, and with cold 



164 CLAN-ALBIX, 

civility complied with the wish of the French 
officer, who, with characteristic importunity, 
craved to be introduced to the fair prisoner. 

From the conversation of this most com- 
municative M. Duval, captain in the 2d divi- 
sion, Norman learned that he had been tra- 
ced all the way from Astorga. It was, how- 
ever, surmised, that his mission was of a more 
important kind ; and he was suffered to pro- 
ceed, the evil eye continually upon him. But 
even if his business were no other than that 
alleged, the papers he had transmitted from 
Pampeluna shewed how dangerous it was to 
have so quick-sighted an Englishman roam- 
ing at large in Spain. If he could do little, 
lie could see much ; and it appeared that l>e 
well knew what to look for, and what to re- 
port. M. Duval, witli a party of fifty soldiers, 
was therefore despatched to bring this couple 
of Scotish Highlanders into Saragossa. 

The curious and disjointed conversation, 
(during which the Frenchman had rather 
betrayed than told these particulars) being 
closed, he invited his prisoners to share in the 
repast his party were about to make after this 
day's important service. Flora declined this 
invitation by gentle gestures, and Hugh, by 
sullen silence, while Norman replied in 



A NATIONAL TALE. 165 

French, that he hud other business. Pedilla 
alone, though, in all probability, ignorant of 
the discreet Scotish proverb, " Better the end 
of a feast than the beginning of a fray," prac- 
tically acted upon it; and, ceasing for the 
time to bewail his captive mules, uninvited 
joined the carousing soldiers. 

The bravery, gaiety, good-temper, and mi- 
litary enthusiasm of these soldiers gradually 
thawed the frost-work national prejudice had 
reared round the heart of Norman ; and as 
they continued to journey together, he felt a 
sort of vague disappointment in discovering 
that French soldiers were not all, become the 
fierce savages the newspapers of the day re- 
presented them. To expect good principle, 
or uniform good conduct, in a soldier, was 
going rather beyond the mark; and he found 
little to choose between the lawless brigand of 
Bonaparte, and the more polished musqueteer 
of Louis Quatorze. The Carmagnole and 
JSJarseillois hymn> had indeed been acquired ; 
but that licentious gaiety, which lent imagi- 
nary grace to former periods, was by no means 
forgotten; and the favourite song was still, 

<c Attendant la gloire, 
Goutons le plaisir." 



106 CLAN'-ALBI^, 

Our travellers had been two days under the 
guidance of their self-appointed conductors, 
when they first saw the distant spires of Sara- 
gossa flashing in the sun of a bright noon. Sa- 
ragossa, the recent scene of so many heroic 
prodigies ! Norman turned to Flora, and, 
pointing forward, exclaimed, " Saragossa I 
how glorious ! A thousand years hence hearts 
shall bound at the view of thee !" — The in- 
fant, struck by his animated gesture, quivered 
its little limbs with eager joy to reach him. 
He held it high in the air, saying, " Yon, 
Hector, is a spectacle for a hero's child. M — 
A momentary joy fluttered round the lip of 
poor Flora. The heart of Norman promised 
him friends in this city, and scarcely could 
his reason fear enemies. 

The military police established in this ob- 
noxious city was at this time peculiarly rigid. 
Norman was no sooner within its walls than 
he was deprived of all his baggage, — separa- 
ted from the widow of his friend, — and placed 
in close confinement. Torn from the shel- 
tering bosom on which she had rested her 
helplessness, the faculties of Flora were now 
roused to combat with the ills of life ; and this 
compelled activity, by abstracting her thoughts 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 67 

from the world within, proved, on the whole, 
a wholesome exercise. 

An opportunity soon occurred of sending 
the prisoners into France, along with some 
sick officers and soldiers returning home, and 
a detachment of troops travelling towards Ge- 
rona. The day which again united the pri- 
soners was gladly greeted, though on it com- 
menced their journey towards the scene of a 
long, and it might be an interminable capti- 
vity. 

Those who had plundered them of their 
baggage, under the poor pretext of examin- 
ing their papers, wanted not reasons for re- 
taining the spoils. From the sale of his own 
watch and Hugh's, and the gold that encir- 
cled the picture of those he called his pa- 
rents, Norman had flattered himself that he 
might raise a small sum for the unavoidable 
expenses of a long journey. Now, in the 
desperation of that impending poverty, which 
he felt only as it might affect Flora and her 
child, he adopted the desperate expedient of 
writing to several individuals in Saragossa, of 
high rank and known patriotism, describing 
his condition, and avowing his necessities, 
with that vehement frankness which a proud 
and delicate mind employs in revealing a 



108 CLAX-ALBIN, 

long-hidden anguish. These letters, written 
on the eve of his departure, necessarily pass- 
ed through the hands of his guards; and the 
uniform answer, as might indeed have been 
anticipated, was a formal denial, sometimes 
accompanied by an expression of surprise at 
so strange an application. 

With new and bitter feelings, closing his 
eyes in calm disdain, Norman turned from 
the sight of poor Flora, seated, with her in- 
fant in her lap, on a baggage-waggon, which 
followed this grotesque party from Saragossa. 
This was a slight circumstance to her ; and 
when she thanked the young French officer 
who procured this slender indulgence, she 
smiled at the reproachful glance Norman cast 
upon her, and smiled a second time as she 
saw him gradually draw nearer to this sick 
young man, and in dangerous places seize 
the reins of his restive horse, and lead it 
forward. 

Norman was just about to shake the dust 
oft' his feet, as a testimony against this inhos- 
pitable city, when the party was suddenly 
alarmed by a cloud of dust, from whence 
emerged, with Cossack-like impetuo<iry, a 
small troop of Guerillas, who, disengaging 
themselves from a light though clumsy car- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 16Q 

riage that galloped after them, and throwing 
a packet which they carried at the head of 
Pedilla, burst into a peal of laughter at the 
alarmed appearance of the Frenchmen, and 
as abruptly wheeled off. Norman was the 
first to unriddle this seeming mystery, by 
eagerly snatching at the packet, which was 
addressed thus : " From the Guerilla Chief 
of Catalonia to his English Friends." A sum 
of money, not very large, but at this season 
most welcome, was the only thing contained 
in this abruptly delivered packet. Nor- 
man immediately placed Flora in the vehicle 
that he doubted not was intended for her_; 
and very quietly putting up the money he 
had received, turned a deaf ear to the angry 
remonstrances of M. Duval, who, now reco- 
vered from his panic, demanded, in name of 
the Emperor, whatever had been received by 
the prisoners. Bearded even in sight of the 
walls of Saragossa, and dreading the future 
visits of these fierce-looking Guerillas, M. 
Duval would willingly have gone back for 
fresh orders, had not the other officers hinted 
the unpleasant consequences which might 
arise from this, and succeeded in persuading 
him that it might be quite as well to fall into 
the hands of a Guerilla party, as into those 
VOL. iv. q, 



170 CLAN-ALBIX, 

of a military commission. M. Duval marched 
onward, keeping a better look-out, and con- 
tenting himself with angry remonstrances 
against the Arab-like mode of warfare re- 
cently adopted in Spain. 

In vain did Norman mould even- cloud and 
bush into a distant Guerilla party, ready 
aid his struggle for freedom ; for the motley- 
squadron which he followed reached Ger< 
without interruption ; and there dropped 
that had been interesting to him, the young- 
friend of Flora, and the detachment which 
he headed. 

Instead of pursuing the route originally 
intended, M. Duval, the fear of Guerillas 
being still before his eyes, took a more cen- 
tral and less-frequented road in roach 
the Pyrenees. 

Gradually 7 ascending for three success 
days, our travellers were at last embosomed 
in the very centre of the Pvrenees. Past all 
danger from the Guerilla parties now formi 
in Catalonia, M. Duval proceeded quite at 
his ease. It was the interest and delight 
of Norman to lengthen out this journey; for 
escape was slili his cherished hope, and the 
bravadoing captain was in no great baste to 
lay down his command, and enter on the dull 



A NATIONAL TALE. 171 

garrison duty that awaited him in dismal 
Flanders. 

Though this little gentleman never failed 
to make requisition in name and by authority 
of his Imperial master, even this powerful 
name procured but sorry accommodation. 
But the eyes of those who had eyes to behold 
the wild magnificence and terrific grandeur of 
the surrounding scenery, were amply repaid 
for the privations of the other senses. Flora, 
who had evidently drooped since she had been 
borne from the milder air and more equal 
temperature of the lowlands, was sometimes 
beguiled into an involuntary expression of 
admiration as these sublime scenes unfolded 
before her. 

Norman had been deprived of Craig- gillian's 
pistols in Saragossa ; but, on better acquain- 
ance, he was permitted to carry a fowling- 
piece belonging to one of the party, as he 
was often fortunate enough to make very de- 
sirable additions to the evening repast. It 
was now wholly entrusted to him ; and he was 
permitted either to linger behind, or walk 
forward, either in pursuit of game, or to 
sketch some bold feature of the mountains, 
which Monimia's hand might' yet extend. 
Flora was the sure pledge of his return. 



172 CLAN-ALBIX, 

On the afternoon of the third day that they 
had travelled in the Pyrenees, he was far in 
advance of his party. The mountains through 
which the road wound, narrowed, and seemed 
to close over his head ; and by an abrupt de- 
scent he entered a ravine of considerable ex- 
tent, forming altogether the most magnificent 
pass that he had ever beheld. Lenny and Bea- 
lach-nam-bo dwindled into insignificance in 
the comparison. It seemed as if the moun- 
tain had been rent from its summit to its base, 
to afford a channel to the river, which roared 
many fathoms beneath. Rocks piled on rocks, 
in every fantastic form, threatened the travel- 
ler from above, while, suspended in mid-aii^ 
he held on his perilous way by a path con- 
cealed from his view, and opening as he ad- 
vanced. Trees and shrubs of every size and 
species sprung from the crevices and shelves 
of these rocks, throwing around this sublime 
pass all the charms of shade and colour, and 
all the embellishment of rich foliage. The 
summit of the cliffs was crowned by meeting 
pines, which might have waved there in soli- 
tude before the mountain burst asunder. Now 
their heavy masses of shade, nearly exclud- 
ing the view of the heavens, deepened the 
gloom of the tremendous ravine they shadow- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 173' 

ed. The first emotion of Norman, on plun- 
ging into this defile, was thrilling admira- 
tion ; but even here, locked up, as it were, 
in the jaws of an abyss, his second thought 
was freedom. With Hugh, and his wolf- 
dog by his side, and Flora and her child be- 
hind him, he felt as if he could have de- 
fended this pass against an host of foes. 
As it was, the chasm yawned beneath : the 
party, lulled into security, must in this nar- 
row path advance man by man. He stretch- 
ed his neck, he strained his eyes, deep into 
the river that toiled through the opposing 
rocks, — turned away, and shuddered, that an 
idea so dark should, even for one moment, 
have stained his mind. Was there no hope left ? 
— His e\ T e impatiently measured the cliffs ; — 
even if the chasm were passed, they appear- 
ed insurmountable, — yet in such places there 
were often caverns, fissures, or recesses that 
might afford temporary security. He recall- 
ed the marvels related in Highland legends, 
— the stories which had delighted his boyhood, 
— the narratives of Wallace and de Bruce, — 
and of those devoted reformers, whom the 
Scottish peasantry, not unaptly, term the 
martyrs ;— he thought of the crags of Cart- 
lane, and the rocks of Cora Linn, equally dau- 

Q2 



174 CLAN-ALBIN, 

gerous, if not so fearfully stupendous, as this 
pass. Idea flashed after idea, with the rapi- 
dity of invention and comhination in moments 
of powerful feeling. 

" O, for a single plank to span that chasm!" 
cried he, and ran forward in search of some 
spot accessible to the foot of man, by which 
he might scale the cliffs, and tear down that 
pine- branch, which might support his footing 
with Flora and the infant Hector. He dart- 
ed round the acute face of a precipice, and 
on a platform of earth, of a few feet in di- 
ameter, — which seemed to have been the 
base of an immense block of rock that had 
tumbled down since the path was hollowed 
out, — discovered a kneeling female, sprink- 
ling, from a rude vase which she held, what 
appeared to be a new made grave. The 
young girl looked up, shrieked, started, and 
fled. Norman as quickly followed. She glid- 
ed round another jutting rock, and crossed 
the chasm on the slender trunk of a tree which 
here united its sides. Norman paused in 
mute rapture; and the girl having gained a 
precarious footing on the opposite side, with 
great quickness and presence of mind, turn- 
ed to destroy her perilous bridge. He cried 
out with threatening gestures ; she still per- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 175 

sisted ; and levelling his fowling-piece in an- 
other direction, he fired off, while a thousand 
sullen echoes mingled with the shrieks of the 
terrified girl. He sprung over, and found her 
panting with fear at the base of the cliffs, 
which she attempted to scale in the manner 
common to all inhabited mountain districts, 
by climbing from height to height, clinging 
to ropes formed of twisted fibres of trees, fas- 
tened to the tough knotted roots which sprung 
from the fissures of the rocks. It was the 
ladders so well known among the moun- 
tains of Switzerland, the Alps of Savoy, and 
the hills of Scotland, — and Norman blessed 
the sight. 

His first care was to sooth his agitated 
companion j and his was not a face, or form, 
or manner, to alarm the most timid female 
nature. The young girl appeared entirely 
unacquainted with French, and but little more 
familiar with the pure Spanish of Castile ; but 
her rapid gestures, and her brown eyes 
sparkling with increasing interest and intelli- 
gence, shewed that she soon comprehended his 
situation and his wishes. She also attempted 
to tell her own little story in a strange mix- 
ture of the Catalan and Spanish tongues. 
The universal language, however, predomin- 



176 cla:;- albix, 

ated ; and Norman learned that this animated 
speaker had been bedewing with consecrated 
water the grave of some beloved object, a 
lover or a brother, who, in assisting his coun- 
trymen to defend the pass, had fallen and 
been buried here. 

Norman followed his young and agile guide 
up the ladders, fixing his footsteps in rude 
niches cut into the face of the rocks. He dis- 
covered a wide upland track of country, unin- 
habited, marshy, and barren. Having by 
every gentle entreaty engaged the young 
Spaniard to wait his arrival on this spot, he 
descended, removed and concealed the frail 
bridge, and flew back to Flora. 

The party had not yet entered the gorge of 
the defile. It was the wish of Norman to di- 
vide their strength, but his first object was 
the safety of the child. As he was often ac- 
customed to carry Hector in his arms for miles 
together, he now took him from Flora, and 
whispering Hugh to follow, ran forward with 
Luath, in seeming play. Again he placed his 
bridge, — crossed the chasm, — and climbed 
the ladders. The Spanish girl was no where 
to be seen. He stood for a few moments in 
distracting suspense, and then formed the re- 
solution of binding his little charge to a tree. 



A NATIONAL TALE t 177 

This was quickLy accomplished,; but no sooner 
was the little smiling prisoner abandoned, 
than the most dreadful apprehensions took 
possession of the mind of Norman : — Should 
he burst the bands which held him and creep 
to the ledge of the precipice, — birds of prey, 
— wild beasts, which the late carnage might 
have attracted to this spot ; — a thousand forms 
of danger haunted his imagination ; and had 
not Hugh at that moment appeared, it is pro- 
bable that he might have given up his enter- 
prise to have once more clasped the child in 
safety. To the Piper he instantly communi- 
cated his project, and retaining Luath, dis- 
missed him to Hector. 

The headmost stragglers of the party pass- 
ed on carelessly, smoking and singing; but it 
seemed an age of time ere M. Duval appear- 
ed dancing down the defile by the side of Flo- 
ra's vehicle, shrugging his shoulders, and ex- 
claiming at every new step, " Ah, Madame, 
vat a place dismal dis be." 

" Stand on your life, Monsieur," cried 
Norman, suddenly springing forward and 
seizing the sword of his quondam gaoler, 
whom he pushed before him across the chasm, 
and left in charge of the growling Luath. 
" Apparently Monsieur is in earnest," said 



178 CLAN-ALBIN, 

the petrified Capitaine, who wanted nei- 
ther courage nor address, though a naked 
sword behind, and a yawning deep beneath, 
left him little opportunity for the display of 
either. 

"Your conjecture is just, Monsieur: Chaqitc 
un a son tour" said Norman, smiling. " The 
game is now in my hands, and life and free- 
dom is the stake." He flew back to Flora. 
Some of the soldiers were now in sight ; the 
captain raised his voice, and Luath opened 
his tremendous jaws. " Mon pauvre petit 
homme," said the captain in a caressing voice ; 
and lest Luath might be unacquainted with 
French, he added, u my poor leetle I'ellozv" 
and made one step forward. But though a 
Highland dog, Luath discovered all the surly 
fidelity of an English mastiff; and remaining 
firm at his post, he compelled the French- 
man to remain in silence where Norman had 
left him. 

Meanwhile, Norman having lifted Flora in 
his arms, was again seen bearing her across 
the tottering bridge, and at the same instant 
Hugh descended ; and some of the soldiers 
advancing discovered the durance of M. Du- 
val, and gave the alarm. " Courage, dear 
Flora !" cried Norman, placing her in safety 



A NATIONAL TALE. 179 

at the bottom of the cliffs. " The ladders ! 
behold ! one other effort for freedom ; — home, 
friends, liberty and your child are beyond 
these cliffs !" — Soldiers appeared on the faith- 
less bridge ; Norman and Hugh flew towards 
the point of danger, and Flora attempted to 
ascend by the ladders, but her shaking limbs 
refused to obey her will, till she heard the cries 
of her child from the top of the precipice, 
and made another effort. 

Mid- way up the rocks she clung to the root of 
a tree, gasping for breath, when, far, far below, 
she suddenly heard the shouts of enraged and 
struggling men, blended with the roaring of 
the w r aters, and the tremendous howling of the 
wolf-dog. She beheld the figures of Norman, 
of Hugh, of Duval and his soldiers, the glitter 
of swords, and the flash of fire-arms, by hi- 
deous glimpses slanting from the deep sha- 
dows that enveloped the bottom of the gulph. 
Still more appalling were the growling echoes 
that, in a thousand unearthly tones, returned 
the unhallowed sounds that rose from its 
depths ; the shrieks of the drowning, — the 
crash of the falling. 

The energy of terror alone preserved her 
sensibility ; she gathered breath to crawl up- 
wards, and perceiving her child in the arms 



180 CLAN-ALB1N, 

of a young woman, sunk almost lifeless on 
the ground. But not long was she permitted 
the indulgence of this helpless inaction. An- 
other and another figure flitted hefore her 
eyes, neither resembling the soldier of Eng- 
land nor of France. Fierce, brawny, ruffian- 
like, — those rude forms seemed but too well 
to harmonize with the scene she had just 
witnessed ; — the hair, which covered their 
faces, lent new ferocity to the eyes that glared 
through its heavy masses. Their half-naked 
limbs, and the skins that imperfectly covered 
their bodies, well assimilated with the mur- 
derous weapons stuck round their girdles, 
and the dreadful purpose that gleamed in 
their dark looks. 

" Oh, my triends ! Oh my infant !" cried 
Flora, stretching out her imploring hands, 
" Oh spare the innocent blood !" 

" Pedro ! Bertranlo ! my good friends !" 
cried a voice from behind, — the voice of Nor- 
man. " Flora, my poor Flora, compose your- 
self, — we are free ; th^se are patriot soldiers, 
my comrades, in the fastnesses of Biscay; — 
follow me,"Bertrando." He again descended, 
folio*ved by the Guerillas. Tlie garments of 
Nuruian were in some places dabbled in 
blood, and " the rage of a man" had not quite 



A NATIONAL TALE. 181 

left his countenance ; but he lived, and to 
Flora he seemed as an angel of heaven. Hugh 
and Luath remained by her side ; her child 
again nestled in her bosom, and a passionate 
burst of tears relieved her aching heart. 

M We did for one good half-dozen of them, 
I warrant," said Hugh ; " and got back all 
our papers, and Colonel Hector's pistols too. 
Was she not a clever girl, now, that ran for 
our old comrades, though it was all over be- 
fore they came, and the Frenchmen tumbling 
in the water like pellochs." 

"Alas, poor fellows!" said Flora, " that 
have travelled beside us for this many a day; 
would rather that we had all died prisoners." 
Hugh was too well bred to dissent from a lady, 
but he hemmed a contradiction. 

The fray was now concluded. Some of the 
captors were in their turn made captive. Pe- 
dilla rose from his knees, and, in the name of 
the English party, took possession of M. Du- 
val's baggage for his own peculiar use. 

The prisoners were committed to a nume- 
rous party of Guerillas to be conveyed to the 
head-quarters of their chief; and Norman a- 
gain joined Flora, triumphantly displaying a 
packet, ad-dressed to himself, in the handwri- 
ting of General . " Flora, was not this 

VOL. IV. R 



182 CLAN-ALBIX, 

worth contending- for ?" — He tore open the 
envelope, and perceived the handwriting of 
the Lady ! Breathless, and with woman- 
ish emotion, he turned aside, and pressed this 
precious packet to his lips, — his bosom, — his 
eyes ! This was not in him an eastern cus- 
tom, — it was a northern impulse. It was im- 
possible to open these letters while any hu- 
man eye was upon him ; and he plunged in- 
to a neighbouring thicket. The letter of the 
General was from Cadiz, and of recent date ; 
but Norman could not stop to examine it. 
He tore open the epistle of Lady Augusta, — 
glanced over its contents, — looked at the 
date, the signature, the post-mark, and again 
read it over more slowly. He then carefullv 
folded it up, and returned to Flora with news of 
home. Her enfeebled condition, and the irri- 
tation produced by the events of this trying 
day, had so unhappy an effect on her spirits 
and her health, that his first care was to tind 
some shelter for the night, which was now 
fast coming on. In the neighbouring moun- 
tains were caverns and subterraneous dwel- 
lings, in which the Guerilla chief had his ma- 
gazine, his hospital, and a place where he 
made his gunpowder ; and thither Bertrando 
offered to conduct his former leader. In the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 183 

absence of any better plan, this was adopt- 
ed ; and a litter, formed for carrying the 
wounded, was provided for Flora. 

During this night-march, which proved 
very fatiguing and tedious, Norman learned 
that his unknown benefactor, the Guerilla 
chief of Catalonia, had sent out various 
parties to intercept M. Duval, though none 
of them had been fortunate enough to fall in 
with him ; and that the chief himself, with 
some gentlemen of his train, and a strong 
party, had on that very morning left the ren- 
dezvous which they now approached, for the 
declared purpose of rescuing the English pri- 
soners. The gratitude and curiosity of Nor- 
man were equally excited by this account; 
and he hoped that, before he left Spain, he 
might find an opportunity of acknowledging 
the goodness of the Guerilla chief. 

It was nearly midnight before they arrived 
at the end of their journey ; and Flora, com- 
pletely exhausted, was borne in the arms of 
Norman from the litter to the farther end of 
a cavern, long, narrow, and rugged ; its high 
and vaulted cope, only guessed at from the 
sooty films that, depending from the roof, 
waved to every gust of wind which swept 
through the low and arched entrance. All the 



184 CLAN-ALBIN, 

disgusting detail of a predatory and almost 
barbarous life hung against its sides, or lay 
scatt red in heaps on the floor ; broken fire- 
arms, rude cooking utensils, the flesh and 
t,kins of animals, and the uncouth habits of 
men. 

The heavy eye of Flora wandered from 
these objects, through the murky perspec- 
tive stretching before her. A kiln, in which 
barilla was burning, blazed at the entrance of 
the cave. The strong, but fitful illumina- 
tion it cast on the projecting points of the 
cavern, threw the adjacent tez£9*ea into 
•gloomier shadow ; while the grotesque figures 
which, in various attitudes, stole into light, 
when tinted by the cadaverous hue produced 
by the flaming alkali, seemed rather a congre- 
gation of spectres celebrating their nocturnal 
orgies, than any assemblage of living men. 

" I cannot rest here," she cried, " though 
I die with fatigue/' 

Norman saw with great pain her flushed 
cheek and painful respiration, and a second 
time he smoothed her uneasy pallet ; and for 
his own sake, and the sake of her little one, 
implored her to seek repose. 

" Oh, Norman !" said she, in Gaelic," what 
should I refuse to you ? — my oldest, now my 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 85 

dearest living friend. — I cannot thank you, 
Norman, my brother, but I will bless you, 
for very tender have you been to me ; and my 
God, and my father's God, deal with you as 
you have done by the dead and by me." 

The eyes of Norman swelled with softness 
as this sweet and suffering creature turned 
round, and, sighing, sought to compose her- 
self to rest. 

In a little while alt became still in the ca- 
vern. Some of the Guerillas went off on an 
excursion, and others retired to various cor- 
ners to woo that repose which was never coy 
to them. A rude curtain of skins divided 
Flora's chamber from the parlour, kitchen r 
and hall of the band ; without it, sat Norman. 
Hugh and Luath were snoring on each side 
of him ; he trimmed his lamp, and again un- 
folding the letters of Lady Augusta, — one of 
which had been written so far back as the 
time he was in Portugal, and the other not 
long after the battle of Corunna, — and read 
as follows : 



a 2 



186 CLAN-ALB1X, 



CHAP. XLVI. 



Nome, word delightful to the heart of man. 

Grahame. 

Lasting was our abode together, 

During two generations that departed like leave*. 

The sapling that the foot would have crushed, 

Have we beheld with age decaying j 

Streams shifting their channels ; 

Nettles in the abode of kings. 

TRANSLATION OF A GAELIC POEW. 



* Often have you grieved with me, now re- 
joice with me, my beloved Norman, — our Mo- 
nimia is my inmate, my boarder, — revere her 
considerate goodness, — the lovely tenant of 
your little attic chamber." The lady next ad- 
verted to those events which had fixed the re- 
sidence of Mo nimia in Eleenalin, with which 
the reader is already acquainted, and then 
went on. — M Many persons may think, and 
some will say, that narrow circumstances have 



A NATIONAL TALE. 18/ 

led her hither; but I folded this charming girl 
to my bosom, with the proud consciousness 
that her own warm heart, and clear judgment, 
brought her back to Scotland. 

" You may guess, then, that this has been 
a sweet season in Eleenalin. My dear old 
woman has been in nice good health, so has 
all her household ; even her bees, she bids 
me tell you, have joyed in this summer's uni- 
versal gladness ; and your old favourites, the 
little singing birds, which always loved us, 
have become more frequent and familiar than 
ever. Numerous swallows, also, have had the 
good taste to fix their tiny domiciles in the 
thatch that o'er- arches Monimia's windows. 
At dawn their twittering note is so cheerful ! 
— but they have another claim on us : Mary 
tells Moome that they have passed over 
Spain ; and she looks at them so kindly, and 
the mind of ten years, and of ten times ten, 
taking the same wild flight, sees these airy 
travellers skimming over the head of our 
far-distant Norman, to nestle round the 
window of Monimia. Could you peep in 
through that window, and now see your little 
abode hung with its gay light paper and dain- 
ty white furniture, — its neglected roses again 
trained, and clustering round the low case- 



188 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ment, and its flower-vases breathing fragrance 
from every recess, — you would wonder what 
fairy wand had called forth so much simple 
elegance from the wonted litter of books and 
papers, and trophies of the chase, and dried 
plants, and specimens of minerals. A French- 
man would say, * A woman dwells here.' Yet 
I can perceive, that, from tenderness to 
Moome, many of its ancient ornaments are 
spared. Your rough drawings, and the little 
book-shelf, that hung behind your alcove- 
bed, — even your old fowling-piece is per- 
mitted to cumber the apartment of the ele- 
gant Monimia ; and never does poor Moome 
pass any of those memorials without involun- 
tarily stopping to give them a polish with her 
apron. We can then see that she ' is in 
heaven for you f but she quietly passes on. 
I am also charged with good news of Hugh's 
garden ; — your own is a little Eden,— our 
Monimia its blooming Eve. The laburnums 
are trailing their ' streamy gold ' on the 
waters of the lake; the globe-flowers throw- 
ing out their * silver balls,' to mingle with the 
gentle surf that breaks on our quiet shores ; 
— not so quiet, however, as to be altogether 
untrodden. Many poor visitors, with long 
memories, have done the honours of the High- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1 8Q 

lands to onr Monimia ; ami some fine la- 
dies from the Fort have also paid us, what 
Moome, in her lack of English, calls a visi- 
tation ; a word which Monimia has adopted 
as singularly happy in this application. But 
Craig-gillian, as you may believe, is our most 
welcome guest. He never fails to ride over 
when he receives a letter, and our young la- 
dies are careful to return his visits. An old, 
but tolerably well- toned Scotish harp, from the 
Castle, has also lent its aid to increase our 
store of domestic pleasures; and we have got 
a great addition to our little library. You 
know that Monimia, like our friend Joseph 
Surface, is a coxcomb only in books. 

" Thus, am I again, dear Norman, restored 
to all my cherished habits and pleasures j 
above all, to free communion with a pure, 
and young, and intelligent mind. 

" But I forget that it was of business I was 
to write to-day, — and I fear that I may talk 
long enough of business before you dare list- 
en to me. You don't know that we have got 
the lease of Glen-albin from the poor hen- 
pecked Montague. It was Craig-gillian's 
wish ; and when Hugh and yourself have ga- 
thered enough of glory and laurels, we in- 
tend to reclaim you to the better glory of be- 



1Q0 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ing our grass keepers. Meanwhile, Craig- 
giilian's bUck Arc Ivy is the most faithful stew- 
ard that evt i wierd women possessed. 

" Lut Craig-gillian is to write you of these 
matters, — let me then pass to a better topic, — 
m\ honest Mac donald ! who writes me, that he 
has been so successful ut late speculations as 
to resum payment. I am, I own, pleased with 
this, a little for our own sak-. , and very much 
for his. The esteem of your fellow men, and 
an honest fame, I have always coveted for 
you, dear Norman, but never great riches. 
We shall have wealth enough for happiness ;— 
would then, that you were restored to us, since 
she, for whose t.ake aione we ought to value 
distinction, feels and thinks as I do. 

M Fortune placed our young friend very 
early on those glittering summits of society, 
to which distance too often lends enchant- 
ment. She soon found that they were bar- 
ren ; and reason and choice have conducted 
her to the green and sheltered valley, in which 
alone beaut) alio f rtilit) are found united, lam 
pleased, that, m forming her estimates of life, 
Monunia has had so wide and so diversified a 
field of observation ; and still more, to find 
that, though her rural enthusiasm is little abat- 
ed, her systems are neither so intolerant nor 



A NATIONAL TALE. I9I 

excluding as formerly ; — she has found that, 
even in the fashionable world, there is some 
happiness, considerable virtue, and almost all 
grace; — she can even express occasional re- 
gret at an entire exclusion from good society. 
I augur well of all this ; for I think I have 
often observed, that the opinions of a strong 
mind become fixed in the same proportion 
that they become just. She now practically 
knows, that her own little circle of friends, 
and her own favourite modes of life, do not 
include all that is pure and felicitous ; but 
she feels that they exclude much evil, and 
that they are best suited to her. In this quiet 
home, endeared by affection, choice, and 
duty, she has placed her happiness ; and 
when a woman like our Monimia is wise 
enough to place her treasure in her home, 
she will generally find or make it there." 

In another place she described the flow of 
her day, chearful and social ; and the various 
occupations of Monimia, in superintending 
their little household, educating her young 
charge, and cultivating her own talents. " but 
I must give you an idea of us," said the lady ; 
" for I know that it will be an engaging one 
to }'ou. It is a holiday in Eleenalin, and the 
hour is evening. My Monimia has justended 



1Q2 CLAN-ALBIN, 

the lady-like duties of her tea-table. You 
know that I am too proud to take this refresh- 
ing-, and almost intellectual meal, from me- 
nial hands, although on holidays we had ser- 
vants, as we have not ; for then we permit our 
maidens to visit their friends, and Mary, so 
proud and so important, is our sole attend- 
ant ; and, like the youngling princesses in an- 
cient story, even brings us pure water from 
the fountain. I need not tell you, that we 
are all very diligent readers and hearers 
of the newspaper*: But perhaps you would 
not guess that Moome has become a student 
of geography in her old age ; — and this is our 
present employment. Her notions — for every 
body has notions of the relative situations of 
countries — are strangely wild; andMonimiais, 
with sweet earnestness, tracing a map of Spain 
and Portugal on the tea-bjard ; and now 
Uriah puts on her black- rimmed spectacles 
to study the position of the armies. * But I 
had a notion, darling, that Spain was over by 

the way of Strath * * Ah, no! just the 

reverse — down rather by Glenlennan.' 

" Well, it always lies by the way of Strath 

, in my own mind ; and I can't put it out 

of that, dearest.' 



A NATIONAL TALE. 19$ 

" On the whole, I perceive that it is not easy 
to put preconceived notions i out of that :' 
There are no spectacles for a dimning mind, 
dear Norman. 

" But put on your new spectacles, if you 
please ; you don't see clearly with those, 
Moome,' said Monimia. ' Yes, darling, but 
they are very well.' — ' Not well, if you can't 
see.' — * Yes, jewel, they are very well.' 

" Monimia is neither Highland nor Irish 
enough to know how any thing can be very 
well, when small trouble would make it really 
so ; and, bent on giving the information Moome 
so eagerly desired, she insisted a third time. 

" I had these, dear, from Ireland,' said 
Moome, in a quiet tone, for she makes no 
parade of her affection. * Ah then!' cried 
Monimia, rubbing them very bright, and peep- 
ing into her old face with playful kindness, 
1 you see nicely now, my Moome.' Moni- 
mia's dark eye caught my smile, I fancy, and 
a thousand innocent shames flitted over her 
cheek ; but quickly recovering from this love- 
ly confusion, and fixing her mildest look on 
Unah, she slowly repeated, from my favou- 
rite bard, 

TOL. iv s 



1Q4 CLAN-ALBTN, 

<c And still to love, when pross'd with ill, 
In hoary age to feel no chill, 
With me is to be lovely still, 

My Moomie /" 

" Am I not a good old woman now, to wear 
out my own poor eyes in telling you so long 
a story about Moome's spectacles. But I must 
finish the outline of a picture, which I leave 
you to fill up, by telling you that your little 
cousin is floating in your old swing, hung to 
that very elm tree on which Hugh — the most 
faithful of the Hughs — from year to year re- 
corded your amazing stature, generally add- 
ing an inch or two ; but we forgave him, for 
it was done in kindness." 

How sweet, how soothing to the wanderer, 
at this midnight hour, to picture out the dis- 
tant home thus described, even in its minutest 
arrangements, and to figure the distinctive 
attributes and employments of each loved in- 
dividual ! — to peep through the honeysuckle 
which embowered the window of the small 
parlour ; and in the favourite recess, to see 
the Bible of the Lady, and the work-basket 
of Monimia, and in it the selected volume of 
the day !— to behold the calm, mild, dignified 
aspect of Lady Augusta, as in the true throne 



A NATIONAL TALE. 1Q5 

of happy old age, the parlour arm-chair, she 
sat surrounded by her little family I — to re- 
vert to the neat lovv figure of Moome, twirl- 
ing her spindle at the feet of her Lady — her 
lively eye, her courteous smile ; the features 
of a green old age, decently shaded by the 
clear lawn, and its whiteness tamed by the 
edging of the velvet hood which Moaimia's 
hand had fashioned ; while that form of love- 
liness started up before the eye of fancy, 
with recollection so quick, vivid, and thrill- 
ing, that it seemed like a supernatural influ- 
ence ; And when this transport subsided, it 
was still so soberly blissful to place his Moni- 
mia by the side of Lady Augusta, instead of 
baffled fancy pursuing her through strange 
and unendeared scenes — to place her there, 
and to worship her ! And Norman could also 
see Monimia lift the latch to recal the play- 
ful fugitive from her airy sport, and his aged 
Braan bound forward, and close his pleased 
eye, and arch his graceful neck, to meet the 
pressure of her caressing hand ; and he could 
see every eye meet on the lily hand that 
rested on this old favourite ; aud the knitting- 
needles stop, and the " half-spun thread twirl 
backward/ 7 and hear the low sigh, sacred to 
Limself, which rose from every bosom. Nor- 



1Q(3 CLAN ALBItf, 

man could have drawn all this, and, in the 
silence of night, when no eye was upon him, 
he could have wept over it. How delightful 
the Tpossession of an imagination thus haunt- 
ed by images of beauty and affection ; — but 
how blessed that heart which is drawn to- 
wards them, " by the cords of love, and the 
bands of a man." 

The other letter was written after a vague 
rumour had reached Eleenalin that Macalbin 
had found Flora in Astorga ; and ihat after a 
forunate escape they were now in Lisbon, 
oniy waiting iho re-establishment of her health 
to return to Scotland. After a long detail of 
domestic events, — i'ew in number indeed, for 
the history of their feelings was that of their 
lives, — the Lady adverted to Craig-gillian, 
that eld man, whose childless a»e was LroincT 
down to the grave in sorrow. p So many 
tender feelings," said she, " blended with the 
veneration he entertained for the exalted be- 
ing he had the honour to call his son, that the 
whole composed an affection as rare as beau, 
tiful in its character. The privileges of na- 
ture appeared to be suspended by ihe majes- 
ty of virtue ; and the father seemed n ady to 
bow his grey head to receive the benediction 
of Jhis child/' 



A NATIONAL TALE. 197 

" OurMonimia is a very frequent visitor in 
the Glen, and we have a double motive for 
sending over little Mary. Our fair friend 
carries the point of honour so far, that I am 
not sure if she would not grieve to see hei? 
pupil, at any age, renounce the errors of the 
faith in which she is instructed at Glen-gih- 
lian. At a late visit, by chance, or perhaps it 
might be by benevolent design, Monimia hap- 
pened to select,for her pupil's lesson, that por- 
tion of Hume's history, which records, by far 
the most beautiful funeral oration that I know 
out of sacred writ, — OuMOND,for his noble Os- 
SOJtY : * I would not exchange my dead son foE 
any living son in Europe/ Craig-gillian is no 
bookish man, — but next day he made Mary 
seek out this passage, and he folded it down" 

After mentioning some other trifles which 
the heart cherishes and the world scorns, the 
lady continued. " Before the young people 
went abroad, they had their picture painted 
by your friend, the wandering artist whom 
our good stars once led to Eleenalin. Its ar- 
rival last year produced great rejoicings in 
the Glen. It was the first of a new series, and 
Craig-gillian looked on it with the pride of 
family and of arTection v I need not acquaint 
you, that the last series, which probably wa* 

S 2 



1 QB CLAN-ALBItf , 

of no great value to any body but our worthy 
neighbour, was destroyed, when the castle 
was burnt by the orders of Ihikt WHUam. 
You have not forgot the butcheries of Cul- 
loden, nor that the sorrows of Hector the 
hunter had a very real cause. 

" But to the painting : It is a master-piece 
of beautiful art, because it is an animated and 
faithful transcript of beautiful nature, — our 
sweet Flora, arming her lover for the field, 
looks on him with woman's fondest pride ; 
while he regards her with that quiet bland 
smile, which was all and only Hector's. The 
painter had never seen the accompanying 
scenery; but I think he had not the eyes of a 
man who could not understand poor Flora's des- 
scription of the banks of her Monzievar, and 
that beautiful spot, where Hector had chosen 
his grave in the days when he first told her 
that he loved, and made her too happy by 
the revelation. Alas ! that fate should have 
denied him that grave which choice had sanc- 
tified. 

" Many a far travelled pair of brogues were 
dolled last year, that the wearer might be in- 
troduced to the picture, — even the uell-re- 
membered beggar was ushered up stairs by 



A NATIONAL TALE, 1QQ 

the good Craig-gillian; and if none of the 
servants had time to indulge the followers 
with this sight, Craig-gillian, though he chid 
their folly, always had time to gratify their 
wish. 

" Last year, a sad fellow, — 2.. genius, — too 
clever to he good for any thing, — who had 
twenty times left Glen-gillian, petitioned to 
be again received with his family, and was re- 
fused. It was vain to plead, for Craig-gillian. 
had pardoned till mercy became weakness j 
now he would neither relent at his prayers, 
nor smile at his wit. 

" Why should I look for grace but from a 
gracious face/' cried this genius ; and off went 
brogues and bonnet, and up stairs he march- 
ed, followed by Craig-gillian, and, with many 
humble reverences, and much blandishment, 
addressed the young laird. As may be sup- 
posed, the.answers he received were heard by- 
no ears but his own. He stooped before the 
picture in the attitude of a most respectful list- 
ener, his features varying from time to time, 
as, to the infinite amusement of Monimia, he 
replied to the imaginary interrogatories of 
Hector's image, which he at last engaged to 
listen to his whole story, and the many good 
reasons that had urged him to every change 



200 CLAN-ALBIN, 

he had adopted. After many bows and ex- 
pressions of thanks, he was walking of with 
an assumed air of high satisfaction. This was 
the critical moment ; and Craig-gillian laugh- 
ingly inquired whatjColonel Hector had said. 
Peter well knew his ground. — " I'll tell you 
what he said, Sir :" — * Well, well, honest Peter,*" 
says he, c since that is the way of it, bring 
your cattle and timbers over to Glen-gill ian 
to-morrow, and tell my father it was I that bade 
you.' And troth, Peter Morrison is not the 
man to sit Colonel Hector Monro's bidding ; so 
good day to you, Sir ; and III be here bag and 
baggage to-morrow, by the screech, I warrant 



me." 



'i I think you are obliged to Hector, friend," 
said Craig-gillian," still smiling ; " though 1 
must sav* this is the first time that he ever 
granted what his father had denied." 

" Far different was the scene that Monimia 
witnessed last week. Craig- gillian's truly 
Highland home knew no solitary joy, and 
consequently, my dear Norman, it never 
knew a solitary grief. An humble female 
friend, who had a daughter serving in the fa- 
mily, was there on a visit Stealing up stairs 
unperceived, and without observing Monimia, 
she threw herself on her knees, and in her 



A NATIONAL TALE. 201 

native idiom passionately addressed the image 
of young Craig- giilian, glowing with life, and 
health, and joy. i Brave and beautiful,' ex- 
claimed poor Marion, ' it is the wound of this 
heart to feel that you are now cold, cold, — 
far from Monzievar, — sleeping with stran- 
gers/ 

" Who would not love such a people, dear 
Norman ; need I tell you how much our Mo- 
nimia loves them/' 

After the conclusion of her letter, the Lady 
was compelled to add ' " I am importuned by 
little Mary to send ycii a copy of the joint pro» 
ductions of Moome and herself, and Monimia; 
and as my frank will include the whole, I 
need not be obstinate. You are to know, that 
when Monimia attended Aunt Margaret on 
an excursion among the isles last autumn, she 
had the good fortune to pick up a fairy hunt' 
mer, in the site of a ruined chapel, in the 
little island of . She lately sent it as a cu- 
riosity to . Unah, who was highly gratifi- 
ed by the attention and courtesy which this 
gentleman displayed towards her traditionary 
lore and its venerable possessor, when he 
visited Glen al bin, strung together a long- 
winded Gaelic rhyme on the occasion, filled 
with wonders and hyperbolical compliments, 



202 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and this Mary and Monimia have englished, 
in which garb it is indeed as unlike the origi- 
nal as can well be imagined. I confess it is 
not easy to embody the conceptions of a bard- 
ess so imbued with localities of all kinds. 

I need not tell you that the Gael has no 
acquaintance with Obernn and his Queen. 
Our mythology is neither devoid of fancy 
nor elegance ; but this branch of it lias cer- 
tainly never passed through the strainers of 
Spenser's and Shakespeare's imagination. — 
Our splenetic and jealous Shi'ich can never 
hope to equal those airy, elegant, sprightly, 
nimble, and obliging little beings, the ' soft 
embodied fays' of England ; nor is it to be 
supposed, that those wayward sprites, who 
wander through the dark forests, and fre- 
quent the resounding torrents of the High- 
lands, can at all resemble the lovely tripping 
elves who, by summer moons, were wont to 
frolic on the sylvan banks of the Devon, or the 
Allan, the Yarrow, or the Esk. Amongst 
our lonely heaths, and shapeless lakes, and 
mist-clad hills, imagination is apt to darken, 
exaggerate, and distort the objects on which 
it loves to speculate; amid the charming, con- 
fined scenery of the Lowland streams, a gay- 
er fancy delighted to gaze on nature through 



A NATIONAL TALE. 203 

a reversed telescope, which represented every- 
thing as little, and lively, and sweetly engag- 
ing. Besides, the fairy must resemble the 
man. The Lowland fairy was not of Lowland 
creation, or — but I'll not say it. Our ShVich 
were entirely our own^ moulded after our own 
ancient image. They have never lost the im- 
pression, but still continue faithful and devoted 
friends, but vengeful and vindictive enemies, 
and, like their inventors, abundantly jealous 
of the interference of strangers with their pe- 
culiar affairs.* But I must give way to my 
young historians of our national faith. 


• Though the hi gh land fairy is far more amiable and refin- 
ed than its Highland neighbour, in border tracks, they still pos- 
sess many attributes in common, particularly the fondness they 
all feel for young infants and ladies in the straw. Along the 
base of the Qchils, on both sides of the mountains, and in the 
vales of Earn, and Allan, and Devon, many fragments of fairy 
freaks are still floating. Every child knows the adventure of 
the smith of Tullybody, who, bu«y at work in one end of the 
bouse, heard the fairies, as they flew up the chimney in the other 
with his wife and child, singing in concert, with great glee, 

" Deedle linkutn dodie, 
We've gotten drucken Davy's ivife, 
The smith ofT.Uybody." 

In the same neighbourhood, put y infants, or, more properly, 
changelmgs, were blown up the chimney by the incantations 
cf the wise woman, who, at the same time, isiued her habeas 



204 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Lines sent to , with a Fairy-hammer! 

found in the Island of 

By altar wreath'd with ocean weed, 

In yon far islet grey and lone, 
The maid who owns tradition's creed, 

Found liny axe of Oberon. 



corpus to Fairy-land, and compelled the genuine infant to Be 
braught up to court, and restored to its legitimate guardia 

It is to be feared, that wherever the ploughshare has defa- 
ced their emerald ring, those tricksy spirits disdain to trip it. 
They have all fled, and their memorial is fast decaying, along 
with that of the olden race, by whom it was so zealously che- 
rished. Their latest appearance was to <oroe young maidens, 
who repaired, late on a summer's night, to the banks of one of 
those streams to sprinkle water on the family linen. Many 
causes have concurred to root out the fairies. — "I look east 
the haugh, and wast the haugh," said an old man, locking 
mournfully round him, on a fine evening, *' and a' our auld 
nee.bours are awa, and the land's a' writers." — The fairy- 
people, everywhere avoiding college-bred gentlemen, have as 
uniformly followed the smn' lairds as if they had been formally 



f To find a fairy-hamrner is lucky, and to possess it is use- 
ful. I have seen it employed in the same manner as -the famed 
lee-penmj was of old ; or that celebrated stone brought from 
Fairy-land, which is in the possession of the family of S— — t 
of A . 



A NATIONAL TALE. 205 

Sway'd by the sleight of fairy wile, 
Of yore it rear'd Titania's tower ; 

Then save from fate obscure or vile, 
Give refuge in thy minstrel bower. 

And know, this axe of wond'rous power 

Has seen an hundred ages flow, 
And from the oak, at midnight hour, 

Has cleft the mystic mistletoe. 

Chieftains have started in their booth, 
On greenwood bough to hear it ringing, 

Blest their lone rest, and deem'd, in sooth, 
'Twas echo of the sea.maids' sinking. 



ejected by the new proprietors, many oi whom would doubtless 
be happy to retain, on any terms, this fanciful little tenantry. 

Even witches have degenerated in character as well as 
decreased in numbers, in these lees of time; although vul- 
gar prejudice still seems singuarly propitious to their ma- 
lignant ascendancy. What comparison between the dull ma- 
licious crone of a modern viiiage hearth, an i that witch of 
the Carse of Gowrie, who, in language not much inferior to 
the wierd sisters of Shakespeare, could issue such a conjuration 
as the following, while s!.e pulled at a hair-rope, along which 
streams of milk were flowing : 

•* Mare's miik, and deer's milk, 
And every beast that' bears milk 
Between S: John stone's and Dundee, 
Come a' to me, come a' to me." 
VOL. IV. T 



200 CLAN-ALBIN, 

And still on 's sheeny tide, 

* Those sea-maids sing, and braid their hair, 

'Neath the green wave in circlets glide, 
And find their homes and lovers there. 



• The common people in some of the Hebrides have an in- 
distinct notion of beings who inhabit the depths of the sea. 
When they perceive pieces of matter with which they are un- 
acquainted floating on the waves, they readily call them part 
of the roofs of the subaqueous dwellings, which, like their own, 
may perhaps need pretty frequent repair. 

There are still remote traditions of the wanderings of the 
royal Bruce in the Highlands, though confused with those of 
Montrose, and even of Prince Charles Eg ward ; — si soon does 
tradition bewilder itself. The adventure of the bracelet of Bruce 
is still remembered. 

The Calliach ?ian Cruachan be'm, as she is called in Gaelic, 
is an old lady, who resides on the top of Cruachan : In other 
words, she is the demon of the storm ; and fancy could not have 
chosen for her a more appropriate residence. When any thing 
ruffles her temper, she gathers an handful of whirlwinds, des- 
cends in tempests to the lower regions, at one stride crosses 
Loch-Etive, which she lashes up to a foaming fury, and, till her 
rage abates, effectually prevents all passage at the ferry of Con- 
nel In Highland diablerie, the Calliacb is uniformly a greater 
favourite than the Bodaeh. 

The common people in the isles adjacent to Stafta, say, that 
this island rests on five huge pillars, the shadows of which are 
thrown on ths waves at sun-set. It is not easy to tell how, nor 
is it proper to be too inquisitive in such cases ; — Highlanders 
might well answer, 

" We have a vision of our own. 
Oh, why should we undo it." 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2 07 

Such wildering theme our night beguiles : 
We sing thy Bruce's sad sojourn, 

Or how our Donald of the isles 

Brav'd the red fight at Banncckburn ; 



An old soldier, who had belonged to the Breadalbane fen- 
cibles, formerly lived on this singular island ; and he described 
it as rocking beneath him, on stormy nights, like a ship at sea, 
so that he could " hardly keep on the pot." Old people talk 
of a small island to the south-west of lona, which has disappear- 
ed within the last sixty or seventy years. 

Since the first part of this tale was printed, I have had the 
pleasure of seeing the poem of Rokeby, and was somewhat a- 
mused to find, that a superstition, practised so recently in the 
isles of Scotland, coincides exactly with one formerly known in 
Lapland. The gentleman, whose servant is mentioned as hav- 
ing purchased the power of raising the wind, was an Hebridean 
laird. I mention this in vindication of my claim to faithfulness 
in the imperfect and disjointed account of Highland superstitions 
interspersed through these volumes. 

Antiquaries might perhaps trace this superstition to the time 
when the isles were under the sway of the Danes. My entire 
ignorance of such matters forbids me to form a conjecture on 
the subjects I know, however, that the islanders, from some re- 
collection of this period of their story, when at sea call the isles 
by their ancient Celtic names, instead of adopting the modern 
appellations bestowed by the conquerors. This is thought lucky, 
but the practice is not universal. 

I am sensible that even native Highlanders may object to pe- 
culiar modes of superstition introduced into this tale, as having 
no place in their particular Glen or Strath. Though the grand 
features of Highland superstition pervade the whole country, and 



208 CLAN-ALBIN, 

What happ'd when the DIRE hag, provok'd, 
On ('ruachan's crest her whirlwinds rear'd, 

When Staffa on its pillars rock'd, 
And the green island disappear'd. 



tinge the manners of the whole society, its minuter touches every- 
where vary with local circumstances. It is quite obvious, that 
inland tribes, though well acquainted with the kelpie, can knovr 
little practically of those beings who inhabit the d ptbi of the 
ocean, or of the boding swell of the ninth wa>e ; i,or can is- 
landers, who never saw a bush, have much faith in the powers 
of witch-elm or slips of venerable forest-trCes, which, in other 
places, cure the tooth ache, defy the evil-one, and perform many 
other 1 wonders. The outline is everywhere the same. It ;s weil 
known that the doctrines of Highland superstition are not sub- 
jects of idle speculation, but matters blending intimately with 
the whole scope of Highland life, in every occurrence between 
the cradle and the grave ; the minute strokes and local colour- 
ing must therefore necessarily vary in different districts. When 
a desired event cannot be accomplished by one agent, another 
must be employed. 

The remote Highlands and isles are now indeed become the 
grand emporium of Western supcrsinion. To various relics of 
Paganism, is added much of the deceptive mummery of the worst 
times of Popery ; and these again have been closely interwoven 
with that peculiar local faith, whose mysterious elements are 
mist and sound. Yet frcm these dreary elements, it must be ac- 
knowledged that this melancholy and imaginative race have origi- 
nated the mostdaring and beautiful fictionsof the western world ; — 
the bright, shifting, ethereal, and bles>ed spirit, moving jn the 
sun-beam \ — and the dim, fantastic, and vindictive ghust that 
rides on the blast of midnight,— with all their air- woven variety 
and shadowy modifications. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 200 

Encaved, we list the ninth wave's swell 
Sob on the broad Atlantic's breast ; 

And ay with nimbly mutter'd spell, 
From fairy-ill the night is blest. 

And here, of wild and wizard force, 
Rhymes never breathed on lowland ear, 

Loose the wide winds, change nature's course, 
And make the sheeted dead appear. 

And still the visionary man, 

Who broods all day in haunted glade, 
At midnight on the mountain's van, 

Holds converse with his elfin maid.* 



* The Leannan SbP, or fairy mistress, alluded to in the above 
lines, is not yet quite forgotten, though mortals so highly favour- 
ed are very rare in these degenerate days. I have heard of a 
young man in Uist, who wandered from isle to isle, to avoid one 
of these unearthly beauties, and at last went over to Ireland, but 
in vain. As a desperate remedy he married, which so strongly 
excited the indignation of his fairy love, that on the wedding- 
night, when the usual hour of assignation came round, he was 
compelled to leave his bride and attend the Shi\ If I recollect 
aright, the persecution terminated soon afterwards. 

Many persons in Mull do still remember a poor fellow who 
was long estranged from all the comforts of society, and at last 
worn out of existence by the melancholy grandeur of his destiny, 
in being, from an early period of life till hisdyirg hour, the cho- 
sen favourite of a fairy. Whenever her mandate came, poor 
Allan was compelled to obey. It was generally in the night ;. 

T 2 



210 CLAN-ALBIN, 

O come ! enthusiast minstrel ! come, 

And rouse thee with our witching spells j 

Or wander by the warrior's tomb, 
Till softer theme thy spirit quells : — 



and besides being dragged from the cheerful circle assembled 
round his master's kitc.ien hearth, he was often obliged to leave 
his bed at midnight, and, in the most dismal weather, wander 
over the most dismal country after his Leannnn Ski' '. His way- 
ward fortune was quite well-known, and most implicitly believ- 
ed ; but 1 never heard that any of his companions had the hardi- 
hood to follow him in his nocturnal wanderings. The Bean Shi* 
is supposed to impart the knowledge of future events to her lo- 
ver, the medical virtues of herbs, and so forth. Some predictions 
that were exactly fulfilled, established the credit of Allan's sto. 
ry ; but indeed its truth was never questioned. The general 
tone of this poor visionary's mind appears to have been wild me- 
lancholy, overstrained and wretched ; yet considerable vanity 
must have mingled with his misery, and some degree of uncon- 
scious knavery, if such a thing be possible, with that grievous 
self-deception under which he lived and died. This was princi. 
pally evinced by his predictions, which were indeed far too art- 
less for a people of little faith. 

It was, I think, by the advice of a surgfon that this poor man 
enlisted during the last American war. His fairy love followed 
him across the Atlantic, and was the first being he saw when he 
touched the Ame rican shores. 

Though Allan was the paramour of a fairy, he was also a 
Highland soldier • he was severely wouided in an engagement, 
and his life despaired of. The Learn nan St i\ wlo.it may fairly 
be presumed, was not likely to desert him in sickness, and after 
an effusion of blood, assured him tha: he would live ar.d return 
to Mull ; he did return, and died there, believed, pitied, and per- 



A NATIONAL TALEt 211 

Catch the high strain traditional, 
Sing glory shrouded in the grave 5 

Let thy wild harp's enchanting fall, 
Blend with the wail of 's wave. 

Chief of the harp of wizard frame, 

Albyn the lofty hest has given, 
That thou shouldst pour her ancient fame, 

On all the wandering winds of heaven. 



haps a little envied, — though surely there was uever a more un- 
happy example of the misery attending unequal alliances. 

In former times, young women, at lonely shealings, were occa- 
sionally the selected favourites of fairy lovers. The presbyterian 
clergy, however, who latterly appear to have conceived a bitter 
and even superstitious aversion to all manner of popular delu- 
sions, have long put a stop to this supernatural intercourse. As the 
fairy-lovers completely evaded their discipline, and failed to ap- 
pear at the session to expiate their offences, either by penance or 
mulct, a double portion of severity and disgrace was directed 
against the frail damsels who had hitherto, like the mistresses of 
princes, triumphed in the imaginary splendour which veiled their 
frailties. Thus was the fairy lover banished from the Highlands, 
to live only in songs and tales, or to be remembered in the 
suspicious genealogy of particular families. 

With this romantic belief, and several current traditions of the 
Highlands, I had originally interwoven the story of " Hector the 
hunter," for whose abrupt disappearance I now take the liberty 
to apologise. It related to a very interesting period of Highland 
society, 1745. Since the first part of this tale was printed, 
the fanciful story of those times has been told with spirit and 
grace which only one pen can reach. 



212 CLAN-ALBIN, 

For she has felt, in kindling mood, 
The witchery of thy magic lay 

Urge high the tide of clannish blood, 
Which ne'er till then own'd lowland sway. 

Then come, enthusiast ! fearless come, 
And rouse thee with our witching spells ; 

Or wander by the warrior's tomb, 
Till softer theme thy spirit quells ! 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2 1 3 



CHAP. XL VII. 



Here still beneath eve's soft. consenting star, 
Fandango twirls his jocund castanet. 

Byron. 

JN EXT morning Flora awoke from feverish 
slumber, so alarmingly worse, that her friends 
became apprehensive that she might even die 
in these deserts. The paternal chateau of 
the Guerilla chief of Catalonia, with its depen- 
dent village, was about five leagues distant, 
and there was a convent of Bendictine nuns 
in the same place. The nameless decencies of 
civilized life mingle fondly with whatever re- 
lates to its close ; an 1 that poor Flora should 
breathe her last surrounded only by men, 
and in the haunts of predatory soldiers, was 
even worse to her friends than the death that 
threatened her. Towards noon, therefore, 
when she appeared somewhat lightened, the 
litter was again brought out, and she was 
placed in it j and so fluctuating was the na- 



214 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ture of her disease, that in two hours after- 
wards she descended, and walked a consider- 
able way leaning on Norman's arm. 

By the time that they had travelled the first 
long and dreary league, through every moun- 
tain vista they caught momentary glimpses of 
the smoother glades of an inferior chain of 
hills, which were gladdened with cottages, 
and corn fields, and herds of cattle. Tney 
continued rapidly to descend, and soon enter- 
ed natural woods of chestnut, and evergreen 
oak, wild olive, and walnut ; and sometimes 
the path led round cliffs of variegated granite, 
in whose crevices the almond and sumach 
struck root, or it was bordered by flowery 
thickets of myrtle, gum-cistus, and lauristinus. 
When the yellow gleams of the setting sun 
threw their mellow glow over this pomp of 
vegetation, gilded the broken surface of the 
rocks, and sparkled in the torrents that swept 
down the woods, the heart of Flora yielded 
to the spell, and she again alighted. They 
entered a deep ravine, and soon heard the 
chime of the convent bell, — the clock of the 
chateau, — the barking of dogs, — and the hum 
of cheerful voices on the wind, — the voices of 
women and children so long unheard, and 
Flora blessed them. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 215 

A peasant who had been gathering the a- 
corns of the evergreen oak in the woods above, 
now accosted them with the wonted salutation 
of " God be with you ;" and from him Nor- 
man learned that he might readily obtain ac- 
commodation for the lady, either in the chateau 
or the convent, though the owner of the for- 
mer was at present from home. 

The transparency of the atmosphere, by 
bringing every object nearer to the eye, 
had deceived the travellers as to the distance 
they were still to measure ; and before they 
reached the village the last blush of day fad- 
ed from the west ; another and another star 
flushed into tremulous brightness, and the 
moon rose over the dark woods that formed 
the back ground of the picture lying at their 
feet, where the ravine widened, and held in its 
bosom the village, the chateau, and the con- 
vent. 

Norman walked forward with the peasant, 
to secure a favourable reception to his sinking 
companion ; and with Hugh, who carried her 
infant, she sat down on the banks of the stream 
which still divided them from the opposite 
village. 

" Glengillian !" said Hugh,tryingto amuse 
her : — " Yon ould castle, Craig-gillian's ; and 



2 1 6 CLAX-ALBIN, 

that little chapel, the mill ; — these our own 
cattle wadince in the stream ; — and the cab- 
ins by its margin — and these again, peeping 
from below the hi^h trees, the huts of the 
cotters. But that beautiful stream, with all 
its myrtles and roses, was never like Monzie- 
var ; nor that guitar, to my own ears, like our 
own cro-challin at the folding." 

" Ah no I" said Flora; " yet here, too, is a 
scene of peacefulness, — war has not yet been 
here." 

It was the eve of a festival. The peasants, 
in the picturesque dresses of Catalonia, were 
walking about conversing with each other, or, 
seated by their doors, enjoying the cooling 
freshness of the hour. A group of young peo- 
ple had gathered round an itinerant musician* 
who, thrumming his guitar in unison, was 
singing the heroic ballads of the country; 
the history of the Infantes, — the exploits of 
the Cid, — and the conquest of the Moors by 
Ferdinand and Isabella. 

Though the Piper was not celebrated for 
minstrel love, yet " be, I ween, was of the 
nortu countrie ;" and the motive, which fiQW 
urged him .o sing might have excused even 
a ruder lay than thai which he spontaneously 
poured forth in Gaelic, in praise of Flora's 



A NATIONAL TALE. 217 

favourite stream, and which was long after- 
wards put into English verse. 

M Stream of the stranger ! thou art fair, 
Through myrtle bowers gaily meand'ring ; 
But I have seen mid mountains bare, 
A stream in wilder beauty wandering. 
Yes, thou art fairer, dearer far, 
Stream of my heart, lone Monzievar ! 

On Monzievar hang3 Valour's tower, 
From far the way-worn pilgrim cheering ; 
By Monzievar blooms Beauty's bower, 
Warm, Highland welcome kindly wearing : 
And nestle close, 'neath rock and scaur, 
Thy peasant homes, lov'd Monzievar 1 

Stream of my heart ! through arching boughs 
Even now thy lulling wave is wending, 
With carols blithe, and whispered vows, 
And murmurs of thy pine-woods blending : 
For now the lovely folding star, 
Brings gloamin hour to Monzievar. 

Now breeze. borne from thy upland glade, 
By starts is heard the wild-buck belling, 
And fitful from thy hazel shade 
The cushat's wail romantic swelling. 

Alas, that sounds of woe should mar, 
The voice of love on Monzievar! 
VOL. IV. U 



218 CLAX-ALBL\ T , 

Stream of my youth ! now tricksy elves 
In ringlets round thy grey cliffs ramble, 
Dip the small foot in flow'ry shelves, 
And in thy fairy lakelets gambol, 

Or chase the beam of evening's star, 
Quivering on haunted Monzievar. 

'Tis past,— and on thy banks lone stream, 
Is heard no more the voice of gladuess, 
The herd-boy's song, the minstrt l's theme ; 
Each sound and sight is woe and saduess : 
For ruthless desolating war 
Has reft thy joys, sweet Monzievar ! 

Stream of the wild ! at twilight pale 
Who love-led roams thy dewy correi, 
Since he thy faithful clan bewail, 
Fell, bravely fell, in stranger's foray : — 

Peace to the Brave who sleep afar ! 

Hush thy wiltl v.ail, lone Monzievar !" 

# * * • • • ' * 

It was neither in the convent nor the cha- 
teau that Norman chose to place Flora ; for, 
on entering the village, lie was met by the 
young girl who had travelled so many miles 
to water the grave of her brother in the pass ; 
and she, in the name of her grandfather, tried 
in her imperfect language to invite the Eng- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2KJ 

lisli lady to pass the night in their cottage. A 
respectable looking old man, who had been 
hobbling after the fleet steps of Angela, now 
accosted Norman, and, in good Spanish, 
repeated the invitation, and led the way to 
Flora; while Angela, on hospitable thoughts 
intent, flew home to arrange the upper cham- 
ber, into which the expected guest was soon 
afterwards conducted. 

This cottage ..as a little way beyond 
the village, at the foot of a steep avenue 
which led to the chateau. Both its architec- 
ture and interior finishing were superior to 
the dwellings common in Spain ; and Flora's 
little chamber, glazed, and ornamented with 
Dutch tiles, and furnished with mats and 
chairs of the esparto rush, had an air of neat- 
ness and accommodation very rare indeed in 
that country. Their host, likewise, both in 
language and manners, seemed far superior 
to the peasants of the village ; and the travel- 
lers soon gathered that he had long been the 
confidential servant of Conde de Castillon, 
who had provided this pleasant asylum for 
his old age. His only daughter, the mother 
of Angela, " was with God and her son," 
young Angela said ; and her father was with 
his Lord, righting the battles of Spain. 



220 CLAN-ALBIX, 

The cottage of Andrea could not accommo- 
date the whole party, and Norman and Hugh 
followed their grey- haired host to the cha- 
teau, after it had heen earnestly represented 
to them, that the Conde de Castillon would 
never forgive his old domestic, if the chateau, 
and all that it contained, was not offered to 
the English travellers. 

Having lulled her little child to sleep, and 
dismissed Angela, Flora pkced herself at her 
casement, fixing her eyes on the bine and 
starry heavens it was often her wish to reach. 

" How natural and how beautiful is that 
sentiment which makes saint and savage alike 
seek in yon serene and lovely heaven for all 
that was ever pure, and lovely, and beloved 
on earth," thought Flora : — " A mother, for 
the babe she lost in infancy ; — a widow, for 
the husband of her youth." 

An imagination, nurtured in all the wild 
yet soothing credulities of the Highlands of 
Scotland, and religiously submitting to their 
mysterious influence, involved all nature in 
the srrief of a bereaved heart. Amid the nuir- 
murs of the night-breeze that swept over the 
wood-tops, and " hollowly howling," died a- 
way in the valley, Flora could hear the tones 
of the beloved voice; and from the thin va- 



A NATIONAL TALE, 221 

pour that hung over the stream, mould that 
form on which fancy for ever brooded. Wrapt 
in this wildering and visionary mood, Flora 
would not have exchanged its mournful en- 
chantments for all the day-dreams of a prouder 
philosophy. 

The clock of the chateau above now struck 
the hour of midnight, and immediately a 
young peasant started from under the syca- 
mores by the cottage-door ; and, while he 
struck his guitar, sung, in extemporary verse, 
the beauty of his mistress, and the hopeless- 
ness of his love. Flora well knew the customs 
of this gallant and romantic land, and she list- 
ened with interest to the praises of the young 
Angela, rejoiced to find that, even in one vil- 
lage of Spain, the roar of the cannon, the 
clash of the cymbals, and the voice of lamen- 
tation, had not yet quite drowned the tinkle of 
that instrument which is consecrated to love. 

As the } T oung peasant ended his bootless 
serenade, Flora went to rest. 

She was awakened from a more refresh- 
ing sleep than she had enjoyed for a great 
while, by the murmured cooings, and the little 
fingers of the playful and happy creature that; 
twined round her neck. At such times there 
was nameless bliss in existence; and for a mo- 
ll 2 



222 CLAN-ALBIST, 

ment she seemed to clasp life and lier child 
together in the same strong embrace. 

She was up and dressed before Norman, 
who had been walking with old Andrea, en- 
tered the cottage. In ascending the stairs 
Norman heard her in a low voice singing a 
Gaelic psalm — he beckoned Hugh to listen. 
It was that beautiful pastoral psalm which 
forms the first intellectual exercise of every 
little child in Scotland that has been educa- 
ted among those who still inherit the primi- 
tive manners and fervent piety of our first re- 
formers. Flora had learned to lisp out this 
psalm on the bosom of her father, long before 
she could distinctly speak ; and she was now 
half conscious of a wish to live till she could 
teach it to her child, and till she could tell 
him what a man his father had been, — what a 
son, and what a soldier !— and bless him, and 
charge him to resemble that father. 

She looked up as her friends entered, and 
seemed greatly invigorated. Her child was 
on her knee ; and, with one of those shifts 
which affection suggests, she was also contriv- 
ing to mend some article of his well-worn 
wardrobe. 

Hugh ami Norman exchanged a cheerly 
look. — " You are better to-day," said the at- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 223 

ter, touching her emaciated hand. " Once 
we had you home to Glengillian, Flora, drink- 
ing goats' whey, we'll soon get you round a- 
gain " 

u Aye that we will, dear," added the Piper, 
feeling revived hope, and seeking to impart 
it, — " If Moome had but the nursing of you, 
and you had youi> foot on the gowan again, 
I'll warrant me — " 

The shake of Flora's head, her smile, and 
her sigh, checked Hugh's spirit of prophecy. 

" But you don't inquire after my adventures 
in the haunted chambers of yonder chateau," 
said Norman, smiling, "though, I assure you, it 
is a very fit theatre for the freaks of any ghost 
you ever heard of, from Caen-beg downwards. 
By the time that I had followed old hobbling 
Andrea and his flaring torch across wide courts 
and lofty halls, and ascended flights of stairs, 
and descended others, and travelled round 
sweeping corridors, and heard the wind whist- 
ling through long galleries, and saw it waving 
old banners, and descended more stairs which 
led to a chamber large as a church, gloomy 
as a tomb, and hung with ragged tapestry, I 
was quite in the mood of seeing sights, and 
hearing noises, — trap-doors ci caking beneath 
my tread, and boards opening behind the ta- 



224 CLAN-ALBIN, 

pestry by a spring, and discovering stairs, 
leading the Lord knows whither." 

" I should have told you, that the patriotic 
nobleman to whom we are so much indebted 
never found any use for the worm-eaten mag- 
nificence of the state apartments of his cas- 
tle ; they were accordingly long given up to 
the sole use of the ghost of a certain ancient 
Countess, (who, it seems, founded yon con- 
vent as an expiation of the sins of her youth,) 
till the necessities of the country compelled 
her descendent to convert his whole dwel- 
ling into barracks, magazines, and hospitals. 
All this I learned from the attendant which 
old Andrea sent to me, whose father well re- 
membered the foreign lady that the Countess 
had either murdered or caused to be murder- 
ed. I ought to say, that his loquacity can 
only be accounted for by the circumstance 
of his father being a Frenchman, who follow- 
ed this same Countess from Paris to Castillon. 
The joint impressions his tale, and the dis- 
mal aspect of these apartments, made on my 
fancy, clung to it even in sleep; and ail night 
long did I wander through vaults and subter- 
raneous ways, following our own Lady, again 
in the spring of life, and a solitary prisoner 
in this castle in Catalonia, with old Andre* 



A NATIONAL TALE. 225 

for her gaoler. The Conde, however, at length 
released us from durance; the scene suddenly 
changed to Eleenalin, and all was joy, for, — " 
Norman did not finish the sentence. 

" It was a very natural dream," said Flora." 

" Some people have a wondrous knack at 
dreaming sensible dreams," said Norman, 
" but mine are always so perfectly incongru- 
ous, that I am rather proud of this one." 

" And so you may, dear, I warrant there is 
something in it," said Hugh ; " I wish to my 
heart we were beside Moome, for she would 
not be long reading it, I warrant me, and 
finding good in it too." 

" I wish we were," replied Norman, smil- 
ing softly, " and I would try to read it my- 
self. And now Flora, will you consent to 
rest a few days in Castillon,to give my dream 
time to unfold. I long to return our united 
thanks to the Conde, for all the kindness he 
has done and intended to do us." — Flora ex- 
pressed perfect willingness.^-" I am certain," 
added Norman, " that the Conde de Castil- 
lon is an excellent man, as well as a good pa* 
triot. One may always judge of a man's 
character from the condition of his estate 
and his tenants, provided they have been 
long enough under his control to assume 



266 CLAN-ALBIN, 

any character ; and his are admirable. This 
romantic village, perched like an eagle's nest 
in the bosom of the rocks, is entire!}- of his 
creation. Look, Flora, at the picture of rural 
comfort which is spread around us. Those 
substantial cottages, and trim gardens, look 
more like the best parts of Switzerland than 
the mountains of Spain. That pretty brown 
Angela, gathering mulberry leaves to feed her 
silk-worms, and those neat young women that 
we see, by their father's doors, weaving lace, 
and singing in concert, do not diminish the 
interest of the picture." 

" Arcadian figures in Arcadian landscape," 
said Flora. 

It was the season of shearing the lambs ; and 
the young girls whom Norman had admired 
as the chief ornament of the village, were seen 
to join the shepherds in the meadows below. 
The stream that here leaped from cliff to cliff 
till it dashed over the stupendous rocks which 
abruptly rose, and walling in the romantic 
village, divided it from the plains, flowed 
through the, meadows with a placid currents- 
its pebbly channel gleaming through the 
sparkling wave, like the most beautiful Mo- 
saic work. Sheep-shearing is the Vintage of 
every pastoral country, the season of heart- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 227 

swelling gratitude for those gifts which man 
best repays when he receives and tastes them 
with joy. Flora had last seen sheep-shearing 
in Glen-gillian ; and with this recollection full 
in her mind, she directed the morning walk 
down the steeps towards the meadows, which 
were still spread with blooms, and broken here 
and there by a few plum-trees and mulberries. 
Contrasting with the dun, though luxuriant 
pasturage, sprung the jonquil and hyacinth, 
the amyrillis and aspodel, the wild tulip and 
the pansy violet, " wagging their sweet heads ;" 
while the sunny rocks that bordered the wa- 
terfal, were inlaid with vivid mosses of every 
vernal and russet hue, and fringed with blos- 
soming myrtle, tamarisc, and oleander, dip- 
ping their graceful and flexile heads into the 
wave they half concealed. 

" Sit down here, dear Flora, on a rustic 
throne, and admire the bountifulness of your 
namesake to this gay region, while I brin^r the 
good Padre euro, to visit you." Norman placed 
heron a turfy knoll, under the shade of a lofty 
chestnut tree, in view of the sheep-shearing, 
and pulled a handful of the gaudy flowers that 
sprung around, to amuse the child. " The good 
father was absent last night at the caverns, on 
the duties of his faith," continued Norman. 



228 CLAN-ALBIN, 

u There is something wonderfully venerable in 
the character of a parish priest, Flora, — even 
the Catholic priest, who, from having neither 
wife nor child, save his flock, may sometimes 
give up his whole heart to them. ,, 

The priest was something of a physician. 
He ministered to the simple ailments of the 
villagers ; and he humbly said that heaven was 
pleased to bless his endeavours. He now looked 
with hopeless compassion on the fair and faded 
form which, amid all the spring of surround- 
ing nature, seemed alone sensible of decay. 

Flora was especially pleased with the pa- 
rish priest, who talked with her in French, 
while Norman was climbing the surrounding 
steeps, or conversing with the peasants. He 
was a reverend looking thin old man, who, 
quite absorbed in the miseries of his country, 
continued fervently day and night to wield the 
only weapon for her defence with which the 
gospel of salvation arms the minister of peace, 
— secret prayers for her prosperity, and ac- 
tive humanity towards her suffering children. 
Over a countenance strongly expressed, and 
peculiarly Spanish in its general outline, was 
superinduced an individual character and ex- 
pression well-suited to these holy functions. 
Flora said it was such a face as a skilful pain- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 22$ 

ter would have given to the beloved disciple ; 
purified by suffering, calmed by holiness, 
sublimed by piety. " It confirms all that you 
have said," said she, " when I see that the 
Conde has given such a father to his people, 
and chosen such a friend for himself. I was 
so weary and worn, dear Norman, and vest is 
so grateful, and his consolations are so re- 
freshing to me, that in the primitive phrase of 
my dear father, and of his fathers, the heroes 
of Drumclog, 1 could now say, " There is a 
drop of dew for every pile of grass," 

They were invited to dine in the parlour 
of the convent. The nuns crowded to the 
grate ; the younger examining the dress of 
Flora, the elder inquiring the fortune of the 
war, and all earnestly recommending them- 
selves to the patroness of Spanish maidens — 
Holy St Barbara ! 

Evening came, and the Guerilla chief was 
not returned, though, in the counse of the day, 
a party escorting some French prisoners ar- 
rived, accompanied by a few Portuguese sol- 
diers whom the Guerillas had rescued. 

From this party Norman learned that the 
Conde had penetrated far into the mountains, 
with the hope, as was whispered, of intercept- 
ing a rich booty belonging to the usurper. 

VOL. IV. x 



230 CLAN-ALBIN, 

After Norman had bidden Flora adieu for 
the night, he walked some time in the court 
of the chateau with the priest, conversing oc- 
casionally with M. Duval's party, through the 
grates of the strong room in which they were 
confined, and sometimes dropping a good-na- 
tured expression of pity for their situation. 
At those times he could not help observing 
something peculiarly invidious in the scowling 
and side-long glance of one Portuguese sol- 
dier ; and wildly vengeful in the fiery scintil- 
lations that darted from the deep-set eye of 
another ; especially when the boastful captives 
vaunted their achievements in Lisbon, and 
ridiculed some of the popular superstitions of 
Portugal. The physiognomy of the one was 
such as the imagination might have shadowed 
out for him " who does murder for a meed." 
It might have assigned the other to an enthu- 
siast in evil, looking for his higher reward 
from the land of his birth, or the saint of his 
worship. Such men might have followed the 
banners of Pizarro and Cortes ; — the one from 
the sordid love of lucre, — the other from mis- 
taken zeal for God. 

The parish-priest, who seemed at this time 
to be upheld by the fervour of his spirit, again 
set out for the caverns, to smooth the way of 
some wounded wretch through the shadowy 



A NATIONAL TALE. 231 

valley ; and Norman was ushered by old 
Andrea into bis ghostly chamber, and left 
with the garrulous attendant of the former 
night. 

w Ah, Sen or, I hope you did not whisper a 
word of what I told you to old Andrea, — not 
that I care, Sen or, but old Andrea has his way, 
so has the Conde for that matter ; but a vassal 
must not speak of his lord, Sen or, or I could 
tell strange things. — My father was a French- 
man, Senor, — aye, you are looking at the pic- 
ture. — In this very chamber, Senor,"— he low- 
ered his voice and looked eagerly round. — 
" Andrea' father was not always so rich, — if 
I thought my word would never be heard, I 
could tell strange things." Norman perceived 
that the French half of Sancho's mental con- 
stitution was itching to be at work; but, in- 
stead of giving it any encouragement, he re- 
plied by quoting a Spanish proverb equivalent 
to, — " A close mouth catches no flies."—. 
Sancho was hot as a Biscayan, though talka- 
tive as a Gascon ; and in huge wrath he flung 
on more faggots, swept up the hearth, and de- 
parted. 

It was long since Norman had enjoyed the 
quiet and security of a private chamber. He 
secured his door and drew to his own fire- side. 



232 CLAN-ALBIN, 

A fire is so animating in a large gloomy apart* 
ment, especially when the wind is howling a- 
broad, and the rain dashing on the casement, 
and a man is solitary and far, far, from home ; 
it is like the soul to the body. Norman stir- 
red his fire, — spread Lady Augusta's letters 
before him, — the pictures of his mother, and 
of him he called father, — and that small copy 
of the Pleasures of Hope which belonged to 
Monimia. He arranged all these instruments 
of idle enjoyment in fifty different ways, and 
viewed them in as many positions, and at 
last lapsed into that mood when 

%i Fancy, ludicrous and wild, 
Soothes with a waking dream of houses, towers, 
Trees, churches, and strange visages, express'd 
In the red cinders. M > 

Now he studied the head of a Mameluke, and 
by a slight transition it became that of Pbelim 
Bourke. From this idling he was recalled by 
a creeping foot-fall in the gallery that led to 
his chamber. He hastily swept up his trea- 
sures, and abruptly throwing open his door, 
discovered the deep- eyed Portugese soldier, 
who started at the sight. 

" Sen6r, do you sleep here to-night ?" said 



A NATIONAL TALE. 233 

he, bending forward, and earnestly scanning 
the shadowy extremity of the apartment. His 
whispers ran in mumbling echoes along the 
gallery. He appeared desirous to advance 
into the chamber, and Norman, from a mo- 
tive of curiosity, gave way one pace to fa- 
vour his design, while he replied, " And if 
I do ?" 

u Frenchmen only sleep in this wing, Se- 
n6r." 

" What have I to fear from them, — or from 
any one ?" replied Norman. 

« Nothing, Senor." 

" Then, why change my apartment ?"' 

" Senor, I must not tell." 

" I am not to be influenced by reasons that 
cannot be told," replied Norman, somewhat 
haughtily ; — and he waved his unbidden guest 
to leave him, which the soldier immediately 
did. Having again secured his door, and 
pored for some time over this mysterous 
warning, Norman went to bed, and, as was 
usual for the last five weeks, without undress- 
ing. 



x 2 



234 CLAN-ALBIN, 



CHAP. XLVIII. 



My son ! my son ! the voice of nature cried; 
Would that for thee thy father could have died. 

Campbelb. 



a or some hours, Norman slept quite sound- 
ly. But he fell into another state ; a load was 
on his breast, every moment its weight be- 
came more deadly. The hag that rode his 
slumbers, now assumed the form of Duval, 
and now of Sir Archibald Gordon ; and, by 
another transition, became the Portuguese 
soldier, who held his throat with a grasp so 
suffocating and powerful that his whole being 
straining to this point could not unlock the 
horrid pressure. Life and death hung on a 
little minute. By a mighty effort he burst the 
spell, and, >vide awake, perceived flames dart- 
ing tli rough the floor of his chamber, now fil- 
led with thick black smoke, while wild uproar 



A NATIONAL TALE. 235 

and continued shrieks ascended from the im- 
prisoned Frenchmen beneath. Norman knew 
that Portuguese incendiaries had committed 
this foul act. But there was no time for 
thought ; or, rather, action and thought were 
now one- He flew through the gallery, and, 
bursting open the door of a closet in which 
the Piper slept, groped round, and, catching 
him in his arms, like another pious Eneas, bore 
him from destruction. At the foot of the 
grand stair-case he gave the Piper an uncere- 
monious rousing shake, and left him. The 
fire had not yet reached this stair; but one- 
very hand was heard the crackling of rafters, 
the falling of beams, and the voices of men 
breaking through that loud, hissing, and con- 
tinuous din which attends a mighty burning, 
and issues from the flames like the terrible 
voice of the destroying fiend. No sounds 
could be more sublimely overpowering than 
those which Norman now heard, especial- 
ly when the last shriek of human agony ever 
and anon yelled from the midst of the flames. 
He flew down the long gallery, and up the 
few steps that led to the prison-door of the 
French soldiers. 

"Incendiary fiend!" exclaimed a man in 
the Spanish tongue, who was rushing down 



230 CLAN-ALBIN, 

these stairs ; and, at the same moment, Nor- 
man felt a sword plunged deep into his side. 
Men and lights advancing danced before his 
failing eyes in an indiscriminate mass of con- 
fusion; and another voice, which had power 
for an instant to arrest his flitting spirit, cried 
out in English, 

"Oh, Sir! Oh God! you have murdered 
your own son !" 

Norman, covered with his own blood, was 
sinking on the stairs, when he was upheld by 
some unseen arm. He raised his eyes on 
young Craig-gillian ! He turned them, now 
heavy with deadly langour, on another war- 
rior form, that stiffened with pale horror as 
it gazed on him. A film came over his sight; 
but he still heard Monro, wildly exclaiming, 
11 Norman ! Oh my best friend that ever I had, 
is there no help ? — Your son ! your son ! — 
Conde de Castillon, will he bleed to death ? n 

The soft hand of Flora was supporting Nor- 
man's head when he felt returning conscious- 
ness, and with her other hand she poured 
some liquid into his mouth, with which the 
priest supplied her. It was day-light. Nor- 
man did not attempt to speak ; but as the dim 
and distorted images of the past became 
more distinct, he turned his eyes every way 



A NATIONAL TALE. 237 

round the darkened apartment. Hugh was 
kneeling at the bed's foot, his face wrapped 
in the coverlet, and Craig-gillian stood there ! 
It was then no deception of failing sense, — 
it was warm flesh and blood that stifled in a 
father's bosom the laughing crow of little Hec- 
tor, when he first perceived the opening eye 
of his favourite play-mate, and leaped and 
struggled to reach him. A sigh that al- 
most amounted to a groan was heard from a 
dark and remote corner of the chamber, and 
as Craig-gillian slipped on tip toe across the 
floor, and withdrew with his son, Norman per- 
ceived another figure turned from him, and 
kneeling in the attitude of earnest and silent 
devotion. Flora stooped towards him. He 
attempted to speak ; but his eye again bowed 
down beneath the langour that crept over all 
his senses. 

" And why should Hive if he dies ?" were 
the whispered words that next roused the at- 
tention of Norman. — " Leave me in peace, 
Craig-gillian ! — Have I not lived long, — and 
far too long, since I have seen him, the kind- 
est, the bravest, the gentlest, fall by the 

hand ? Oh, Craig-gillian, my poor Lady ! 

Her brother murdered by her husband ! — 
her grandson by her own son ! O let me die 



238 CLAN-ALBIN, 

in peace, Craig-gillian !" — Hugh impatiently 
waved off Craig-gillian, who was attempt- 
ins: to lead him from this chamber. 

A father, — the son of the Lady ! but even 
this was not Norman's predominant idea. — 
" My uncle Hugh, live and bless me;" said 
he in Gaelic. That low, imperfect, and pain- 
ful voice made every heart bound, and each 
person sprung to the bed-side. Conde de 
Castillon and Hugh rushed forward together. 
Hugh's blood curdled at the touch he thought 
murderous, and he recoiled with a look of 
horror and aversion so marked, that the miser- 
able father, smiting his forehead, and groaning 
in agony, turned away, lest he should meet 
such another withering and abhorrent glance 
from his own son, and live. 

" Father ! my^father !" cried Norman, in 
extreme agitation ; and the Conde, touched 
by an irresistible impulse, again sprung to- 
wards him, and clasped the form that invo- 
luntarily rose to meet his embrace. " My 
son! my son, forgive me!" exclaimed he; 
and sunk, pale, speechless, and almost life- 
less, on the wounded bosom of his son, whose 
blood again burst forth. 

Craig-gillian led the unfortunate father 



A NATIONAL TALE. 23$ 

away, while the priest attempted to staunch 
the bleeding. 

During the long night, Hugh was still 
kneeling by the bed's foot. Flora and Craig- 
gillian, silent, and hand in hand, were also 
there ; and Norman could hear a restless and 
agitated step in the anti-chamber, now paus- 
ing at his door, and now hurrying away. 

By the next morning, surgeons and physi- 
cians from a great distance had reached Cas- 
tillon. They were presumed to have skill far 
superior to a simple parish priest ; and as a 
proof of it, an oracular sentence was imme- 
diately passed on the young Englishman. 
When they learned, however, that he was the 
son of the Conde, they appeared inclined to 
restrict the libel to an arbitrary punishment, 
and to compound for death by perpetual ill- 
ness. 

Next night, Norman could perceive that 
the priest and the Conde were his nurses, 
and that Hugh was still there. During the 
greater part of that night, the two latter con- 
versed together in English, whispering now 
about the lady, and now about the birth 
and the various adventures of Norman, over 
whose cheek a smile sometimes stole at the 
simple art with which the Piper tried to 



240 CLAN-ALBIN, 

prepossess the father in favour of the son, 
and to conciliate his regard by all manner of 
inconsistent praises lavished on this eighth 
wonder of the world. He was glad, however, 
that Hugh had forgiven the Conde ; and lest 
he should disturb their whispers, he affected 
to sleep. 

At one time, during the night, he perceived 
the Conde leaning on the bed-post, gazing 
stedfastly upon himself. This then was his 
father — a nobleman of the first class — of great 
virtues — the son of Lady Augusta Macalbin ! 
Her features were there, above all, her power- 
ful eye : Yet the Conde appeared far older, 
and, Norman was reluctant to think it, far 
less amiable than the Lady. Stormy passions, 
though long passed away, had left portentous 
traces on his countenance : the calmness of 
age was, like the fettered torrent of the volca- 
no, fixed, but still telling how high the de- 
structive tide had risen, and how furiously it 
had rolled. His expression of countenance 
had been gathered amid the intrigues of 
courts and the excesses of camps ; her's, in 
the mountains of Scotland. 

It was fortunate for Norman that extreme 
debility prevented his mind from pursuing 



A NATIONAL TALE. 241 

the trains of thought which this contrast sug- 
gested. 

The Conde sat down by the bed-side, hold- 
ing in his hand the picture of Geraldine Fitz- 
connal, which had been taken from the bo- 
som of her son. 

" Oh unhappy Geraldine !" said he : " Was 
it for the hand of your husband to steep your 
image in the blood of your only son ? Great 
God ! who mysteriously visitest the iniquities 
of the fathers upon the children, teach me, 
while I tremble at thy judgments, to bow to 
thy will. The same spot, holy father," — and 
he turned to the priest — " the same spot 
that witnessed the cruelties of the Countess 
de Valmont, is mysteriously chosen for the 
catastrophe of that night when her blood rose 
against itself, and the last of her race fell 
by the hand of him whom her ambition first 
depraved. He, holy father, who neglected an 
innocent, and injured, and widowed mother, 
lived a childless father, and finally became 
the destroyer of his own son. Great God ! 
thy ways are wonderful — wonderful in judg- 
ment among the children of men." 

The fluttered breathing of Norman con- 
vinced the priest that he heard and under- 
stood the import of those vehement, whispered 
vol. iv. Y 



242 CLAN-ALBIN, 

exclamations, and he prayed the Conde to 
withdraw and compose himself; reminding 
him of the mercy of that God whose justice 
he was constrained in so trying a manner to 
adore, while he trembled. 

To Norman and his friends it was an af- 
fecting circumstance, that the picture of his 
mother, which he constantly wore concealed 
in his bosom, should have protected his life 
from the sword of his other parent. The gold 
rim of the miniature, broader and far more 
solid than modern fashion allows, had turned 
aside the sword's point in a slanting direction, 
and it touched no vital part. 

The priest had indeed said this from the 
first ; though fever, and an excessive effusion 
of blood, might, he feared, produce conse- 
quences equally fatal. 

Some symptoms of fever appeared on the 
subsequent day; and the priest insisted that 
the Conde should no more enter the chamber 
of his son. 

When a week of this, kind was expired, 
Norman, surrounded by physicians, still lay 
hovering between life and death ; the weak- 
ness of nature lulling thought to sleep, as 
often as it brought the crowded images of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 243 

the last few days before poring, yet fatigued 
attention. 

About this time he missed Flora from his 
bed-side, and seldom perceived Craig- gillian 
there. It was into the attentive ear of Hugh 
that he breathed a scarcely audible inquiry 
after that dear and endearing creature, who 
had sat by him even when extreme weakness 
compelled her to accept the assistance of 
others in reaching his chamber. Hugh made 
an eager signal, and ran to summon Craig- 
gillian. Flora was also confined to a sick 
couch. Her disease, which had assumed so 
many alarming characters, was found to be 
what physicians call a vomica. It had now 
reached its dreadful crisis, and the event was 
favourable. All this did Craig-gillian now 
whisper into the ear of Norman. 

" It waslucky in one way, dearest," said Hugh, 
" that you were half-killed at the same moment 
Craig-gillian came; for though the worthy mi- 
nister took all care in the telling of her, she 
would have died on the spot, or gone mad for 
joy at any rate — and myself, to hear you was 
what you was, though I always knew it, — my 
heart warming to you the first moment I ever 
saw you, lying on Moome's knee in Ronald's 
house, when the poor lady, whom God him^ 



244 CLAN-ALBIN, 

self led to Glenalbin, that our clan might 
have a head left — But alas ! alas ! — However, 
let them keep the lands, we have the men ; 
and did we live in the good ould times, our 
soords would make them good to us yet. — 
But when, dear, think you, will the Corvde 
send myself home to let our Lady know : 
By the bones! I would not linger. — * Mac- 
albin's come home [' would Moome cry, 
in the surprise. * Ewan Piper Mach-piper, 
since it is yourself, you are welcome; and 
God send us good news/ — * Macalbin is come 
home !' would 1 cry ; and Moome would be 
in a high passion, thinking I took it upon my- 
self to joke with her. — ' Hugh Piper,' would 
she say, c ill does it become your father's son 
to compare himself to his master. To the 
stones be it told that I lived to see the day 
when your graceless face durst laugh at what 
makes all my sorrow' — and then she would 
take up her apron to wipe her eyes, and my 
own heart could never stand that ; 1 would 
tell the whole truth, and she would look so 
comical. — ' Hugh, dearest, Ocli God bless 
you ! and forgive myself for scolding an ho- 
nest man's child,' — continued the delighted 
Piper, mimicking the manner of Moprae : 
' Then would 1 say a littLe slily, You see you 



A NATIONAL TALE. 245 

may be too ready to take me up so hot when 
I say, ' Macalbiii's come home? 

" Macalbin's come home !* wouldshe again 
shout : * Och blessed sound I 7 — and she would 
soon tell all about the last creagh Macalbin 
your own great-grandfather made, down by 
Rannoch and that way ; and all about the day 
of the Pass of Stones, as you have thousands 
of times heard her*" — 

"And therefore need not trouble you again," 
interrupted Craig-gillian. 

"Trouble !" exclaimed Hugh, " God bless 
you ! that is no trouble to myself. I would 
rather speak of it than any thing else in all the 
whole world. There was Sir Norman, returning 
with a drove ; threescore head before him, 
and all his following behind — the stoutest and 
the bravest men that ever left the West. 
Then would the glen ring again with Macal- 
bin's pibroch, and the women and children 
run out to give them welcome, and follow on 
to the castle ; — targets clanking, — claymores 
glancing, — pipes playing, — cattle lowing, — 
men shouting, — and four- and- twenty yards of 
the Clan-Albin tartan waving from the broad 
shoulders of every pretty man. Then would 
the watchman give the signal, and all the la- 
dies run to the bartizan to count cows, 

Y 2 



246 CLAN-ALBIX, 

while we all drive in to the hall ; — and then 
what a joyous welcome from the ould bard 
Macclairseach ! i Welcome to Dunalbin, brave 
chief! welcome to the chief that is crowned 
with victory I — Fill the cup to him, whose 
bounteous hand is filled with the spoils of the 
strangers ; — fill to the first of the race of Al- 
bin of the spoils, whose full hand runneth 
over.' — ^So we would all dance and sing to- 
gether, and weep for joy, and laugh for glad- 
ness; and tell all the tales of our own clan; and 
how no other clan was ever half so brave or so 
ancient. All the women and maidens would 
be there, and there would be no want of ale 
or usquebaugh ; and plenty of cattle, hung by 
the heels, to feast our own people. We were 
not always the fools to send our cattle to the 
Lowlands, and starve at home ; — no, we ra- 
ther lifled; — but I warrant they provoked us 
to it. So, after being all jovial for weeks to- 
gether, and the cattle well^hrough, the chief 
would dismiss every one, except the lads of 
the belt, with a good share to his wife ; and 
having stuck their claymores ID the roof, tlie 
followers would fall to work, and hunt, or fish, 
or herd — for war was but their pastime, I may 
say, and the blessed sun himself never rose on 
a happier people or braver times. To be sure/' 



A NATIONAL TALE. 247 

added Hugh, in a lower tone, " the parlia- 
ment had made no laws about claymores and 
philahegs at that time; — there was neither 
turnpikes nor guagers. Moome herself was 
but a young maid then." 

" Pr'ythee, sweet wag," said Craig-gillian, 
smiling, " shall there be a gallows standing in 
Glen-Albin when thou art chief? and resolu- 
tion thus fobbed as it is with the rusty curb 
of old Father Antick the law ?" 

Norman smiled, and Craig-gillian let the 
curtain fall, as the only means of arresting 
Hugh's eloquence. 

The high interests entrusted to the Conde 
de Castillon, and the exigencies of the times, 
compelled him to tear himself from the couch 
of his son, even before the cautious physi- 
cians had declared the probability of his ulti- 
mate recovery. Daily, and sometimes hour- 
ly bulletins of health were however dispatch- 
ed after him in all directions by the priest m 9 
and he had at last the double felicity of learn- 
ing that his son was likely to live, and that 
his own soul was free from the taint of blood. 
On the night when he arrived at Castillon 
with Craig-gillian, and from a distance dis- 
covered his castle in flames, he had indeed 
imagined, that, in plunging his sword into the 



248 CLAN-ALBIN, 

bosom of Ins son on the stairs of t\*e prison, 
he was doing an act of needful justice in rid- 
ding the earth of another of those incendiary 
ruffians whom he had seen goading their vic- 
tims back into the flames from which he had 
delivered them : — But what mind of sensibility 
can ever hope for returning peace, when it 
reflects that, though the motive was pure, 
the conduct was rash, and the deed fatal ? 

Be it recorded, to the honour of those im- 
prisoned soldiers, that not one of them at- 
tempted to escape from him whose generosity 
had relieved them in this extremity. They 
assisted in subduing the flames, repaired to 
the chapel of the chateau at the bidding of 
the Conde, and quietly remained till their 
prison was refitted. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 24Q 



CHAP. XLIX. 



O what a precious comfort 'tis to have so many like 
brothers commanding one another's fortunes ! 

Shakespears. 

" I^hall I begin at the very beginning," said 
Craig-gillian, sitting with his little son on his 
knee, and looking from Flora to Norman, 
who, pale as two statues, reclined on opposite 
couches in the chamber into which Flora had 
been carried on her first visit to her friend. 

" Yes, from the very beginning," said Nor- 
man, though he had little to learn that was 
new; — for the whispers of the Piper, the un- 
connected observations of Craig-gillian, and 
his own shrewd guesses, had made him ac- 
quainted wfth many of the particulars that 
Craig-gillian now sketched. 

He said that the report of the wounded 
men around him on the field of Corunna, was 



250 CLAN-ALBIN, 

perfectly correct. He had been carried off 
by a small party of the enemy's cavalry, that 
had made a dash forward on this point. — 
Darkness came on, and some of these men 
having torn every thing from off his faded 
uniform that gave it value, and rifled his 
pockets, threw him into a ditch two miles 
from the spot where he had been left. The 
nipping frost wind made his wound smart ex- 
ceedingly, and pain restored sensibility. 

" I shall never forget how I then felt," 
said he : " I was devoured by a raging thirst ; 
my parched tongue rattled in my mouth when 
I attempted to make myself heard. Can yoa 
believe it, Macalbin ? I could have wept like 
infancy when I heard footsteps near me, and 
found that I could not articulate." — Flora 
wept it now. — " I was like some poor wretch 
left on a desert island, that sees the ship fast 
disappearing, in which hope, and life, and all 
that is precious, are embarked." 

Instead of seeking safety on board the Eng- 
lish transports, Craig-gillian's highland ser- 
vant had formed the singular resolution of be- 
coming a second " wandering Jew," and of 
never returning to Glengillian without his 
master. Accordingly, he returned to the 






A NATIONAL TALE. 251 

scene of action, and wandered about all night. 
As if by miracle, Craig-gillian outlived that 
horrible night, and lie imputed his preserva- 
tion to a cordial more exquisite than ever 
luxury furnished to the voluptuary, — the 
snow flakes that he caught on his parched 
tongue as they fell around him. Among the 
things rifled from his pockets, was a let- 
ter written in behalf of his wife, to a gentle- 
man of Astorga. The dragoon who had taken 
it, deemed it of sufficient consequence to be 
given to an officer who understood English. 
This Irish officer had that same morning seen 
the Highland servant approach the French 
sentinels with an old pocket handkerchief tied 
to a stick as a flag of truce, inquiring for his 
master with every symptom of heart-felt an- 
guish; and he had saved him from being made 
prisoner. 

With the humane design of preserving 
Colonel Monro from the indiscriminate se- 
pulture which follows a battle, this Irish 
officer sought him out. A faint spark of 
animation still lingered in the body, which 
Phelim Bourke, and two of his renega- 
do countrymen, assisted Hector in bearing 
to Corunna, which was now evacuated by the 
British. Another countryman was procured 



252 CLAN-ALBIX, 

to dress the wounds of Colonel Monro, — and 
he breathed, — he lived, — he rapidly recover- 
ed, during the three days that these Irishmen 
concealed him in their quarters. 

Till Bourke was compelled to leave Cor- 
unna he refrained from discovering his country 
or his name, lest the delicate honour of a 
British officer might shrink from the suspi- 
cious kindness of ^traitor ; — but then he could 
no longer forbear to ask an explanation of the 
mysterious words of Macalbin ; and Craig- 
gillian learned that Norman was the son of 
the Conde de Castillon. 

He was immediately visited by Colonel 
Fitzconnal, the exiled father of the sweet 
little girl be had seen with Monimia in Ire- 
land. Fitzconnal confirmed all that he had 
heard, and heard all that he had to tell of 
Norman Macalbin, an orphan boy reared 
in a Highland glen, and yet the undoubted 
offspring of Geraldine Fitzconnal and the 
Conde de Castillon. 

The unhappy Fitzconnal, who, like Craig- 
gillian, had been torn from a wife and child ; 
a wife that pined for him, and died because 
she saw him no more, could well under- 
stand the distress of Colonel Monro ; and he 
at once agreed to keep the secret of his real 



A NATIONAL TALE. 253 

situation, and even to aid his fixed purpose of 
returning to Astorga. But long before Craig- 
gillian was in a condition to travel, this poor 
exile, whose idol was a real or an imaginary 
national independance, had flung down his 
arms in disgust before the walls of Saragossa, 
and returned to France with the intention of 
retiring to America. 

As the Irish servant of Fitzconnal, whom 
he had left sick at Corunna, Craig-gillian tra- 
versed a great part of Spain, till at Saragossa 
he heard of the captivity of his wife and his 
friend, and that they were already on their 
way to France. Craig-gillian had now but 
one hope, the Guerilla corps forming in Cata- 
lonia under the Conde de Castillon. All 
communication betwixt this obnoxious noble- 
man and his brother-in-law Fitzconnal, had 
been jealously watched for the last six months; 
and the Conde, when Colonel Monro joined 
him, was still a stranger to the existence of 
his son. Some of those bold spirits who fol- 
lowed Norman through Biscay and Navarre, 
had now, however, joined the mountain chief; 
and so much was he interested by their ac- 
count of the young Englishman, and the pur- 
pose of his daring journey, that when inform- 
ed by some of his spies of the departure of 

TOL. iv. z 



254 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Duval's party for France, he sent what suc- 
cours were in his power, regretting that more 
important concerns forbade him to attempt 
the release of the captives. But when he first 
learned that this young adventurer was the 
son ofGeraldine Fitzconnal, — the pupil of that 
widowed and desolate mother, whom, in the 
hey-day of blood and of ambition, he had ne- 
glected, and now imagined beyond the reach 
of filial atonement, what were his tumultuous 
feelings ! In every direction his roving par- 
ties crossed and intercepted the great routes 
leading to France through Catalonia ; but 
"both Craig-gillian and himself feared that it 
was too late, though they never slackened in 
the pursuit. 

No young Scotsman is sent abroad into the 
world without one unerring guide of his way. 
His Bible is generally the parting gift of some 
dear and revered friend, — venerated for the 
important matters it contains, even while the 
ardour of ambitious pursuits lulls better 
thoughts but too much to rest, and cherished 
at all times along with the purest and happi- 
est recollections that accompany the adven- 
turous wanderer from the mountains of Scot- 
land. Norman's small Bible was, the death- 
bed gift of Buchanan, who, to display at once 



A NATIONAL TALE. 255 

his learning and his friendship, had written 
on a blank leaf, in the lapidary style, and in 
the Latin language, the name of his pupil, — 
his age, — the place of his abode. — and some 
complimentary sentences. The loss of this 
little memorial at a venta in the Pyrenees, 
the day before the prisoners reached the great 
Pass, caused Norman much regret at the time, 
though it fortunately afforded his father ano- 
ther clue to his discovery, as it fell into the 
hands of the Conde and Craig-gillian on the 
same day that he effected his liberation. 

The self-reproaches which remorse wrung 
from the Conde, rather than any regular narra- 
tive, acquainted Norman with all else that he 
longed to know, and feared to inquire. The 
Conde had grown up under the eye of that am- 
bitious woman, who, finding she could not dis- 
solve the marriage of her son with Augusta Mac- 
aibin, secretly adopted the fruit of theseill-star- 
red espousals. The Chevalier de Valmontdieo7 
as his mother had represented, in that remote 
bastile to which the prostitution of power con- 
signed him ; and his wife disappeared so mys- 
teriously from the chateau de Castillon, that, 
in the traditions of the place, it was still said, 
she had been carried off by some unhallowed 

■ 

means. The Countess knew better. When 



256 CLAN-ALBIN, 

her grandson attained the age of fifteen, she 
acquainted him with his birth, and those fami- 
ly honours and riches that might become his, 
on the simple condition of renouncing forever 
a mother who believed him dead, whose al- 
liance had disgraced their family and blasted 
the best hopes of his father. The young man 
hesitated. Without the Countess he could 
never establish his legitimacy, — his mother 
believed him dead, — she had therefore no- 
thing new to suffer, — an adventuress who dis- 
graced the illustrious family with which in- 
trigue had connected her : The voice of nature 
rebelled against this surmise ; but the young 
Chevalier de Valmont, proud of the name he 
was born to inherit, and eager to establish a 
claim to distinction, resting on a surer founda- 
tion than the favour of the Countess, consoled 
himself with the reflection, that to his mother 
he was already dead; that his prosperity must 
indeed be her chief desire; and he accordingly 
took the sacrilegious oath prescribed to him 
by the remorseless woman, who had injured 
her victim too deeply ever to cease pursuing 
her with rancorous hostility. 

At the proper age, or somewhat beyond it, 
young De Valmont' entered the service, and 
the Countess, like other Parisian ladies, from 



A NATIONAL TALE. 257 

a woman of intrigue and fashion, and a bel-e- 
sprit, became devout; and having taken a the- 
atrical farewell of the world, that is, of the 
higher circles in Paris, retired to a convent 
which she had founded in Castillon for twelve 
nuns. 

The Countess was but half a Frenchwoman : 
again in Spain, her character became Spanish; 
and, torn bv the consciousness of concealed 
guilt, the last years of her life were spent in 
the edifying practice of flagellating herself 
with a hair scourge before a picture of her 
son. Had the crime of blood not been darklj 
hinted at, the simple sisterhood, and the good 
inhabitants of Castillon, would have been 
highly edified by these pious exercises ;— but 
who can avoid shuddering at the murderess. 
The Countess lived to a great age, in her life 
and in her death exhibiting that inexplicable 
mixture of grandeur and debasement of spi- 
rit, heaven-defying pride, and abject super- 
stition, which is the peculiar growth of bigot- 
ted countries. At her death her grandson suc- 
ceeded to her fortunes in Spain ; and shortly 
afterwards the reigning monarch revived the 
title of his Spanish ancestors and conferred it 
upon him. 

The young Conde was at this time basking 

z 2 



258 CLAX-ALBIX, 

in the brightest sunshine of prosperity ; high 
in favour at the gay, refined, and profligate 
court, in the precincts of which he had hither- 
to lived, as well as at the equally profligate, 
though dull, sullen, and obsequious state pri- 
son to which his allegiance had lately been 
transferred. Under the polished exterior of 
a French courtier, and the gallant vivacity of 
a French soldier, the Conde concealed the ve- 
hement passions and overweening pride of a 
Castillian grandee ; an ambition as daring as 
hers who had formed his mind, and hardly less 
dark. Occupied even at this early age by pro- 
jects wide as his vast capacities, the Conde 
still forgot a widowed mother, abandoned to 
solitude and obscurity, if not to penury. 

Madrid proved to him but a dismal sojourn ; 
he had too much talent, taste, and activity, 
for his compatriots ;-*-he had, by some centu- 
ries, taken the start of them, and they could 
not forgive it. He was too proud to follow, 
and far too impetuous to lead ; and scarcely 
had he attained the dizzying summits of po- 
litical greatness, when the intrigues of the 
reigning favourite precipitated him into the 
gulph of oblivion. No man is so utterly ne- 
glected as a discarded minister. While time 
and chance gradually throw a veil over other 



A NATIONAL TALE. 25 9 

persons, studied mortifications and insults at 
once bury the fallen great man under the 
rubbish which caused his overthrow. 

The important years which lead a man from 
twenty-six to thirty, had been spent at the 
court of Madrid — the next ten years in a kind 
of honourable exile at Castillon. And here 
the spring of his early exhausted mind reviv- 
ed, and he began to yearn after something 
to love worthy of being loved ; something to 
think about capable of exercising a rational 
mind; something to desire, which was able to 
awaken a manly ambition. When ten years of 
solitary expiation had atoned for his offences, 
the Conde incognito visited Lisbon. When 
in that city, accident led him to shield the 
life of Roderick Fitzconnal, not the father, 
but the brother of Geraldine, from the dag- 
ger of an assassin. Fitzconnal was on his way 
home from America, in bad health, when this 
attempt was made on his life. In a few months 
Geraldine Fitzconnal, in all the power of 
loveliness, and adorned with all the graces of 
youth and innocence, came to Lisbon to at- 
tend her sick brother. 

Youth, beauty, talent, were mere drugs to 
the sated volupcuary, — he had tasted of them 
all, and exhausted their delights ; and he now 



200 CLAN-ALB1N, 

thought that if any thing feminine could have 
stimulated his palled senses and imagination 
it must be something that touched the brink of 
all he hated ; something that gave him the rare 
delight of strong sensation, in perceiving in- 
to what a fiend woman may be transformed. 
The bowl and dagger of Spanish jealousy, 
therefore, for a little while, supplanted the 
graces of French coquetry in the favour of 
the Conde. But, unhappily, this soon wore 
off; the most frivolous comedy was in real 
life far more tolerable than the tragedy of 
Tom Thumb the Great, if perpetually re- 
peated. The Conde returned to his original 
faith; French women were the most cultivat- 
ed, the most charming, and almost the most 
beautiful of their sex ; and French women 
delighted not him. It was in vain, there- 
fore, that the mind-illumined face of Geral. 
dine, and her faultless form, exhibited the 
high-wrought perfection of animated beauty; 
the Conde would examine the one with the 
cool eye of a painter, and pronounce on the 
other with the accuracy of a statuary. 

Senor Velasquez — for such was the assum- 
ed name of the Conde — a brave soldier, the 
preserver of her brother, handsome, well in- 
formed, and gallant, joining the dignity of a 



A NATIONAL TALE. 26 1 

Spaniard to the grace of a Frenchman, was 
an object of very different interest to the 
youthful Geraldine. She soon became a study 
to him. Were those affectionate, artless, and 
playful, though guarded manners, the result 
of exquisite art, or more exquisite nature, — 
Could the mere character of her sex, guided 
by natural talent, teach this little girl, edu- 
cated in the wilds of Ireland, a system of 
manners as winning and ingratiating, and in- 
finitely more flexible and varied, than the ar- 
tificial graces of the highest Parisian female 
circles, trained from one generation to an- 
other in all the wiles of fascination, — every 
daughter receiving the accumulated arts along 
with the increased jewels of her mother, and 
in her turn transmitting them to her daugh- 
ter, together with her own acquisitions. The 
Conde could not quite resolve the problem ; 
yet the difficulty of solution in so far cured 
him of that palsy of the heart and fancy with 
which he had been so long afflicted. It would, 
however, have been impiety against nature to 
doubt the existence of that attachment, strong, 
tender, and delicate, which every look and 
motion of Geraldine displayed for her bro- 
ther, and the absent members of her fami- 
ly, — particularly for her sister Bourke. The 



262 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Conde had now attained his fortieth year"; and 
he could not say that he had ever known the 
happiness of being loved for himself alone, 
nor eren the delight of being deceived into 
so charming a belief. 

In the lack of all that the heart clings to, 
he had been conscious of dislike to the vulgar 
wife of old Andrea, because she had withdrawn 
from him some portion of that animal fond- 
ness which attached the old man to the boy 
he had ?ttended. The family leagues with 
which the Conde was familiar, were rather 
coalitions for spoliation and mutual aggran- 
dizement, than that beautiful combination of 
affections, and ties, and habits, and duties, 
which mitigate the real ills of life, exalt its 
enjoyments, and purify its pleasures, and al- 
most create the felicity they bestow. It was 
in the humble lodging of Fitzconnal that a 
new heaven and a new earth opened to the 
view of the Conde. He was too proud, and 
withal too distrustful of human nature, to be- 
come the dupe of his own vanity ; yet he per- 
ceived, that in the inmost bosom of Geraldine 
there beat another heart, more impassioned, 
more glowing, more devoted, than that which 
prompted her sisterly kindnesses, ready to leap 
from its heaving prison as often as he ventur- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 263 

ed to approach its sanctuary 'with the language 
of wooing invitation. Chance revealed at the 
same instant to Geraldine and the Conde the 
genuine feelings of their hearts ; he was be- 
loved for himself, and felt like one born again 
from the dead. Pleasure, fame, ambition, 
faded away ; and not for the fruition of all 
they had ever promised to his young and as- 
piring mind, would he have exchanged the 
first-fruits of the innocent heart that he had 
unweetingly taught to throb with passion for 
himself, while he still seemed an obscure and 
impoverished individual. 

The mind of De Castillon was now effectu- 
ally roused from the torpor succeeding early 
exhaustion ; and when the first ardours of the 
passion to which he gave himself up with all 
his heart and soul were spent, ambition again 
took its turn. A few months had flitted away 
in a rapturous dream, ere the Conde began to 
reflect, that he had committed the very same 
error for which he often in idea condemned 
his own father, — connected himself with an 
obscure foreign family, unable to promote his 
designs, or extend his alliances and his influ- 
ence. 

While the smile of Geraldine was still chas- 
ing away the cloud that gathered on the fore- 



204 CLAN-ALBIN, 

head of her husband, accident led him to re- 
new an interrupted acquaintance with a French 
gentleman residing at the Court of Lisbon, 
who soon drew hina into a political intrigue 
that again excited the displeasure of the 
Spanish Government. An order was obtained 
for his arrest ; but Fitzconnal found means to 
convey him on board of an English vessel just 
leaving the Tagus. His wife followed soon 
afterwards, — but they met no more ! And 
the loss of all that he had ever loved, fin- 
ally corrected his ambitious mind, and shew- 
ed him the emptiness of that vanity and 
vexation of spirit which he had hitherto la- 
boured to treasure up. For some years after 
his misfortune he travelled, and afterwards 
retired to Castillon, and giving himself en- 
tirely up to agricultural and literary pur- 
suits, spent a life of usefulness and quiet. 
The Conde had not been at Court for four- 
teen years, when the interests of his country 
dragged him from retirement ; and the events 
which preceded the war prevented his return. 
By those among the nobility who purchased 
hollow security by the most abject submission 
to the usurper, the Conde had long been 
styled a dangerous man, a French ijicd Spaniard, 
who neither feared king nor devil. He had 
ever smiled with contempt at these charges, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 265 

and pitied the delusions which gave them 
currency. His evil fame, however, for a short 
time limited the sphere of his exertions. He 
returned to his own province, where he was 
known and loved ; and in the midst of his 
prosperous tenantry, by a solemn act of 
self-dedication, devoted life, talents, and for- 
tune to his country, vowing never to lay 
down his sword while the winds of his pa- 
ternal hills fanned the banners of an inva- 
der. His plate was melted down, — his family 
jewels were sent to London, — and an act of 
the provincial junta permitted him to alienate 
his estates, and sell them out in any way he 
chose. " Let it be recorded on my tomb," 
said he, in answer to the remonstrance of a 
friend, " that I lost the inheritance of my an- 
cestors, and conquered for their last descend- 
ant the grave of a free man." 

His little army amounted to 800 men. — 
Jt had been equipped, and was to be support- 
ed by the slender sums arising in this convuls- 
ed period from the sale of his lands. 

If he now repented his precipitance, he 
never once said so; nor did he degrade* his son 
by the suspicion of selfish regret. When Nor- 
man, however, affixed his signature to those 
deeds, which could not, now that he was known 

vol. iv. a a 



266 CLAN-AL13IN, 

and acknowledged, be legally completed 
without his consent, the Conde pressed his 
hand in silence, and appeared to feel the full 
value of this sacrifice. 

When the first gush of natural feeling was 
expended, and Norman declared out of danger, 
Craig-gillian was astonished, and Flora grieved 
and mortified, to perceive with what engrossing 
eagerness the mind of De Castillon returned 
to the affairs of Spain, almost to the exclu- 
sion of every other claim or duty. 

A Spanish estate, and much less an empty 
Spanish title, were no objects of ambition to 
Norman. He had found a father, and he ho- 
noured him ; but strong filial attachments are 
not the growth of a day. His opinions, his 
habits, his associations, his hopes, his preju- 
dices, were all Scotish ; and it did violence 
to every feeling of his nature to consider 
Spain as his country, or Castillon as his per- 
manent residence. Besides, and every nerve 
thrilled with pleasure at the reflection, lie was 
no longer master of his own choice. 

By a sort of tacit agreement, the discussion 
of those points was waved by all the parties ; 
and Norman was for the present addressed by 
the name which he had always borne, and 
which he wished never to surrender. 

About this time the Conde received letters 



A NATIONAL TALE. 267 

from one of the Spanish deputies in London, 
informing him, that bills to the amount of 
L.7000 were lodged in his name with a banker 
in the city. He immediately executed a new 
will, by which he divided this sum equally be- 
tween Lady Augusta de Valmont and Mary 
Fitzconnal. To his son devolved his high- 
sounding titles, the walls of his chateau, and 
of another mansion in Arragon, a good col- 
lection of books, and a few excellent pictures 
which the Conde had collected at great ex- 
pense. " The world is all before you, my 
son," said the Conde ; " but if every thing 
fail, you have, like your father, the London 
market ;" — he cast his eyes mournfully round 
his cabinet. " No, no," said Craig-gillian, 
smiling, " Pictures don't eat, — we can afford 
to keep pictures even in Scotland." 

De Castillon was to lead his little army in 
a desperate assault against Rosas, while the 
English attacked it at the same moment from 
the sea. At midnight he visited the cham- 
ber of his son. He stood at the bed-side, 
shading his face with his hand : — " If I 
should never live to see, — to implore, — yes, 
you my dear son, will be my mediator with 
my mother ; — I shall find a way to her heart 
through yours." He stood another minute 



268 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and repeated : " Bless you, my son ;»— to her 
whose generous love distinguished you, carry 
a father's blessing. A soldier's honour and 
his sword is all the inheritance with which I 
can endow you, Norman, — but you are al- 
ready far richer than ever I could have made 
you." He lingered a little longer, as if he 
struggled to say what was strongly on his 
mind, and found it impossible; and abruptly- 
repeating, " Bless you my son !" he disap- 
peared. 

On the evening of the second day follow- 
ing, he was brought home a corpse to Castil- 
lon ! His desperate undertaking completely 
failed, and it was with great difficulty that his 
Guerillas recovered his body. 

The first time that Norman left his cham- 
ber was to follow the funeral procession of 
his father, at midnight, to the family vault 
beneath the chapel of the castle. The ser- 
vants of the family, the tenants, the nuns, and 
Guerillas, were all assembled in this vault. 
The death of the Conde, their respected pro- 
tector, was wept, together with their own for- 
lorn state, for they were now in hourly ex- 
pectation of a visit from the enemy. Norman 
was supported bv Craig-gillian and old An- 
drea during the service, which the feelings of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 26Q 

the spectators, and the condition of that part 
of the country, rendered at this moment pecu- 
liarly impressive. The coffin of the Countess 
de Valmont was the last that had been placed 
here. Her grandson's was laid beside her*s. 
Many of the poor people, who were prepar- 
ing to fly, they knew not whither, exchanged 
their hurried adieus over his remains. 

When this melancholy ceremony was end- 
ed, Norman entreated to be left alone for a 
little while, and he was indulged. He kneel- 
ed down, leaning on his father's coffin. He 
beheld the end of all flesh. Grandeur, ho- 
nour, ambition, were perished from the face 
of the earth ; and he shed a few natural tears 
ere he could direct his attention beyond it, 
and reflect, that, though dust returns to dust, 
the spirit returns to God who gave it ! 

His friend led him back to the chateau, and 
left him in solitude, while he took measures 
for a sudden departure. When they met a- 
gain, Norman talked of his father with great 
calmness, — as of a parent, whom he must ever 
revere and remember, though his death ra- 
ther brought moments of devout meditation 
than the agonizing sorrow which such an 
event must, in other circumstances, have oc- 
casioned. 

A a 2 



270 CLAN-ALBIN, 

The person second in command to De Cas- 
tillon had now assumed the guidance of the 
Guerilla corps, and he offered his whole force 
to escort the English party to the coast. Se- 
veral frigates were at this time cruizing off 
ltosas, which he thought they might easily 
reach. Part of the Conde's property, which 
now devolved to Norman, was therefore pack- 
ed up in all haste, and sent to the coast by 
Craig-gillian's orders; and the rest, consist- 
ing chiefly of books, given in charge to old 
Andrea and the priest, to be conveyed to the 
strong-holds in the mountains till quieter 

times. 

With a natural feeling of regret, Norman, 

still an invalid, was borne from the spot where 
the memorial of his father was sweet. 

The English frigates had all along main- 
tained a pretty close communication with the 
shore, — landing parties at various points dur- 
ing the night, and favoured in all their at- 
tempts by the people of the country. A boat 
was therefore in readiness to receive Colonel 
Monro and his friends ; and their Guerilla 
guard of honour saw them reach the ships in 
safety before they returned to the mountains 
to allay the fears of the good padre cura with 



A NATIONAL TALE. 271 

the grateful intelligence that his poor worn- 
out patients had at length found 

u A home to rest, a shelter to defend, 

Peace and repose, a Briton and a friend." 

All this they truly found in Captain M 's 

ship, where they remained for a fortnight ; at 
the end of which period they obtained a pas- 
sage to Gibraltar, in a schooner that was sent 
with intelligence to the Governor. Though 
the season was now far advanced, the little 
voyage proved delightful. The first day's 
sailing afforded the most beautiful views of 
Montserrat rearing his jagged head to the 
third heavens, — the coast of Catalonia, — and, 
in the extreme distance, the islands of Ma- 
jorca and Ivica, like dun vapours floating 
between the shadowy ocean and the ethereal 
sky. They all along kept close to the shores, 
and the luxurious climate of the south of the 
peninsula rendered the latter half of the voy- 
age equally charming. On viewing the coasts 
of Valencia and Granada, all the romance of 
Norman's character was called into play. 
Still suffering under severe indisposition, he 
lay from morning to evening on the deck, sooth- 
ing his fancy with dreams of Moorish foun- 



272 CLAN-ALBIN", 

tains and palaces, — knights and ladies, — tilts 
and tournaments, — and all those voluptuous 
enchantments, and shifting and brilliant co- 
lours, with which imagination invests the age 
of chivalry in this charming country. 

It was late in October before Norman was 
deprived of the profitable occupation of build- 
ing castles in the air, or, as the French more 
aptly say, " Castles in Spain," by the landing 
of the vessel. 

When Craig-gillian, with the friendly as- 
sistance of some British officers, had placed 
his invalids in comfortable lodgings, he wait- 
ed on the Governor, to whom he was previ- 
ously known. From the Governor he heard 
that his regiment was now embarked for Ca- 
nada ; and that, having been reported dead 
of his wounds, another officer had succeeded 
to his appointment. Craig-gillian had already 
written to England. A number of letters lay 
on the table, sent round this way to find their 
way into Spain ; among others, Craig-gillian 
observed a packet, addressed to Norman, in 

the handwriting of General , which he 

immediately claimed, and received. 

" 'Tis from Allan Drummond," said Nor- 
man, throwing aside the envelope. He burst 



A NATIONAL TALE, 273 

the seal, and, after drawing a long breath, 
added, " and dated from Eleenalin." 

" An<l is every body well ? — and in Glen- 
gillian, too r" — " Every body is well," replied 
Norman. " Then you may go to your cham- 
ber, and tell us more afterwards." 

When upwards of an hour had elapsed, he 
returned to his impatient friends, to whom he 
gave the voluminous letter, and again with- 
drew to his chamber, which he was still un- 
able to quit but for a few hours in the morn- 
ing. 

Flora first snatched the letter : Craig-giU 
lian complained that she read slow, — he read 
far slower, and, by mutual consent, it was 
spread out between them. 

" Eleenalin, 20th September 1S0S. 

" My dear Macalbin !— Aye, you may 
stare ! but here I am ; and if you don't be- 
lieve me, I'll describe your Imogen's cham- 
ber, i such things, and such.' If, however, 
you take it for granted that I am here, I shall 
proceed to more important matters, and, lest 
I should never begin, begin at once, and, if 
possible, preserve my secret till the proper 
time. The many long letters that I have sent 
after you, to Lisbon, Cadiz, Gibraltar, ' or 



27* CLAN-ALBIN, 

elsewhere, , may never have reached ; so take 
another sketch of my mishaps. — I was not 
quite dead when we landed at Plymouth 
from Cornnna ; though many a worthier fel- 
low was. Mary came to me, and her care 
soon restored me. I had just joined, when 
we were ordered to a blessed place, called 
Walchern, where poor Marshall, the Loch- 
winnoch man, that used to talk about 'reason 
and revelation,' and ' the root of the matter,' 
was killed at my side. Ellis lost his right leg; 
and Pat Leary and your humble servant 
caught the fever, recovered, and relapsed. I 
am suffering under it still. Ellis is starving, 
and keeping a gentleman's gate, somewhere 
about Norwich ; and Pat is in the same thriv- 
ing way in some outlandish part of Ulster. 

" From Holland I was landed at Leith, and 
carried to my brother's house in Edinburgh ; 
and again poor Mary came to me from the 
Highlands. While sick in Edinburgh, I scrap- 
ed up an acquaintance with your queer old 
friend Montague, as I have the honour to be 
a cousin, fifteen times removed, to his lady 
wife. — And this brings me to the second head 
of my discourse. 

" He needed none of my instigation to re- 
bel against his lawful sovereign ; for never 



A NATIONAL TALE. 275 

was citizen bent on an honester purpose, if 
any one would but guarantee indemnity for 
the past and security for the future ; in other 
words, if Monimia would agree to reimburse 
part of what his limb of quality had squander- 
ed, and if I would stand by him against the 
tongue and talons of my lady. I could not 
help demurring to the first proposition ; but 
for the latter 1 frankly undertook. 

" Mrs Miles Montague had taken forcible 
possession of all her husband's papers. I 
wrote for counsel to Eleenalin, and good 
Craig-gillian himself brought me an answer 
in behalf of Monimia. We accordingly put 
the affair into the hands of my brother, who 
is, you know, learned in the law. Before he 
took severe measures, he exhausted every 
means of entreaty and persuasion ; but Ursu- 
la, considering that possession is nineteen 
points of law, kept possession, and to law we 
went. My patience was soon completely ex- 
hausted by forms and delays, for which I 
could see no manner of use ; so the first 
morning I could crawl, I dashed in upon 
Ursula, turned the house upside down, and 
vowed I would send the whole system to the 
right about, unless I obtained all the papers 
relating to Monimia. Poor Montague fled 



276 CLAN-ALBIN, 

at last ; and, after much wrangling, and many 
tears and imprecations, and affected hysterics, 
against all of which I stood soldier-proof, the 
lady gave up the papers I wanted. I never 
was engaged in a more entertaining scene. 
During her fits she squeezed me so lovingly 
in her arms, I daresay wishing herself Apega 
for my sake, — and pinched Montague by the 
ear till he roared again. That I might be 
wanting in no point of courtesy to a lady, I 
soused her well with water; and, lest she might 
harm herself, held her from pure kindness in 
an embrace almost as ardent as that which she 
bestowed on me. At last she condescended 
to recover, and begged to be released. 

We had now, without troubling Doctors' 
Commons, got possession of Mr Montague's will, 
and ascertained that Monimia, on completing 
her twentieth year, was entitled to a fortune 
of twenty thousand pounds! Most unfortunate- 
ly, however, her guardian is no longer worth 
so much in the world, cither belonging to her 
or himself; though it is shrewdly guessed, 
that, besides her house and plate, and equi- 
pages, Ursula, seeing her lord so mulishly 
honest, has laid up a snug thing in sonic 
corner. 

By the positive orders of Monimia, who 



A NATIONAL TALE. 277 

could not endure the thought of distressing 
Montague, we compounded for twelve thou- 
sand pounds ; and the poor Holbornian, out 
of his snug half plum, has saved about fifty 
pounds a-year : my lady is bound over to keep 
the peace, and openly retains six times that 
sum. Monimia came to town to sign releas- 
es, &c. &c. ; and the first act of her power 
was to settle a thousand pounds on her little 
adopted daughter, and on Montague an annu- 
ity of a hundred pounds. He actually shed 
tears of gratitude on receiving this mark of 
generosity, and he appears to regret the loss of 
his fortune more for her sake than his own; 
but that, after all, is impossible. He is now 
the careful Stewart of his young sister at Dun- 
albin, — and he declares himself in heaven. 
He consoles himself with remarking, that his 
wife was neither an Englishwoman nor a 
member of the church of England, so he shall 
, probably escape her in the other world as well 
as this. Though Montague be a mere low- 
born Englishman, the whole of the clans cried 
shame on her ; her insolence, bad temper, 
and undisguised rapacity, indeed exceed be- 
lief. It is yet more incredible, that he had 
not escaped her clutches above ten days, and 
had hardly begun to get sleek and comfortable, 

VOL. IV. B B 



278 CLAN-ALBIN", 

when, as he smoked his pipe one evening, he 
began with great exultation to give me a his- 
tory of — a genealogical tree, do you call it ? 
which cost him fifty guineas last year ; and, 
4irough all the red and green zig-zags ima- 
ginable, proved his wife to be related to most 
of the great families in Scotland. I could 
have seen him hung upon it. 

" On the invitation of Lady Augusta Macal- 
bin, Mary and I attended Mrs Montague back 
to Eleenalin. I was elevated and delighted 
with all I heard and saw. Fourscore and ten 
years ! — the Lady triumphs over the power 
of Time. I no longer wonder that you were 
fashioned for an hero, Norman ; the glance of 
her royal eye could make a hero of myself. 
I at first imagined that it was her majestic sta- 
ture, and primeval grandeur of deportment, 
and perhaps something in her story, her dress, 
and her residence, that took so strong a hold 
of my fancy. It is more than these, — she is 
the living emblem of those lofty and patrician 
times that are forever passed away, when the 
porcelain of the earth was not debased by mix- 
ing with its clay, when well-born Highlanders 
were not tamed into esquires and justices of 
the peace. Have you ever been struck with 
the account of a noble and very aged Scot- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 27Q 

ish matron in Boswell's Johnson, — the Coun- 
tess of Ejrlinton ? or with the more animated 
picture of the venerable descendant of our 
roval Bruce, in Currie's Burns ? Like the ar- 
dent bard, I could have kneeled at her feet, 
and, at the touch of that inspiring sword, have 
started up a loyal cavalier. ' Where is the 
world, Norman, into which these ladies were 
born r' 

" Apropos of cavaliers, — Our brave Sir 
Archibald Gordon having put in leg bail, most 
honourably broke his parole one morning last 
spring, and by way of Jersey reached Eng- 
land. 

" He was admonished by the higher powers 
to return to France, and my chevalier became 
sulky. His aunt prayed, his friends remon- 
strated, the officers of his regiment respect- 
fully represented the hardship of their case, 
and the higher powers threatened ; my knight 
became mulish and insolent, and by his ob- 
streperous conduct effected a cashiering. — 
May I fight him now on the old score r — No, 
cashiered, disgraced, shunned, despised, his 
blood would stain my honest sword. 

" I had lived in Eleenalin four days ; — 
Moome had bathed my feet, and tucked me up 
o'nights, and brought me goats' whey in the 
mornings, and sung me old songs, and told 



280 CLAN-ALBIN, 

me old tales of my proscribed chief, the Duke 
of Perth, finding refuge in GJenalbin in 1746, 
in the character of a pedlar selling spectacles ; 
and I wasbcginningto getplumpand rosy, when 
my spirits were thrown into a sudden ferment 
by seeing the estate of Dunalbin advertised for 
sale, with all its ' red deer and roe deer, grouse 
and ptarmigan, caperkailie and salmon, ex- 
tensive moors, and fine trouting streams, pe- 
culiarly suitable for an English gentleman of 
fortune.' Mary and I echoed each others 
sighs, when we thought of a Scotish gentle- 
man, without fortune, to whom it would be far 
more suitable ; and earnestly did we wish that 
the beautiful country, on which we gazed so ad- 
miringly, were in the possession of the friends 
we loved so dearly. The same idea entered 
the head of good Craig-gillian, and lie wrote 
to town privately to inquire the upset price of 
the estate. Forty thousand pounds ! and a 
great deal more expected : — we might as well 
have thought of paying off the national debt. 
— Our whole funds were Monimia's fortune, 
a few hundred pounds the Lady has lately 
recovered, and the price of Brora ; for Craig- 
gillian was willing to part with that delight- 
ful retreat for the pleasure of seeing the Lady 
reign in the glen, and resign her sceptre in 



A NATIONAL TALE. 281 

the fulness of time to a true bred Macalbin. 
She all along damped our ardour ; for all the 
patrician longings she awakens, she seems 
most coolly reasonable herself. An estate 
so burdened was, she said, worse than no 
estate. Her pride would be more gratified by 
seeing you an independant tacksman than a 
dependant laird. 

"Gordon, who was extremely unwilling that 
the estate should be sold, contrived, from 
week to week, to adjourn the sale. Above all, 
he was resolved that Macpherson, whose gras- 
sums have been his bane, should not become 
the purchaser ; and Daniel was equally stout 
in opposing his umquhile master. The sheep- 
farmers, for whom Gordon drove out the na- 
tive tribes, have to a man become bankrupt. 
Other proprietors, forseeing the impending 
mischief, reduced the rents, obtained during 
the reign of madness, a fourth, a third, and, 
in some instances, a half. Sir Archibald, un- 
der the influence of his worthy adviser, would 
not abate a sixpence, and accordingly he lost 
all. Thus are the exiled Highlanders reven- 
ged. Think not, however, that the good mo- 
dern practice is abandoned. Pray tell me, 
Norman, if the power which can, in one day, 
depopulate a wide territory, and drive the- 

Bb 2 



282 CLAN-ALBIN, 

descendants of those who, for countless ages, 
have been its inhabitants, into miserable exile, 
does not approximate pretty closely to that 
which holds the population of an estate in per- 
petual vassalage. Yet we have known the 
former prerogative vigorously exercised by 
those liberty-mongers, who have the most 
edifying, and truly English abhorrence of the 
latter. The Russian noble says at once, ' You 
shall stay and be slaves ;' the liberal-minded 
proprietor of an Irish or a Highland estate, 
only observes, 'You shall go and be damned.' 
Yes, Norman, though you should be offend- 
ed, I will say that, besides old castles, and old 
chieftains, and old times, I do still more and 
more love old systems. I love power, and the 
kindness by which it was tempered. But it 
is paralyzed, and in its stead we have influ- 
ence temporizing at court and tyrannizing in 
the country, — digging in the dark, and under- 
mining all that is fair and noble, — crawling 
and insinuating itself every where, and every- 
where leaving its slimy trail. Our ancestors 
had, to be sure, the power of pit and gallows, 
and its reputation contented them ; our mo- 
derns flourish a petty scourge of whip-cord, 
and they smack it about our ears continually. 
How I wander !— Craig-gillian dined with us 



A NATIONAL TALE. 283 

one day in Eleenalin. It was the first time 
he had left home since his irreparable loss. 
Our discourse was, as usual, quite tradition- 
al. From Ocaan Bo, the Irish ancestor of the 
Monro clan, we descended to the time when 
the Glen-gillians broke off from their tribe 
and settled in this neighbourhood, and the 
chieftain of Clan-Albin bound himself to pro- 
tect them by night or day, though they came 
to him with blood on their hands, if it was not 
the blood of his tribe, i. e. promised that no. 
body should rob them with impunity, save 
himself. — What a blessed principle is female 
curiosity ! Next day Monimia went with my 
Mary to Dunalbin, to search, in a place that 
the Lady described, for the fusty paper which 
recorded this compact. She searched and 
searched, and found — what think you ? I need 
not bid you worship her who has been the in- 
strument of restoring the Lady to her father's 
halls ! Many a broad league of his lands, who 
could ride sixty miles on a stretch on his own 
ground, is irrecoverable ; but it is only in 
wadset that the Gordons hold Glen-Albin and 
Gallanavorach. These estates were pledged 
in 1745 for the trifling sum of three thousand 
pounds. They are redeemable by females, 
failing male heirs -, and, finally, by any legi- 



284 CLAN-ALBTN, 

timate descendant of the family of Macalbin. 
The Lady, and some of the old family de- 
pendants, had a vague notion of the existence 
of such an agreement; but there was no sa- 
tisfactory evidence to be obtained, and she 
never had spoken of it. Themelancholy events 
which for some time cut her off from all com- 
munication with her family, deprived her of 
the hope, and, I suppose, of the wish to re- 
claim an inheritance descending to her in 
consequence of the timeless or violent deaths 
of seven brothers. But when Monimia threw 
herself, in extreme agitation, on her bosom, 
saying, 6 Lady, this paper, — if I am not de- 
ceived, — this paper, which I found in the se- 
cret repository you mentioned — * Yes, my 
love, it gives us Glenalbin ; and I shall see, 
before I go hence, the children of my affec- 
tions beneath my father's roof.' 

" It was a jubilee in this country when the 
deed was recovered, — so dear is the memory of 
thefamily of Dunalbin to these poor Highland- 
ers. I am to set off for town to-morrow, and 
have already written to my brother. Before 
three months, I hope to see the Lady presid- 
ing in the hall of her fathers. Before three 
years — but Til not tell what I expect to see 
before three years— Only do you return, my 



A NATIONAL TALE. 285 

dear Norman, and be as happy as wealth, and 
worth, and love, and friendship, can make 
you. 

" My uncle has never recovered our disas- 
trous retreat ; he now talks of retiring, and 
of purchasing Brora ! — a happy hearing for 
me. I can't contrive how he has scraped to- 
gether so much money ; — but he began life 
in the Havannah times ; and I, lucky dog, 
have married an heiress without knowing it. 
This farm is valued at six thousand pounds, — 
no bad look-out for a half-pay captain of 
foot ; — but my prospects are mending. Is it 
not Pope that says, he hopes it may be with 
parties, as with the monsters described by the 
poets ; and that their heads at least may be 
human, though their bodies and tails are wild 
beasts, fishes, and serpents ? I hope so too, 
and indeed believe it. Like the melancholy 
Jacques, I could moralize this now into a 
thousand similies, provided I had time and 
paper. 

" The ladies of this house are, one and all, 
employed in writing to you, as usual, through 
the General ; but I shall let this take its 
chance by Gibraltar. Present my respectful 
compliments to Mrs Monro. Craig-gillian is 
extremely anxious to see his little grandson ; 



280 CLAN-ALBIN, 

for we have lately heard that there is such a 
gentleman in this good world. 

" Just on the wing for Edinburgh. — God 
bless you, my dear Macalbin, and send you 
back to Glenalbin. So prays your faithful, 

" Allan Drummond." 

Norman could not feel a more lively joy at 
this intelligence than did those friends, who 
now hastened to his chamber, and grasped his 
hands in expressive silence. 

" I should die to-day," said Flora. " And 
yet, Norman, to think that they do not know 
my happiness. Oh that we could fly to Scot- 
land, to fill up the measure of their joy \" 

" As I suppose you don't intend to do the 
thing you should do," said Craig-gillian, 
smiling at his wife ; " and as you can't well 
fly without the help of canvas wings, I think I 
had best inquire about a vessel. Norman, is 
Drummond's cordial potent enough to make 
you weather the voyage ? I don't see why I 
should not eat my Christmas dinner in Dun- 
albin, as my grandfathers wont to do three 
hundred years ago, and let three generations 
of Monroes pay their deferred homage to their 
lord." 

" This would be quite in character, were it 



A NATIONAL TALR* 



287 



Flora, or sanguine Drummond, who spoke/' 
said Norman ; " but for you, Craig-gillian, to 
cut before the point — " " It is I, never- 
theless," replied Craig-gillian; "and, wind 
and weather favouring, I shall dance at your 
wedding in Dunalbin castle on Christmas day 
in this year of grace 1809, or forfeit what you 
please, provided you surrender yourself to 
my command." 

" The prospect is far too flattering for me 
to refuse," said Norman, " as either way I 
must be a gainer." 



288 CLAN-ALBIN, 



CHAP. L. 



Ah, little did thy mother think, 

The day she cradled thee, 
To what lands thou should'st travel, 

Or what death thou should'st die. 

Scotish Ballad. 



Une of the few projects on which Norm an 
allowed his mind to dwell, was, to detach 
Bourke from the service of France, and pre- 
vail with him to retire to America. That di- 
vision of the French army to which he was at- 
tached, was now in the neighbourhood of Ca- 
diz ; and, anxious as Colonel Monro was to 
reach home, he owed too much to the unfor- 
tunate renegade to resist Norman's entreaty. 
They accordingly sailed for Cadiz. When 
they landed, that city was still in a tumult of 
joy, for a success obtained over the enemy in 
an affair of cavalry, which the English had 
gained, and the Spaniards claimed. One of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 28Q 

the most remarkable circumstances of this 
partial action was the illustrious madness of 
an Irishman in the service of France, who, 
after his troop was completely routed, threw 
himself into the hottest of the fight, courting 
death, and dealing destruction ; proudly dis- 
daining the mercy that was offered j and 
boldly declaring his name, his country, and 
his wrongs. His horse fell ; and, after a des- 
perate resistance, he was overpowered by 
numbers, and, covered with many wounds, 
was made prisoner. He had been sent to 
England, to take his trial for treason, in the 
same vessel that carried home the account of 
the affair, though it was feared he could not 
outlive the voyage. 

To bid Bourke farewel, — to sooth his last 
moments with the voice of a friend, — Nor- 
man wished to reach England. He appeared 
so deeply affected with this new misfortune, 
that both Flora and Craig-gillian, though 
they had at first opposed his departure till the 
convoy should sail with which they were all 
to go home, consented to his engaging a pas- 
sage in a running ship, bound for Dublin. 

He left Hugh with his friends, and, after 
three long weeks of tempestuous weather and 
severe sickness, had the pleasure to be awa- 

VOL. iv. c c 



2Q0 CLAN-ALBIN, 

kened one morning by an Irish seaman, ex- 
claiming over-head, " Hail, old Howth ! good 
luck to you once more l" 

From the newspapers of the day, he too 
soon learned the fate of Bourke. It had been 
judged expedient that he should be sent to 
that part of the empire where the example of 
his punishment was most likely to prove be- 
neficial to others. He had, therefore, been 
tried by a special commission at the town of 
C , in Ireland : 

11 And now he must that death endure, 

Which gives the brave the keenest wound." 

The sentence was such as every man must 
have acknowledged to be just, however much 
he might have regretted its necessity. The 
time allowed him to prepare for death was al- 
most expired ; and Norman feared that he 
would see him no more. Without stopping in 
Dublin longer than was absolutely necessa- 
ry for acquiring information, he again push- 
ed forward, and at seven o'clock in the even- 
ing reached the stage nearest the town to 
which he travelled. Here he could find no 
horses ; they were all engaged by the neigh- 
bouring gentry, " as there was a ball in C 

the night, and an execution to-morrow." 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2QI 

" And is this the time chosen for a ball in 

C ?" said Norman. 

" Sure it is ; for though not the regular ball 
at the sessions, a great many lawyers and of- 
ficers are here hanging a rebel !" The big- 
coated men, lounging round the inn-door, 
groaned with one accord. To them Norman 
applied for a guide, determined to set for- 
ward on foot. As they all intended to see the 
execution to-morrow, nearly half-a-dozen of 
them chose to accompany his honour; and 
the escort, though it ensured his safety, cer- 
tainly did not contribute to his quiet, during 
a walk of sixteen miles, along a level, sandy 
track, by the sea- shore. 

By eight in the morning, the sheriff and 
several gentlemen of the county were assem- 
bled in the town -house to concert measures 
for preserving the peace of the town, and 
rendering the spectacle as impressive as pos- 
sible. Though the morning was rainy, with 
a boisterous east-wind, crowds of country 
people had already arrived, and through every 
avenue they still rushed in. Several troops 
of horse were also marching in, — field pieces 
were planted at commanding points of the 
streets, — and the town was filled with arm- 
ed orange yeomanry. Norman repaired to 



2Q2 CLAN-ALBIN, 

the prison-doors with the first peep of dawn, 
but lie was refused admission ; and it was 
not without much difficulty that he at length 
obtained an order for admittance from the 
sheriff. 

It was now nine o'clock, the execution was 
to take place at eleven. He flew back to the 
prison. The place in which Phelim was con- 
fined was a vaulted subterraneous apartment, 
called the Stone-room, which, from the want 
of a bedlam in the county, was commonly 
used for confining the furiously mad. The 
gaoler cautiously threw back the harsh-sound- 
ing door, and Norman perceived the prisoner 
leaning against the wall in conversation with 
a priest, and quite prepared for the catas- 
trophe of the day. He was dressed in a green 
habit, similar to the uniform which had been 
worn by the rebel officers ; and though ema- 
ciated and pale from his wounds, and from 
long and close confinement, he had never ap- 
peared so interesting, either in the bloomy 
flush of his better days, or during those evil 
times on which it was his fate or his crime to 
be driven. The wise may lecture, and the 
plain may fret, but beauty will find its way to 
the heart : When allied to those lofty charac- 
ters of manly intrepidity and austere compo- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2Q3 

sure, which were now stamped on the counte- 
nance of Phelim Bourke, who would struggle 
against its influence ? 

His quick eye instantly knew the figure 
that broke through the gloom of his prison- 
house, and, shuffling forward as rapidly as 
his heavy fetters would permit, he extended his 
chained arms, exclaiming, "My cousin! most 
kind, and most welcome to me !" — Norman 
could not reply, nor could he longer restrain 
his feelings ; he fell on the neck of the pri- 
soner, and sobbed, rather than articulated, 
" O Bourke, to find you thus 8" — 

" Is to find me less miserable than I have 
been for a great while," replied Phelim.— 
" Macalbin, this is father Ullic ; who was the 
friend of all your friends, and of mine/' He 
introduced these strangers to each other, and, 
for a few minutes, talked with considerable 
pleasantry on various subjects. He was already 
acquainted with the death of the Conde ; and, 
after inquiring minutely concerning Norman's 
fortunes, he turned the discourse to himself, 
solely because that topic appeared the most 
engaging to his friends. No man could, ap- 
parently, have a better feeling of the solemn 
situation in which he was placed. Alike re- 
mote from exultation and despondency, with 

c c 2 



2Q4 CLAN-ALBIN, 

calm and manly resolution he seemed prepar- 
ed to meet the fate which he neither depre- 
cated nor braved. He spoke as one who has 
made up his account with life. He regretted 
that boyish folly had led him to enter the ser- 
vice of England ; and, though he appeared 
quite insensible to his crimes against that 
country, he said he sincerely lamented that 
when an horrible catastrophe left him no al- 
ternative between the degradation of living a 
scourged slave, or redeeming his honour at 
the expense of becoming a daring outlaw, he 
had so rashly engaged in the service of France. 
From the self-reproaches of the priest, Nor- 
man learned, that the same imprudent gene- 
rosity and perverted reasoning, which mark- 
ed every important act of Phelim's life, had 
led him Uxenter the English service, when at 
the age of seventeen he indignantly fled from 
the priest, to spare the sister of Leary the 
disgrace of being turned out of doors, for an 
attachment which Father Ullic had interrupt- 
ed with more propriety and decision than 
knowledge of the character of the head-strong 
boy confided to his care. 

In talking farther of his early service, Bourke 
said that tillGordon became colonel of the regi- 
ment, — Gordon who had led that party which 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2Q5 

a few years before razed his father's house ! — 
he had been perfectly thoughtless and happy. 
The officers had till then treated him with 
great kindness and distinction, as their equal 
in birth and education, if not in fortune ; and 
he had been at all times permitted to do and 
say what no one else durst have presumed to 
hazard — fatal indulgence ! He added, that 
in all likelihood he might have dreamed out 
his prime of life the contented soldier of 
England, had not that black shame arisen, 
which, in a single moment, converted the 
milk of human kindness that flowed through 
his bosom, into the gall of bitterness. The 
torturing and ever present recollection of 
that disgrace, which, he now vehemently de- 
clared, time, nor space, nor God, nor man, 
could ever obliterate, while he retained con- 
sciousness of being, had stung into a thousand 
strengths that busy devil which national pre- 
judice and family wrongs, remembered too 
well, and resented too keenly, had first ad- 
mitted into a heart which nature had fitted 
for the resting place of a very different inmate. 
Bourke's last moments of life were wearing 
fast away. A Romish priest, who had been 
appointed to assist in his devotions, entered 
the dungeon. 



2Q6 CLAN-ALB1N, 

It cannot be denied that a small portion of 
mere earthly curiosity does sometimes min- 
gle with the pious zeal which actuates holy 
persons in their attendance on the dying mo- 
ments of illustrious criminals. Father Cos- 
tello, from this or some less excusable mo- 
tive, had incessantly persecuted the unhappy 
prisoner to reveal plots and treasons, of which 
he certainly had no knowledge, and which pro- 
bably had no existence. Phelim had already 
confessed to Father Ullic ; he had nothing poli- 
tical to reveal, and Father Costello importun- 
ed in vain. " The fatal moment^draws near, 
my son," said he, u I hope that God has at 
last granted you to see the enormity of your 
crimes, and that you feel a fervent desire to 
make all the reparation in your power." — "Fa- 
ther Costello, I trust that I teel as a man ought 
to feel ;" replied Phelim, with an air of calm 
dignity. " Do not deceive yourself, my son, — 
there is no hope left, — make your peace with 
God by a full confession of your crimes. — I 
am commissioned to hear all you may have 
to reveal." 

" Father Costello," said Bourke, smiling 
ironically, " a secret might be pleasant, and 
perhaps useful, I am sorry that I have none. 



n 



A NATIONAL TALE, 2Q7 

The pertinacious priest, not yet repulsed, 
again importuned. " Brother, this is unkind 
to a dying man," said Father Ullic, mildly, 
while Norman looked the indignation he 
could not express, and Phelim, with an air of 
suppressed contempt, turned away ; but still 
his tormentor followed him, urging confession. 
" Brother, this is cruel," said Father UUic," 
" how precious are these moments to him.,' ' — 
" Aye, ten times precious," thundered the 
priest. " You must die, my son, within the 
hour you must die ; for you there is no mer- 
cy on earth, seek it in heaven by an avowal 
of your crimes." 

" Then leave me to seek it there," replied 
Bourke ; and he calmly added, " Father Cos- 
tello, I am a young, and you are an old man, 
but life is doubtless s«<eet to us both. I am 
about to lay down mine. I could wish to die 
in charity with all men, — and I have great 
need that the prayers of all good men should 
accompany me on the dark journey on which 
I am untimely sent. I and life are parted, — 
1 have nothing to reveal. Give me your pray- 
ers, Father Costello, or leave me to my own 
thoughts." He made a signal to Father Ul- 
lic, who approached, and they joined in pray- 
er. Father Costello withdrew,— and Norman 



2Q8 CLAN-ALBIN, 

kneeled down by Plielim; and his heart, if not 
his voice, devoutly concurred in the petition 
they proffered. 

While they still knelt, the bell of the pri- 
son-tower suddenly swung forth the sullen 
prelusive knell; — the deafened roll of the 
muffled drums, and the hum of the multitude, 
told that all was ready ! — O never had silence, 
to the sense of Norman, been displaced by 
sounds so appalling. 

Bourke sprung to his feet. — " Hark ! I am 
quite ready !" He assisted the priest in ris- 
ing; and hastily adjusted something about 
his own dress. He gave his watch to the 
priest, and all the money he had in his poc- 
kets, requesting him to distribute it among 
the persons who had attended him in prison. 
He polished his seal for an instant on the 
sleeve of his coat, and presented it to Norman. 
The arms of his family were cut on it, — of that 
family he was the last descendant — he look- 
ed at it earnestly for a moment. — " Have you, 
my dear Bourke, no other commands for me, 
which I shall have a melancholy pleasure in 

fulfilling, when " "All is over, and I 

am happy, 1 ' said Bourke, smiling, as he fi- 
nished the sentence, which Norman ccnl I 
not finish. " Yes, be kind to poor Pat Leary. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2QQ 

whose first fault was loving his master's son 
better than his own prosperity. He has been 
hereabout since the day of the trial : though 
he has never been permitted to see me, I have 
often heard him without. I know his brogue 
well. When he knocks at St Peter's gates I 
shall know him by it.'' — Phelim was not the 
first catholic that Norman had known, who 
held his faith sacred from every thing save the 
powers of his own ridicule. 

The outer gates of the prison were heard to 
grate on their hoarse hinges. Bourke turned 
hastily to his aged and very dear friend, and 
knelt to crave his benediction. At this moment 
alone the intrepidity of his mind yielded to the 
softness of his heart. " Often have I offend- 
ed you, dearest father," said he ; " and many 
times have I grieved you. Had I followed 
your precepts, I might have lived a happier, 
and died a better man, — but you forgive me. 
Let your forgiveness be the earnest of the for- 
giveness of my * Father which is in heaven." 
The priest wept and trembled, while on the 
head of his ill-starred pupil he poured forth 
mingled prayers and blessings. The sheriff 
now entered, accompanied by several officers 
and gentlemen, who, from various motives, 
wished to see the prisoner. He received them 



300 CLAX-ALBIN, 

all with easy politeness, and cheerfully re- 
plied to many well-meant, but ill-timed in- 
terrogatories, though he endeavoured to cut 
them short by telling the sheriff that he was 
quite ready. That gentleman,who had through- 
out treated him with great humanity, told 
him to make his own time ; and inquired, if 
there was any thing he could still do for him. 
Phelim thanked him, and said, there was no- 
thing. The sheriff hinted something about 
the impropriety of his dress, and hoped that 
he would not think of addressing the mul- 
titude, whose intemperate resentments he 
knew so well how to inflame. — " I mount yon 
scaffold to die, not to commence orator," 
said Phelim ; " 'tis somewhat too late for 
that. My deeds must speak for me now. As to 
my dress," continued he, smiling, as he glan- 
ced his eye over it, " blame my poverty." 
He assisted the man who struck off his fet- 
ters ; and that done, threw his freed arms 
round Norman, whom he held for sometime 
in silence to his bosom. The unsubdued 
firmness of the prisoner, when contrasted 
with the agony that struggled in the throat 
and convulsed the features of Norman, who 
resembled him so much as to be taken 
by strangers for a younger brother, deeply 



A NATIONAL TALE. 301 

affected the spectators, and many of them 
shed tears, while Bourke shook the hands of 
those who stood nearest him, and bade them 
farewell. He again declared that he was 
quite ready ; and recommending his friends 
to the care of the principal gaoler, was the 
first to move forward. Norman and the priest 
could not part with him till it should become 
horror to remain ; and, in defiance of his en- 
treaties that they would spare themselves, 
they persisted in following him. Now that 
they touched on the dreaded moment, every 
individual, except the prisoner, involuntarily 
lingered and the sheriff again entreated him 
to make his own time. He bowed, and moved 
forward, supporting the tottering steps of fa- 
ther Ullic. 

The melancholy procession proceeded very 
slowly, through close lines of military, to a 
temporary scaffold, which had been raised at 
the upper end of the principal street. Bourke 
conversed at intervals with the sheriff and the 
priest ; and, with his habitual gallantry, bow- 
ed repeatedly to the weeping females who 
filled the windows. But the voice of Pat 
Leary, who struggled to burst through the 
lines of soldiers, affected him far more power- 
fully at this moment than the pity of the sex 
VOL. IV. D d 



302 CLAN-ALBIN, 

he had loved so dearly. " Ha ! poor fellow, 
I could have wished to see him once more." — 
The sheriff offered to have him called. He 
sighed slightly, and answered, " Tis too late 
now." 

He mounted the scaffold with a quick, 
light step ; and, having assisted the priest, 
moved forward with undaunted firmness, 
while a shout from the multitude greeted his 
appearance. The sun suddenly shone out ; 
and he raised his eves as one who had been 
long shut out from the view of that glorious 
luminary, and who now beheld it for the last 
time. With the rapid and piercing gesture 
peculiar to himself, he next glanced over the 
multitude. " God bless you ! God bless you !" 
sobbed those who stood nearest, and the 
low sound crept to the verge of the crowd, 
rose like the rushing of a mighty wind, and 
died away as he devoutly joined with the 
priest in the last prayers. It was one of those 
awful moments when time is visibly beheld 
flowing into eternity, and the stillness of death 
reigned throughout the immense multitude. 
The * boldest held his breath,' in fearful ex- 
pectation, as Bourke slowly rising took his 
farewell look of the earth, and the heavens, 
and of every living thing ! The executioner 



A NATIONAL TALE. 303 

approached, and he waved him hack with a 
hasty gesture, as one who loathed the contami- 
nation of his touch. He closed his eyes ; his 
lips moved, as if, in secret prayer, he com- 
mended his departing spirit to the God who 
gave it, — and an almost divine composure 
dwelt on his uplifted countenance. The fear- 
ful celerity with which every feature of Phe- 
lim's countenance, and every muscle and ar- 
ticulation of his frame, obeyed and revealed 
each wild and changing impulse of his un- 
governable will, had often struck a dread, 
not of this earth, to the heart of Norman. It 
did so now, even before Bourke, with the 
swiftness of thought, drew a small dagger from 
the sleeve of his dress, and, plunging it twice 
into his bosom, snapt it in the wound ! A 
shriek of agony, mingled with a shout of ex- 
ultation, burst from the multitude; — the drums 
beat loudly, — the horsemen charged forward, — 
and the executioner and the bystanders flew 
to prevent the completion of the suicide. — 
" O God, be merciful to this wretched man ! n 
was the involuntary exclamation of Norman, 
who ran to support him. 

" Norman ! Norman ! judge me not so 
harshly," cried he, stretching out his hands, 
with that sad and terrible strength of express 



304 CLAN-ALBIN, 

sion, which recalled the night when Bourke, 
first feeling himself dishonoured, had implor- 
ed that no eye would look on him. — " If I 
owed my forfeited life to England, with my 
own hand I have paid it down. Let them 
mangle my worthless carcass as they will ; 
but the touch of a hangman's rope shall 
never a second time degrade that living 
body which is the habitation of my free and 

Irish spirit ! Off, hangmen, — slaves — " 

With the strong effort which he made to push 
back the persons who closed him in, he burst 
from the arms of Norman, — fell forward, — 
shuddered for a moment — and was at rest ! 

Resentment was done in Norman ; — he 
pressed his quivering lip to the brow of the 
unhappy suicide, and fled, he knew not whi- 
ther. 

At the alehouse of a petty village on the 
sea»shore, about six miles from the fatal town, 
he halted, from mere inability to proceed. 
Feverish in body, and in mind stunned and 
wretched, he threw himself upon a bed, re- 
calling all, that had passed as a hideous 
dream, from which there is no awaking. In 
the evening he was roused from this distem- 
pered stupor, by the clamorous voices of people 
in the kitchen below. They had returned 



A NATIONAL TALE. 305 

from the execution. Living or dead, there 
was none so brave, nor so gay, as the last of 

the Bourkes of Bally . They proudly ex» 

hibited pieces of his green dress, which had 
been torn into innumerable shreds, and dis- 
tributed as relics among his countrymen, and 
triumphantly related^ that though many fled 
in horror when the bleeding head of the traitor 
was held up to the public gaze, many more 
repelled the foul accusation, and threw it 
back on his executioners. Norman earnest- 
ly listened to these fierce and deluded, but 
most affectionate creatures, while they madly 
treasured up wrath against the day of wrath ; 
and fervently did he pray, that this might be 
the last Irishman, whose wayward fortune 
should half justify his crimes, and teach the 
heart to rebel against the judgment, when it 
attributes, to individual perversity what may 
in part be ascribed to an unhappy and unna- 
tural state of society. 



306 CLAN-ALBIN, 



CHAP. LI. 



Breathes there the man with soul so dead, 
Who never to himself hath said, 
This is my own, my native land : 
Whose heart hath ne'er within him burned, 
As home his footsteps he bath turned, 
From wandering on a foreign strand ? 

Scott. 

JNorman had agreed not to go home till the 
fleet arrived, and till he was joined by his 
friends. He wrote home, however, a very de- 
tailed account of his adventures since the 
death of his father; for Colonel Mpnro had 
already acquainted the Lady with the life and 
the death of her son. He also wrote to Father 
Ullic ; and having resolved to wait the arrival 
of his friends in the metropolis of his native 
country, set forward for Edinburgh. 

The first day's journey was nearly ended, 
when Norman felt himself so uncomfortable 
in his airy, Irish chaise, the glasses of which 



A NATIONAL TALE. 307 

some former traveller had broken " out of cu- 
riosity," as the post-boy told him, that he 
alighted to warm himself with a walk. The 
day was closing as he entered a huddle of 
mud cabins, which shewed no external mark 
of vicinity to the White mountains. He had 
for some time perceived before him a tall, 
meagre figure, with a military step and air, 
driving, or rather carrying forward, a worn- 
out garron, which dragged a small, clumsy 
car, laden with turf. The ingenious conjec- 
ture of the Englishman, who concluded that 
the poor of Ireland enjoyed the reversion of 
the garments of the beggars of England, was 
fully confirmed by the ragged regimentals of 
this figure, who alternately threatened and 
coaxed his steed by the name of Cap- 
tain, and then, in despair, set his own shoul- 
der to the car. Our traveller was quite sure 
that this was the person of whom he came 
in search ; but he still held back. On turn- 
ing the angle of this straggling street, Nor- 
man was suddenly struck by the appearance 
of a man on horsehack, vehemently hold- 
ing forth to a motley, and not very reveren- 
tial congregation. — " What sort of person is 
that, comrade ?" said he, addressing the sol- 
dier, who had now stopped before the door of 



308 CLAN-ALBIN, 

a miserable cabin : " That, plase you, mas- 
ter, (be asy, will ye, Captain,) is one of God 
Almighty's cavalry." Norman looked for a 
moment at the divine errant, sent out by the 
Mountaineers of Scotland to skirmish with 
idolatry in the north of Ireland, and then 
turned to the soldier : " I think you have been 
in the army, friend ?" — u Aye, that I was ? 
Sir. I have been in Egypt and Holland. I 
fought with Moore and Mackenzie, Sir, for 
the eagle. Look at this button, if you plase, 
master. 'Tis an ould coat, to be sure ; but it 
is a coat I was never ashamed of:" — and he 
entered on a long and animated, though some- 
what poetical account of the exploits of his 
regiment. " All this was in my time now, 
Paddy, and I am sure I never heard of it be- 
fore," said Norman. " But, God bless me, 
how ill you look ! Is it possible that you 
don't know me r" 

" Och, mother of Jasus ! not know your ho- 
nour ! — and have I then the honour and the 
pleasure to clap eye on you once more in the 
kingdom, and in the life ? — Dora ! Dora ! 
Paddy, where are ye ? — Are ye in it ?" — He 
threw down a half-hung door, and out rush- 
ed Dora, tumbling over Paddy ; and out- 
rushed Paddy, tumbling over the pig, which. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 309 

also brought a nuzzling welcome to the feet 
of the stranger. — " Here is his honour ! I told 
you I seen him." — The sudden joy of his for- 
lorn eyes was momentarily damped by the 
recollection of the fatal spot on which he had 
beheld Norman. Dora curtsied, and simper- 
ed, and adjusted her dress ; and Paddy shook 
his son, — " Where's your salute, Paddy ? Sa» 
lute his honour, you ill-bred pig ; will ye be 
like the Ulster childer, will ye ?" — Young 
Paddy, thus compelled, made a leg, and flou- 
rished his hand to his cap en militaire. " Lit- 
tle Paddy, the arch rogue, remimbers your 
honour, I warrant, as well as the day at Co- 
runna, when we parted, yez," — said the wise 
father. 

Norman entered the wretched abode of old 
Tracey, who, become blind, and fallen into 
a harmless dotage, divided his time pretty 
equally between the storming of Quebec, 
and the floating batteries before Gibraltar. 
It was now that Norman drew forth the long 
and disastrous story of Leary. He had never 
perfectly recovered from the Walchern fe- 
ver. When discharged he was unfit for work ; 
and with a small sum Drummond collected for 
him in the regiment, Dora commenced an 
ale-house in this her father's native town. It 



310 CLAN-ALBIN, 

would not do. They had no art of thriving; 
and Paddy, in despair, became the chief cus- 
tomer himself. The remaining stock was 
canted, and Paddy bought an old horse and 
car, hoping for employment in driving turf. 
This proved still worse Pat was not " ac- 
quaint," he said, "' wid the ways of the north, 
nor looked on as if this \va.- Fitzconnal'j town." 
No man could have a more cordial hatred to 
Orangemen, and ag.nts, and tithe farmers; 
and here he perfectly agreed with his neigh- 
bours : But then he had a wyrm regard for the 
military; and for this he was disliked and dis- 
trusted. In the want of all other employ- 
ment he had, however, joined some of his 
neighbours in framing a new constitution, 
lowering the rents of lands, and demolishing 
Orangemen. He could not very intelligibly 
describe what form of government his friends 
wanted ; though Norman guessed it might 
probably be that constitution which flourished 
in Israel, in the days when there was no king, 
and every man did that which was right in his 
own eyes. A fair held in this town had been 
attended by a considerable number of these 
leagued brethren, and also by some English 
soldiers, quartered in the neighbourhood. 
The day, as if by miracle, passed over without 



A NATIONAL TALE. 311 

any remarkable feat of arms ; and towards its 
close, one of those valorous knights who pro- 
ceed from fair to fair in quest of adventures, 
was compelled to throw his gauntlet, in the 
shape of frieze great-coat, into the midst of 
a crowd, daring any Orangeman or red-coat 
to touch it. The Orangemen, who were not 
in force, prudently drew off, and the sol- 
diers had been cautioned against quarelling 
with the country people. " I could not help 
giving it one kick for the honour of the button, 
your honour," said Paddy, " and so the row 
began, though not in the proper and jantle- 
manly way I could have wished. I came off 
wid the worst, and so signs on my skin the 
day, though the soldiers did join me at last 
against my own sworn countrymen, who from 
that day think me black-hearted to them." 

An incredible deal of false swearing follow- 
ed, and the animosity was embittered on all 
sides. Every new battle was pregnant with 
the seeds of future battles. It is said, that an 
oath for confirmation is the end of strife, 
but here it seemed but its commencement. 
A pistol had been fired through Paddy's win- 
dow on several nights ; and on the whole it 
appeared that county — was no longer a resi- 
dence for him. " Not that I care for myself," 



312 CLAX-ALBIN, 

said Leary, with manly or soldierly pride, 
"but Dora and Paddy, the souls." — "I am 
surprised that the fellow who began this dis- 
turbance got off so easily," said Norman. 
Leary looked hastily up, and, in a tone of sur- 
prise, replied, " Och sorrow ail him, — sure 
didn't I teliyour honour he got the first swear." 
" O ! in that case I suppose there was nothing 
more to be looked for," said Norman, smiling 
at Leary's notions of law, Leary also forced a 
smile ; and anxious to change the subject con- 
tinued, " But sure your honour did'nt see the 
oder little one : Norman Bourke Allan Grant 
O'Shaughnassey." — Dora pulled the many- 
titled youth from a crib. " You have honour- 
ed all your friends in the name of this young 
gentleman," said Norman. " Aye, your ho- 
nour," replied Leary, with gravity becoming 
the dignity of the occasion," family rasons made 
me call Paddy, Patrick, an ould name wid the 
Learys ; but I kissed the cross on it, tnat if 
ever I had another, — blessed be the Maker ! 
he should have a good name and a good edi- 
cation ; for 1 intend him, plase God ! for a 
drummer to your honour. — " Say a piper, ra- 
ther," replied Norman, smiling ; u You must 
leave this miserable place, and take a croft in 
Glenalbin." — He put an abrupt stop to the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 313 

eloquent gratitude of Dora and Paddy, by 
rising, and appointing the latter to wait on 
him at the inn, where he intended to stop for 
the night. 

Paddy would, with great pleasure, have 
set fire to his whole Irish establishment, and 
followed his honour; and, long before Nor- 
man had concluded his dinner, the accents of 
a well-known voice, bawling, " Nobody says 
more than one fippmny for all the whole lot," 
drew him to the window. Perched on the top 
of a barrel, round which was strewed his whole 
moveables, Leary was seen canting away with 
great spirit in the moonlight. A broken 
spinning-wheel, an old carved chest, and a 
rusty bayonet, seldom called on to perform 
the duties of a spit, was the sum of his house- 
hold goods. Three fowls, a couple of ducks, 
the old garron, and the pig, endeared by 
two months of the closest intimacy, and which 
little Paddy now fondly kissed, constituted the 
live stock. No one could say that Leary was 
one of those Irish proprietors who run away 
to spend their revenues in other countries. 
Having very honestly discharged his debts, 
he spent every tinpenny that remained like a 
gentleman, in treating his neighbours ; " for 

vol. iv. E e 



314 CLAN-ALBIN, 

lie hated," he said, " to carry their bad wish 
out of the kingdom." 

Dora, her father, and Norman Bourke, &c. 
&c. were to go by sea ; and Norman, who had 
no attendant, accepted tbe often proffered 
services of Leary. Young Paddy also fell to 
their share ; and the road to Edinburgh was 
insensibly beguiled by the dawning wit of 
Leary's heir apparent, which generally re- 
quired his father's explanation, and the hum- 
our of old Paddy, which needed no commen- 
tary. 

In the town of Ayr, as Norman sat lingering 
over his solitary bottle of wine, one of those 
airs which thrill on the heart-strings of the 
wanderer from Scotland drew him to the 
window. It was sung by a female voice, sweet 
and low, and wildly querulous, and his heart, 
rather than his eaf, informed him, that he did 
not hear this voice for the first time. It was 
however, by no means such a voice as generally 
attracts attention to a wandering syren, and 
Norman was a solitary listener to the ballad. 



u 



I'm weary o' your ha's, auld lord, 
I'm weary o' your towers ; 

The hours o' grandeur unendeared, 
O but they're lauely hours. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 315 

My fingers shine wi' moiiy a ring, 
And wi' jewels tl.ey busk my hair, 

But the lightsome glance o' leal young love 
Will never bless me mair. 

I mind thee still, thou Athole wood, 

And him on Lynedoch lee, 
Wha pu'd my snood frae the scented birk, 

And my beads frae the reddan tree. 

merrily sang the bonny blackbird 
Aboon our hazel screen, 

And ilka leaf was stirr'd wi* joy, 
And the blue lift danced between. 

1 mind thee still, thou fairy eve. 
Whan this flichterin' heart was tint; 

And how saft the sang o' the mavis rang, 
Whan he tald what its flichterin' meant. 

A witless bride ye bought, auld lord, 

And he didna frown or fret ; 
But a breaking heart was in his ee, 

And that look's before me yet, 

l'mlanely, lanely, a the day, 

But the night is war to bide ; 
For the dream that brings me Athole brae, 

Wakes me by my auld lord's side. 



310 CLAN-ALBIN, 

O there's mony a leaf in Athole wood. 
And mony a bird in its breast; 

And mony a pain maun the heart sustain, 
Ere it sab itsel' to rest." 

Long before the oft- repeated ditty was con- 
cluded, Norman recognised in the singer that 
mournful wanderer from Glenalbin whom he 
had long before met in England. Though 
half resentful at the neglect shewn to her un- 
obtrusive lay, the pride of blood, as well as 
the kindness of his nature, was interested in 
rescuing a daughter of Albin from this de- 
grading employment. Some mixture of the 
same feelings made him shy of exposing her 
to the observation of Leary. He suffered her, 
therefore, to proceed on her tuneful tour, and 
following her across the river, made himself 
known. How supreme must that clannish 
attachment be, which had now power to im- 
part a solitary rapture to the chilled heart of 
this desolate woman. She was the avant- 
courier whom Norman sent to Eleenalin. 

In Edinburgh, Norman had the pleasure to 
meet his friend Drummond, and Colonel 
Grant, who liked him not the less for being 
the heir of Glenalbin. This information, when 
it reached Drummond a few weeks before, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 317 

had certainly quickened his zeal for the re- 
covery'of the estates, — his friendship it could 
not heighten. By the time that Norman had 
arranged his affairs, and legally established his 
claim to the estates of Glenalbin and Gallan- 
vorah, and Leary and little Paddy had ad- 
mired the castle, and the palace, and Prince 
Charles, as he is called, — Craig-gillian, more 
fortunate in his voyage than Norman, reached 
town, with Fiora and the Piper. Home was 
now in every heart, and on every tongue. 
Drummond's renewed leave was not yet quite 
expired, and he was sorely tempted when* 
Craig-gillian and Flora urged Mary and him- 
self to spend the approaching holidays in 
Glengillian, — " and on Christmas eve dance 
shan truis at Macalbin's wedding in the hall 
of Dunalbin, or the Highland fling, with old 
Moome for your partner." " This is irresist- 
able ! but how is it all to be accomplished," 
said Drummond, casting a look of arch intelli- 
gence on Norman. — "Leave all to me," re- 
plied Craig-gillian. " And now if you please,, 
hear me read my resignation : With one arm at 
Vimiera, and this great hole in my neck, even 
if my health were better, I could not hope to 
discharge those duties which, in this active 
season will best be fulfilled when my sword \b 

e e 2- 



3 1 8 CLAN-ALBIN, 

become a ploughshare : — besides, my dear 
father has laid his solemn commands on me." 
Craig-gillian resigned his commission. 

It was now the beginning of December. 
To Mrs Drummond was entrusted the impor- 
tant charge of replenishing Flora's ward. robe,, 
and purchasing the grey satins and cambric 
hoods of the Lady, and the white satins and 
snowy plumes of the unconscious bride. Flo- 
ra's spirits were still extremely languid, and 
she was also occupied with higher duties. On 
the last day of her stay in Edinburgh she 
made a solemn profession of her belief in the 
tenets of the Catholic Church, by receiving 
the sacrament, in presence of her husband 
and Norman. Craig-gillian had all along 
gently warned her against precipitance, and 
even engaged Norman to dissuade her from 
rashness of judgment in a matter so impor- 
tant to her peace; and he did so. But when 
he put her into the sedan which waited at 
the door of the chapel, he could not forbear 
testifying his satisfaction in her having, from 
sincere and heart-swaying conviction, volun- 
tarily professed the faith of the family with 
which she was so closely connected. " There 
was a time approaching which the Lady great- 
ly feared," said Norman. " A creature so 



A NATIONAL TALE, 3 1 9 

devoutly attached to the doctrines in which 
she was educated, must have been miserable 
as soon as her children were estranged from 
her bosom to be nurtured in doctrines which 
she thought fatal to their eternal peace. Poor 
Flora's sufferings have not been in vain." 

" lam glad you think so, my dear Norman, 
replied Craig-gillian, leaning more kindly on 
Norman's arm as they walked home. " We 
shall all be of one mind by and bye. I hope 
I am incapable of grieving my wife ; I think 
I am not an illiberal man. . But it is well that 
all occasion of trial is removed. I owed some- 
thing to my family, more to what I have been 
taught to think right ; and Flora might have 
been made unhappy by my means, instead of 
repaying, as she now does, the great sacrifice 
my father and my kindred made in consenting 
to my union with the sweet heretic. " 

Flora was very far indeed from being a 
rigid or theological Catholic. On the after- 
noon of this same day, still' accompanied by 
Norman and her husband, she visited a spot, 
which from earliest infancy sJie had been 
taught to cherish with solemn and tender 
respect. It was that humble monument in 
the church-yard of the Gray- Friars, which 
piety has erected to the martyrs of free- 



320 CLAN-ALB IN, 

dom of conscience, and of civil freedom. 
She had seen many monuments which chro- 
nicled more splendid and commanding events 
in the history of her country, but none 
which excited reverence more deep, or en- 
thusiasm more high, than this grass-grown 
and unfrequented tomb. 

The travelling party set off next morning. 
In Glasgow they halted a single day, that 
Norman might indulge one vanity which feel- 
ing exalted. He regained the splendid relics 
of his family ; among other trinkets, that an- 
cient heir-loom, the rose-coloured topaz 
ring of Brian Ro, an Irish prince whom Albin 
Vohr had assisted in war. Moome could 
sing its history and its virtues, for it had once 
been a potent ring ; but now, alas ! — 

Dodone inconsultc a perdu ses oracles. 

They left Glasgow very early next morning, 
intending to breakfast at Dumbarton. It was 
a clear cheerful morning. The sun rose over 
those lofty mountains which, in one quarter, 
bulwark the Highlands. O ! who that ever 
wandered from their bosoms has again return- 
ed, and gazed from afar on their rugged out- 
line, without beholding it like the counte- 
nance of a friend ! " Welcome the blue hills 



A NATIONAL TALE. 321 

of Albyn \" exclaimed Norman, gazing on 
the mountains of Cowal, and on those impe- 
rial summits that towered over the hills of 
Lenox. " Welcome the blue hills of Albyn !" 
echoed Hugh ; and chirruping the little smil- 
ing Hector who sat on his knee, he sung to 
Norman and Drummond 

Cueerly, Soldier ! the gladdening sun 
Springs over Albyn's mountains dun ; 
Purples each peak, and, bravely, now 
Rests his flaming targe on the Grampians' brow : 
Smiles o'er the land of the rock and tarn, 
Of thiue infant's couch, of thy father's cairn ; 
The land of the race of dauntless mood, 
Who grasp thy hand in brotherhood : 

Cheerly, soldier ! 

Cheerly, soldier ! gladsome meeting, 
The warm salute, the victor's greeting, 
Await thee : — Now, in blazing hall, 
Go thread the maze of the flow'ry ball ; 
Encircled fond by a kindred throng, 
Tell of glories past,~pour the heart-warm song ; 
Or on yon blue hills the roe pursue, 
With the sweep of the jovial view-halloo ! 

Cheerly, soldier I 



322 CLAN-ALBIJST, 

Cheerly, soldier ! She who loves thee, 
Blythe welcome sings 'neath the trysting tree: 
On the breeze of morn the heath-cock dancing, 
On the gleaming lake the white swan glancing, 
The frolic fawn, in wanton play, 
Chasing his twin down the sunward brae,— 
Each thing of life, with wilding glee, 
Shadows the bliss that wails for thee. 

Cheerly, soldier ! 

Cheerly indeed were the feelings that now 
rose on the minds of the homeward band. 
The delightful shores of Loch- Lomond were 
rapidly left behind, and they entered on scene- 
ry more appropriate to the Highlands. They 
descended the stony mountain into the nar- 
row vale, inclosed by high and precipitous 
ridges of rock, over which an hundred tor- 
rents were resounding, or passed on through 
brown deserts and dark elevated heaths, 
stretching forward and around in dreary su- 
blimity ; while the mist everywhere flung 
round an ever- varying, but ever graceful 
drapery; — now amusing the eye by its fan- 
tastic wreathings, and now filling the mind 
with melancholy delight, as the traveLler, from 
the mountain's top, beheld its broken billows 
tossing over the landscape below ; and every 



A NATIONAL TALE. 323 

little eminence lifting its purpled head above 
the dun vapour, like an islet of the ocean. A 
wild bird screaming unseen, — suddenly burst- 
ing from the palpable obscure, and as rapidly 
dashing into its sheltering gloom, — was the on- 
ly living thing to be seen here; though mimic 
walls of grey stone, hanging on the sides of 
the mountains like slender lines traced on a 
map, gave notice of a thin inhabitation. But 
in the hollows of the vallies through which the 
travellers wound, or in the overhanging glens 
that opened among the surrounding hills, a 
little heap of mouldering stones, a patch of 
verdure, and the black pits of a peat-bog, 
half mantled over with unprofitable vegeta- 
tion, told of what had once been. These oases 
in the desert were often indeed in more cho- 
sen spots, where sparkling rivulets and fairy 
waterfalls dashed around ; or a narrow and 
sinuous arm of the sea shot up amid tall cliffs 
to a little sheltered bay ; or where a small, 
circular loch, bordered by a few irregular 
trees, gleamed at the base of a solitary moun- 
tain, covered half-way up with shaggy copses 
and crowned with jagged peaks. Hugh ne- 
ver failed to apostrophise these deserted ham- 
lets ; and sometimes he was tempted to pour 
forth a piper's malison on the churlish white 



324 CLAN-ALBIN, 

farm-house, whicli stood in chilling loneli- 
ness, after it had extinguished the fifty neigh- 
bouring cottage smokes. 

But it were long to tell all their adventures, 
as Hugh headed the procession through these 
vallies, piously remarking, that they were like 
the children of Israel going up out of the land 
of Egypt ; — and how he got no sleep during 
the whole night they halted at Oban, for a 
ghost which galloped round the house, in the 
shape of a young colt, that had burst its straw- 
rope fetters ; — and how Paddy Leary, an out- 
rider on Norman's chaise, as they pulled up a 
lovely glen, espied a rosy, kilted lass, in all 
the glowing abandon of rustic exercise, wash- 
ing, in defiance of the season, in the manner 
which excites so much speculation among 
well-informed English and Irish gentlemen ; — 
and how, in a rapture of admiration, he dash- 
ed aside the reins which partially coiicealed 
this beautiful object from his view, and, smit- 
ing his hands together, exclaimed with en- 
thusiasm, " By the holy, you're a jewel in 

a tub !" — And, lastly, how at Fort they 

were met by good Craig-gillian, who fell on 
the neck of his son, saying, in Gaelic, " Now 
let me die since I have seen thy face, because 
thou art yet alive !" 



A NATIONAL TALE. 325 

In due time they received the joyous wel- 
come of the Glen-gillian Highlanders, and 
the courtly salutations of aunt Margaret. But 
in vain for Norman and the Piper did Craig- 
gillian's board smoke with her choicest dain- 
ties ; and that happy old man, with his grand- 
son on his knee, joke with the still-grave Flo- 
ra, and laugh with the ever- gay Drummond. 
No persuasions could detain them, even for 
one night; and as severe frost rendered it 
dangerous to proceed on horseback through 
such a country, they set out on foot for Eleen- 
alin, on a dark winter's afternoon. The Pi- 
per's foot seemed to have recovered its wont- 
ed spring, as he trotted over the crisped 
heaths, or bounded across the well-known 
morasses which lay between them and Glen- 
albin. 

The heart of Norman beat quicker as they 
entered the glen ; and at the side of the 
lake he paused, hardly able to proceed. 
Hugh took the liberty to unmoor Montague's 
skiff, and, rowing down the lake, shot into the 
bay of Lochuan. " It must be a dark night 
I could not } find you out," said he, address- 
ing the bay." A light suddenly streamed 
from the cottage, and Norman involuntarily 
touched Hugh's arm. — " Yes, dear," said the 
Piper, in a faultering voice, " Let us go on, in 

VOL. IV. F F 



326 CLAN-ALBIN, 

God's name, — what should we fear ?" They 
went round into the garden. Norman step- 
ped over the Lilliputian paling, and, peeping 
through a fortunate opening of the window- 
curtain, the loved group instantly broke up- 
on his swimming sight ! Giddy with over- 
powering joy, he leaned against the case- 
ment. Braan set up a tremendous barking, 
which was instantly exchanged for yelping 
gladness ; and up rose Moome, exclaiming, 
" Macalbin's come home !" — and down fell her 
spindle. Mary, and persons somewhat older 
than Mary, intent on every noise, likewise 
sprung up : — The wanderer entered, — the 
trembling frame of Monimiawas sustained by 
his embrace ; Mary kissed the boots which 
she clasped ; and Moome curtsied, and curt- 
sied, and blessed herself, and all around. 
" My Monimia !" was the low whisper of Nor- 
man, as for an instant he leaned his face over 
the head that rested on his bosom. She drew 
herself, with a long relieving sigh, from his arms; 
and, while he silently saluted the Lady, hung 
back, and looked on him. How changed, but 
still how dear ! He appeared much taller since 
he had gone abroad ; every proportion was 
fuller and more perfectly developped. The 
bloom of youth was displaced by the tints of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 327 

a military life ; and the open smile and bright 
wandering glance of those irrecoverable days 
when thought and speech are identified, were 
banished by the lofty port of manhood. He 
looked like one who had already bnffetted 
with fortune, and who was firmly advancing 
on that path which, to man, is ever surround- 
ed with peril or difficulty. A single glance 
enabled Monimia to perceive this change. 
She had the tastes as well as the virtues and 
the charms of her sex; and when the Ladv 
placed her passive hand in Norman's, there 
was pride as well as pleasure in the glow that 
mantled her maiden cheek. 

All this while was Moome with " spectacles 
on nose," muttering blessings. At length the 
stranger turned to pay his respects to his ve- 
nerable friend. — The chief of the clan! 
the beloved of her heart ! " But don't think, 
darling, that I can love you better that you 
are Macalbin. — Lady, witness for me ; yet, 
if the living image of Donald Dunalbin were 
to walk this earth, there he is before me 
now, — there is his face, and a blessing in it,— 
and all but the tartans 1" The ladies next in- 
quired for Hugh ; and Norman, perceiving 
that he had modestly hung back, led him in. 
" My poor, faithful Piper," said the Lady, 

Ff 2 



328 CLAN-ALBIN, 

4< who ha^ ever been more a brother than a 
servant to me !" and she kindly shook his 
hand ; "you are most welcome to Eleenalin." 
"Now, God bless you, Lady, and don't say 
it," sobbed Hugh, " since 1 have lived to 
see this day and this night, it is more than 
ever the likes of me deserved from God or 
Macalbin. — Unah Bruachrua, I am come to 
lay your feet in the grave yet." And he 
turned jocosely to Moome, with whom he re- 
tired, " to be made much of," and to relate 
and hear many a long story ; particularly how 
Moome knew they were just at hand, as all 
the last night, which was very windy, she had 
heard the splash of Macalbin's oars on the 
Jake. 

Norman was then under the roof of the 
Lady. It was Monimia who did the honours 
of the late repast, over which they all linger- 
ed. The chickens were the lineal descend- 
ants of Moome's white hen ; the venison dress- 
ed by her ancient receipt was part of the an- 
nual tribute of Hector the hunter ; and she 
lold Hugh, with much dignity, that Macalbin 
drank her health, and said, he had not made 
so good a supper since he left her. 

" Shall we turn this poor fellow out of doors 
to-night, my dear r" said the Lady, smiling. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 32Q 

Monimia also smiled ; and Norman drew for- 
ward his chair. " Our house is so confined, 
Macalbin, and you have so fine a house wait- 
ing you over the way, which Mr Montague 
has been labouring to put into order foryou."— 
Macalbin turned his meaning eyes on Moni- 
mia ; — no eyes could say more plainly, " with- 
out your smile, what are fine houses to me ?" 
'Tis said that ladies are not peculiarly fond 
of listening. ; yet true it is and of verity, that 
for this long winter's night, and till two o'clock 
in the next morning, did the Lady on the one 
side, and Monimia on the other, listen to the 
narratives of Norman ; asking a hundred 
questions which his letters had not anticipated; 
and all this while did the little chin of Mary 
Fitzconnal rest on his knee. At length he was 
conducted by this little handmaid to the oft- 
aired chamber, where a blazing turf- fire, and 
the curtsying Moome, with the water for the 
feet, patiently waited for him. He was shock- 
ed at having kept her up so late ; but he could 
not decline the kindness it was her pride to 
display. " Many a weary foot did they go 
since I did this for them last," said she : " but 
now, blessed be the Highest ! that is all at 
an end ; and they say you will send to Ame- 
rica, Macalbin, though I am not so bold as t< 



330 CLAN-ALB^N, 

ask." Moome was sure that the days of clan- 
ship were now to be revived with fresh splen- 
dour. Norman insensibly beguiled her into 
Jong stories, which the Lady would have 
thought far too trifling for recital, though a 
lover loved to hear them. These narratives, 
blended with her own visions and dreams, and 
compositions in rhyme, detained them for up- 
wards of an hour in conversation, and then she 
curtsied, and withdrew, " wishing him the 
night well beneath that roof." 

Next day the Craig-gillians arrived. Co- 
lonel Monro was too delicate or too well-skil- 
led in female nature, to whisper his project, 
but he contrived to accomplish it neverthe- 
less ; and though Monimia eertainly looked 
very demure, when the Lady announced the 
intended nuptials to her friends and her house- 
hold, she did not appear peculiarly unhappy 
when receiving the congratulations of tlie 
women with the long cloaks, who poured in 
from all quarters to deposit with Moome the 
wonted presents of fowls, eggs, game, and 
cheeses, and to receive the gifts of the boun- 
tiful bnde. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 331 



CHAP. LII. 



" ■ «■ Elegant sufficiency, content, 
Retirement, rural quiet, friendship, books, 
Ease and alternate labour, useful life, 
Progressive virtue, and approving Heavek. 
These are the matchless joys of virtuous love ; 
And thus their moments fly. 

Tkomsow. 



On Christmas day eighteen hundred and 
nine, did Lady Augusta de Valmont and her 
ancient suite, after an absence of threescore 
and ten years, return to the dwelling of her 
forefathers to witness the nuptials of her 
grandson, and the re-establishment of herfa- 
mily : Honour, attendance, troops of friends, 
welcomed her return ! It was a bright, blue- 
skied winter's noon ; the smile of summer 
was in the heavens and on the waters, though 
the wavy outline of the surrounding hills was 
still exquisitely defined by the frozen snows 
that glittered on their surface. Fantastic 
temples and spires of frost-work still sparkled 



332 CLAN-ALBHf, 

on the dripping rocks of Kenanowen, and 
the scanty rills that crept through their chinks 
were heard faintly chiming beneath a glassy 
veil. Flocks of green plovers were wheeling 
overhead, and innumerable aquatic fowls 
rustling through the reeds and bulrushes r 
which waved their superb plumage of fairy 
frost-work on the margin of the lake. At the 
head of the glen, on that flat where the chiefs 
of old were wont to train their followers to 
arms and exercises, a large party of High- 
landers were engaged in active sports. A 
huge bale-fire blazed on the mound in the 
midst of this Ryff> round which females and 
children, and dogs, were gathered, all inte- 
rested in the festivity of the day. These per- 
sons had been hastily assembled by the Piper, 
from a very wide circumference, to heat the 
house, and honour the welcome- home of the 
Chieftain and his bride. 

The Lady had still an eye for nature as 
well as a heart for man. She looked round 
with complacency, and forward with pleasure, 
to the friends who had left the castle to 
meet her as soon as her boat was seen on the 
lake. She laid her hand gently on the arm 
of her grandson ; and, turning to the lake, 
looked back for a moment, saying, " May I 



A NATIONAL TALE. 333 

not say with the patriarch, ' With my staff I 
passed over this Jordan, and behold thou hast 
made me two bands!' " 

Moome had often prophesied, and very fer- 
vently believed, that this was to be the hap- 
piest day of her life ; yet on this night, when 
she retired to the apartments of the Lady, 
Moome wept ! She had seen her chieftain re- 
stored, — she had seen bale-fires blazing on all 
his hills for a splendid and fortunate alliance, 
— a bride, as condescending as lovely, had 
kissed her reverend forehead, and craved her 
maternal blessing. Moome had beheld an 
immense turf-fire go roaring up the wide, un- 
grated chimney of Macalbin's hall, and an 
hundred festive dancers smiling in its light ; 
she had heard the song and the pibroch, and 
witnessed the flow of the shell, and the antick 
joy of the presiding Piper : — the dancing 
blood that lagged in her own veins had be- 
gun to prance more nimbly ;— and there was 
not a single circumstance of which she could 
complain — all the ladies wore sashes of the 
Clan-Albin tartan, and Monimia's hair was 
braided with the Piper's pearls, and her fin- 
gers glittered with the ring of Brian* Ro\ and 
she knew that she would be happy tomorrow : 
but to. night, Moome wept, and said, " Ob, 



234 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Lady dear, this is not the Dunalbin I have 
seen : Hugh is but a boy, poor man. Say, 
was it Bad to me, Lady, to look round, and see 
not one, but only six, of Albin's blood or line- 
age, when I have seen — but no matter what 
the likes of me have seen, since you, Lady,— 
but it is indeed a long time — threescore and 
ten years ! There was no stucco cielings, nor 
grates, nor carpets here then ; but this was 
Gregor and Fergus's chamber, and these old 
hands pulled the heather on the braes of Gui- 
anach, which made their bed, just before they 
came home from Lovat's; in that corner it was— 
and I was a young maid then, and you Lady 
was a child, and it is all locked up in my own 
heart, and death itself cannot put it out of that." 
Moome looked round, and sighed, and then 
added, " This is far finer indeed, I don't de- 
ny ; though the tartan curtains we made that 
summer for Macalbin's bed were spoken of far 
and near in their own day. The prince 
slept in that bed ; and Lady Lochiel herself 
sen«U«£ for the set all the way from Lochaber." 
To the Lady this had been on the whole a 
very happy day, though memory softened and 
saddened the joy it could not banish from a 
mind so regulated. She too had looked round 
for the heavy oaken rafters and rudely paved 



A NATIONAL TALE. 335 

hall of her fathers, thronged with numerous 
allies and kinsmen, and devoted though bois- 
terous retainers. This age was quite gone. 
Comfort, and even elegance, had taken 
place of rough feudal magnificence. Polish- 
ed friends and peaceful tenants sat round the 
chieftain's board ; — the quiet and the grace 
of life had stolen on those turbulent though 
animating times. Yet there was something 
wanting to the aged heart, or rather to the re- 
collections of long-rled youth ; and there is so 
much of the heart in the recollections of 
youth, that, like Moome, the Lady was some- 
times ready to look round for the world she 
had known, and to sigh- because it was no- 
where to be found. 

It would have broken Hugh's heart if Mac- 
albin and his bride had run away from their 
numerous wedding guests : But on the follow- 
ing week they set off for Edinburgh; and 
for this and the succeeding winter Norman 
attended the lectures of some of the pro- 
fessors in the University, while his wife and 
himself mingled soberly with the gay soci- 
ety of that enlightened metropolis. The 
improvement of his estate, and the conse- 
quent happiness of his people, which was now 
the chief object of his life, were rather promo- 



33© CLAN-ALBIN, 

ted than retarded by this temporary absence ; 
he never saw a well* managed farm without re- 
ference to Glenalbin, and Monimia never be- 
held a neat cottage but it was sketched for the 
rising hamlet. The principles on which he 
formerly loved to speculate were now vigor- 
ously acted upon, as far as prudence, and 
somewhat farther than immediate interest di- 
rected. In his old comrade, Ellis, who had 
been trained to husbandry, he found an ex- 
cellent bailiff; and in Montague, during his 
own absence, a shrewd and vigilant agent. 
With unwearied perseverance did Macalbin, 
now returned home, labour to improve the 
condition of his tenantry. Mills were con- 
structed, roads were opened, trees were plant- 
ed by millions, implements of labour were 
improved, and every mode of useful cultiva- 
tion quietly exemplified on his own farm, for 
the advantage of his people ; for, with the 
honest pride of a manly mind, Macalbin ab- 
horred the compulsion whicti even benefits. 
Servitudes and thirlagc of all kinds, and the 
cheerless and listless exertions of occupation 
at the will of a superior, were forever banished 
from Glenalbin. Its Chief chose to be the 
friend of prosperous and active men, not the 
master of needy, abject, and despondingslaves. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 33 7 

A fair was also established in the Glen for 
the sale of black cattle and sheep, and those 
household manufactures which afford em- 
ployment to females ; and it was a holiday 
also. Little comparatively was accomplished, 
yet that little was well and wisely done; and, 
to the eye of discernment, it promised an ag- 
gregate of advantage, which, like the wonders 
of numbers to those unacquainted with their 
powers, can only be believed when the result 
is seen. Macalbin was, however, by no means 
bigoted in the belief that his own modes of 
management were the best. There were some 
estates far more populous, and many far more 
productive of the temporary means of an ab- 
sentee's luxurious enjoyment ; but none was 
better stored with well-chosen, and good, and 
happy human creatures. This was Macalbin's 
taste ; and in this country no one has a right 
to dispute the whims of landed proprietors. 

By the spring of 1810, Moome could count 
tw r enty cottage smokes rising in Dunalbin ; 
and perceive many a blue wreath stealing up 
in sweet solitude throughout the valley. The 
hamlet had been rebuilt exactly on its old 
site, under, its old trees ; and tenderness 
united with good taste, in making the Lord 
of the Glen preserve its ancient, stragglings 

VOL. IV. G q: 



338 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and picturesque disposition. On the ruins of 
every second hut a neat cottage had been rear- 
ed ; — the low white walls were already half 
covered with climbing plants, and the pur- 
ples of the warm and substantial heather roofs 
were hardly yet faded. To each dwelling 
was attached a kitchen -garden ; nor did the 
Lady of the glen, who delighted in the inno- 
cent embellishments of humble life, and wlio 
could well estimate their influence on charac- 
ter, leave the little garden without its rose. 
These cottages were now occupied by Mac's 
of all clans and kindreds ; for Macalbin allow- 
ed but one cause of preference in the selec- 
tion of his tenants. 

With mingled grief and indignation, Moome 
and the Piper learned that not one of the co- 
lony on the Mohawk river, save Ronald the 
smith, his now widowed daughter, and an 
old man who longed to lay his bones in Glen- 
albin, had accepted the general invitation 
given by their chief, to ail who pined to re- 
turn. Unah felt a generous shame of con* 
duct so astonishing, and, save to Hugh, she 
could not even speak of the insult offered to 
Macalbin. But her heart soon returned to 
her kindred. lc Had they then forgotten that 
dearer land over hills and far away ?" Ah no, 



A NATIONAL TALE, 339 

Moome,— affection still bestows on every ob- 
ject the name dear to tenderness and familiar 
to memory; — your clansmen still live in Glen- 
albiiij — still rear their huts in friendly clusters, 
still teach their little ones to prattle in the 
language of the Gael : And they have wept 
with joy and pride to hear that Clan-albin, 
so long eclipsed, has again emerged in splen- 
dour among the clans of their country. 

When Macalbin's invitation came, the el- 
ders of the colony met to consult on future 
measures ; and they unanimously agreed to 
refer themselves to their young chieftain as 
their natural judge. Though he still welcome 
ed all that pined to return, he exhorted those 
who were happily settled to remain in peace. 
And they did so. These poor exiles had 
struggled hard, and some had yielded to ad- 
versity ; but such as surmounted the first dif- 
ficulties were now rich in all the real goods of 
humble life. The fields which these small 
proprietors sawed in hope, they reaped in 
peace ; each sat under his own vine and fig- 
tree, free from capricious annoyance. Their 
decided aversion to foreign alliances preserv- 
ed their ancient habits and their national 
faith. The pride of Highland descent was 
grafted on the vigorous stem of American in- 



340 CLAN-ALBIN, 

dependance > it was still the golden age of the 
colony. 

Unah long continued to bewail their dege- 
neracy ; but when she was forced to believe — 
what she thought hardly possible— that they 
were indeed reconciled and comfortable, she 
strove to think of them with charity, and with 
kindness of the new settlers that prospered 
around her. And how could Moome be long 
unhappy, who, now in her hundred and sec- 
ond \ r ear, with renewed sight and hearing, 
and cheerfulness that needed no renovation, 
dandled on her knee the fifth generation 
which she had seen of her chiefs ! And her 
young chieftain has again followed her while 
she pointed out Rohan's grave ; and given his 
hand and word to lay her old head there, be- 
tween Rohan and her child. Not to assist in 
an Emperor's coronation would Macalbin vio- 
late that sacred promise. Her latter days, like 
those of her Lady, now glide on, calm as sab- 
bath sunshine ; for she has accomplished the 
only ether project on which her heart was set, 
and is satisfied. " Hugh, the son of my bro- 
ther, poor man," said she to the Lady one 
evening, " though the best cratur that ever 
drew the breath of life, is, for all his travels, 
still but a fool for himself withal. And though 



1» 



A NATIONAL TALE. 341 

every dwelling in Glenalbin is open and wel- 
come to him, the innocent soul, from Pat 
Leary's smiddy to Macalbin's dining room, 
yet home is always home, Lady, be it ever so 
homely. Hugh, the poor soul, will grow old 
some time, and must have done with his wan- 
derings : Now if Macalbin thought it right 
that Ronald's gentle Mary and the Piper 
should throw their clothes together — 
Moome spoke like an oracle, as she always 
did, and it was done. The widowed Mary was 
forced to consent, — for all Glenalbin and Glen- 
gillian went a wooing for Hugh to his first love. 
So, in due time, the young Lady Glenalbin and 
Lady Glengillian, and their lords, and many . 
other gentlefolks, attended the Piper's wed- 
ding in Ronald's dwelling, which was hence- 
forth to be Hugh's principal residence ; and, 
better still, this dwelling stood on the very 
spot where Unah's hut had formerly reared s 
its weed-crowned head in the centre of the 
ancient bkalie. This circumstance was not 
now forgotten ; often, within the last ten 
years, had Macalbin spent a stolen half-hour 
in buttressing its falliLg walls. On this me- 
morable day, the Piper had the high honour 
of dancing a strathspey with Lady Glenalbin, 
while the admiring circle knew not whether 

Gg2 



342 CLAN-ALBIS", 

to bestow the palm on Monimia, who floated 
on the gaze with the enchanting grace of 
chastened motion, or on the nimble and glee- 
some Piper, who bounded so gaily, snapping 
his fingers, till they rattled again like casta- 
nets, that Leary trembled for the fate of the 
birchwood lustres- he had suspended, and 
which the delighted bride's-maid, Mary Fitz- 
connal, had wreathed with fragrant roid, and 
garlands of natural flowers, — all in honour of 
this great day. It is to be questioned, after 
all, if this wedding was half so joyous as 
Mary's first espousals. Moome, and the other 
great ones, withdrew early ; but, long before 
the festival terminated, Ellis danced an English 
jig with his wooden leg ; and Pat Leary, an 
Jrish planxty, with a pair of red shanks, now as 
stout as if they had never tramped through 
the marshes of Walchern. Ronald's smithy 
had been rebuilt tor Leary. He had indeed 
told his honour that it was nonsense, — his 
work- arm was broken; — but his honour would 
not believe it. Leary had accordingly been 
sent out to Glasgow, to recover its use, under 
the care of a good workman, and he succeed- 
ed. There was not now a more thriving or 
happy man in the glen. By one of the Irish 
beggars, all of which met with a kind recep- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 343 

tion in his cottage, he wrote home to Fitzcon* 
naPs town, that he had a pig in the trough, 
and another in the pig-house, — a score of 
sheep on the hill, — and a good milch cow, his 
honour's present to Norman Bourke, &c. &c. 
lowing in the little field beside the potato 
garden. 7 ' Leary did not add that he was ne- 
ver even half drunk, save on Christmas, after 
prayers, in Glengillian j.and on that proud day, 
when the bunch of shamrock in the hat, and 
enthusiasm in the eye, declares the son of 
Erin ; — except when he went to Inverness to 
buy iron, or to receive his slender pension, at 
which las; season an old soldier seems bound 
to get glorious by all the articles of war; 
Macalbin, however, did not appear to think 
so; and Leary, whose good humour redeems 
all his failings, has agreed to pay his pension 
soberly and regularly into the parish bank, 
established in the glen, under the manage- 
ment of Montague. After all, Leary's house- 
hold, though abundantly gay and happy, is 
but a hugger-mugger kind of establishment, 
when contrasted with that of his old comrade, 
English Ellis. Ellis, his wife, and their lodger, 
Mr Montague, live together a little way be- 
yond the hamlet in a delightful spot ; which 
Paddy, and even Hugh, have been heard, in a 



344 CLAN-ALBIN, 

certain tone, to call, " Roast-beef Place," and 
" the English colony." It is that snug, rough- 
cast cottage, backed by shrubby cliffs, which 
fronts the traveller when he passes through 
the hamlet, and follows the natural sweep of 
that well-frequented foot- track which leads to 
the castle. A trim garden, before its door, 
slopes towards the path, from which it is di. 
vided by a low plashed fence. Copses of 
brushwood stretch their verdant wings on 
each side ; and Ellis's flower-beds and vege- 
tables, bee* hives, wattled sheds, and walks 
laid with gravel from the lake, are a pattern to 
the whole country. When, at the close of 
a well-spent day, this old soldier sits with 
Montague on the turf-seat by his door, talk- 
ing of Old England, while a tiny column of 
smoke from their tobacco pipes ascends amid 
the overarching woodbine, and mingles its 
harsh odour with the perfume of the sweet- 
briar and the bean-flower, the traveller starts 
with delighted surprise, to find, in a remote 
Highland valley, the same smiling picture of 
rustic comfort and neatness which had charm- 
ed him in Hampshire or Kent. And when he 
leans over the wicket, to pay a passing com- 
pliment to so much rural beauty and good 
management, Ellis takes his .pipe slowly 



A NATIONAL TALE. 345 

from his lips, and, with honest pride, replies, 
" Sir, this cottage is an Englishman's castle !" 
and the surprise vanishes, but the pleasure re- 
mains. His wife presides in that small tene- 
ment, which it was the Lady's province to re- 
fit ; and which, besides the school- house, 
forms the library and the chapel of the glen. Mr 
Montague, who retains a laudable abhorrence 
of idleness, spends some hours there every 
day in teaching the elder children writing and 
accounts, lavishly paid by the praises which 
Monimia bestows on him when he dines at the 
castle on Sundays ; or when, after visiting the 
village school on Fridays, she does him the 
honour to drink tea with him in his bow par- 
lour. To this institution^ and the library con- 
nected with it, will finally revert those small 
pensions which the Lady has bestowed on some 
of her ancient adherents. This is likely to esta- 
blish and cherish its infancy, without convert- 
ing it into a merely charitable foundation ; 
for Macalbin would be grieved to think, that 
his people should ever need to accept from 
charity the first best gift which a noble pea- 
sant's industry can bestow upon his child. 

The Lady and her ancient dame of honour 
soon afterwards retired to Eleenalin for the 
summer months ; and Macalbin's old pupils, 



346 CLAN-ALB1N, 

Colonel Grant, Major Drummond, and his la- 
dy, arrived at the castle ; the young men to 
take farewell of the grouse and of their friend 
before they embarked for Spain, and the Co- 
lonel and his daughter to take possession of 

Brora. General , the generous friend of 

Norman and Monimia, who had now retired 
from active service, full of years and honour, 
rich in those distinctions which kings can nei- 
ther give nor take away, is also the honoured 
guest of Macalbin : And weddings and holi- 
days, christenings and Sabbaths, are again re- 
turned to his glen. Moome has once more 
unfolded her scarlet plaid, and pinned it over 
her coif, and decently fastened it on her breast 
with the ample broach, and gone * " to 
the stones." And the Lady has again heard 
the " voice of praise," floating dubious on the 
Sabbath air ; or thrilling in wild cadence 
among the rocks that shelter the hill-side 
worshippers ; And May-day an' 4 Lammas are 
returned to Glenalbin, and have brought their 
wonted pastoral vicissitudes. On the calm 

* Those Highlanders with whom I am best acquainted, say 
much more frequently " I am going to the stones;" or, M I have 
been at the stones/' than " I am going to church." It is conjec- 
tured that this phrase may have existed since the times of Druiri 
worship. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 34 7 

clear evening of the latter day, the Lady went 
forth among the graves of her forefathers, as 
was her custom, at that hour of the eventide 
which piety gives to meditation. She was 
joined by Unah ; and they sat down toge- 
ther on one of those huge rocks which, like 
couchant lions, centinei her enchanted island. 
Her humble neighbours had on this day come 
down from the shealings. Their cattle were 
now standing knee- deep in the lake, which lay 
in stillness as beautiful as the repose of her 
spirit who gazed on its soothing calm. Young 
and old were dispersed in light careless groups 
round its margin, enjoying the eve' of this ho- 
liday. The once desolate Morag, and her 
blind son, and the veteran Tracey, were seated 
there ; and the feeble orphan, whom Macalbjn 
protected, smiled on the widow whom his kind- 
ness roused once more to cheerful exertion. 
The evening smokes curled briskly among the 
trees; and the "son of the recesses of therocks" 
a thousand times repeated in softness the de- 
caying wail of the pipe, the wandering notes 
of the folding song, and the soothing hum of 
holiday sounds. The chieftain and his family 
were seen walking among these groups, wel- 
coming the return of their friends from the 
mountains; and bestowing on each well-known 



348 CLAN-ALBIN. 

individual the kind inquiry, or the expected 
notice. In a little while they entered their 
skiff, to pay the wonted evening visit to the 
Lady. Moome for some time quietly watched 
their approach ; then dropped her spindle in- 
to her lap, and, in her own energetic idiom, 
said : " Blessed he the race of him who 
rekindled the cottage smokes, and made the 
heart of the desolate and the widow to sing 
for joy! Long may they encircle the hearth 
of Albin in peace, ere they be gathered to 
the rest of Albin in blessedness!" 



THE END. 



l'nnteJ by Jofcn Moir, 




ERRATA TO VOL, IV. 



Page Line 

21 7 from the top, for nights read night. 

203 14 from the top, for Highland read Lowland, 
217 9 from the bottom, for thy read my. 

334 6 from the bottom, for sending read sent. 



