M E L M O T H 



THE 



WANDERER 



TALE. 



BY THE AUTHOR OF « BERTRAM/' &c. 



IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



VOL. HL 



EDINBURGH : 

PRINTED FOR ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE AND COMPANY, 

AXD HrRST, aOBINSOX, AXD CO. CHEAPSIDZ, 
LOKDOK. 



1820. 



•!;>•■» 






V" ♦. *h ' 



v.? 



MELMOTH 



CHAPTER XIL 

Jura:\'i lingua,, mentem injuratam gero. ■ ■ 

Who brought you first acquainted with the devil? 
Shirley's St Patrick for Ireland. 

I RAN on till I had no longer breath or 
strength, (without perceiving that I was 
in a dark passage), till I was stopt by a 
door. In falling against it, I burst it open, 
and found myself in a low dark room. 
When I raised myself, for I had fallen on 
my hands and knees, I looked round, and 
saw something so singular, as to suspend 
even my personal anxiety and terror for a 
moment. 

VOL. III. A 



2 MELMOTH : 

" The room was very small ; and I could 
perceive by the rents, that I had not only 
broken open a door, but a large curtain 
which hung before it, whose ample folds 
still afforded me concealment if I required 
it. There was no one in the room, and I 
had time to study its singular furniture at 
leisure. 

" There was a table covered with cloth ; 
on it were placed a vessel of a singular con- 
struction, a book, into whose pages I look- 
ed, but could not make out a single letter. 
I therefore wisely took it for a book of ma- 
gic, and closed it with a feeling of excul- 
patory horror. (It happened to be a 
copy of the Hebrew Bible, marked with 
the Samaritan points). There was a knife 
too ; and a cock was fastened to the leg of 
the table, whose loud crows announced his 
impatience of further constraint *. 

* Quilibet postea paterfamilias, cum gallo prae ma- 
nibus, in medium primus prodit. * * 



A TALK. 8 

" I felt that this apparatus was some- 
what singular — it looked like a prepara- 
tion for a sacrifice. I shuddered, and 
wrapt myself in the volumes of the dra- 
pery which hung before the door my fall 
had broken open. A dim lamp, suspended 
from the ceiling, discovered to me all these 
objects, and enabled me to observe what 
followed almost immediately. A man of 
middle age, but whose physiognomy had 
something peculiar in it, even to the eye 
of a Spaniard, from the clustering darkness 
of his eye-brows, his prominent nose, and 
a certain lustre in the balls of his eyes, en- 



Deinde expiationem aggreditur et capiti suo ter 
gallum allidit,, singulosque ictus his vocibus prose- 
quitur. Hie Gallus sit permutio pro me, &c. * 

* * * * ill- * " 

Gallo delnde imponens manus, cum statim mactat_, &c. 
Vide Buxtorf^ as quoted in Dr Magee (Bishop of 
Raphoe's) work on the atonement. Cumberland in 
his Observer, I think, mentions the discovery to have 
been reserved for the feast of the Passover. It is just 
as probable it was made on the day of expiation. 



4 MELMOTH : 

tered the room, knelt before the table, kiss- 
ed the book that lay on it, and read from 
it some sentences that were to precede, as I 
imagined, some horrible sacrifice; — felt the 
edge of the knife, knelt again, uttered 
some words which I did not understand, 
(as they were in the language of that book), 
and then called aloud on some one by the 
name of Manasseh-ben-Solomon. No one 
answered. He sighed, passed his hand 
over his eyes with the air of a man who is 
asking pardon of himself for a short forget- 
fulness, and then pronounced the name of 
" Antonio." A young man immediately 
entered, and answered, " Did you call me. 
Father ?" — But Avhile he spoke, he threw 
a hollow and wandering glance on the sin- 
gular furniture of the room. 

" I called you, my son, and why did you 
not answer me ?" — " I did not hear you, fa- 
ther — I mean, I did not think it was on 
me you called. I heard only a name I 
was never called by before. When you 
said ' Antonio,' I obeyed you — I came." — 



A TALE. O 

" But t/iat is the name by which you 
must in future be called and be known, 
to me at least, unless you prefer another. — 
You shall have your choice." — " My father, 
I shall adopt whatever name you choose." 
— " No; the choice of your new name 
must be your own — you must, for the fu- 
ture, either adopt the name you have heard, 
or another."— " What other, Sir?"—" That 
of parricide J' The youth shuddered with 
horror, less at the words than at the ex- 
pression that accompanied them ; and, af- 
ter looking at his father for some time in 
a posture of tremulous and supplicating 
inquiry, he burst into tears. The father 
seized the moment. He grasped the arms 
of his son, " My child, I gave you life, and 
you may repay the gift — my life is in your 
power. You think mc a Catholic — 1 have 
brought you up as one for the preserva- 
tion of our mutual lives, in a country where 
the confession of the true faith would in- 
fallibly cost both. I am one of that un- 
happy race every where stigmatized and 



O MELMOTH : 

spoken against, yet on whose industry and 
talent the ungrateful country that anathe- 
matizes us, depends for half the sources of 
its national prosperity. I am a Jew, " an 
Israelite," one of those to whom, even by 
the confession of a Christian apostle, " per- 
tain the adoption, and the glory, and the 
covenants, and the giving of the law, and 
the service of God, and the promises; whose 
are the fathers, and of whom as concerning 
the flesh — " Here he paused, not willing 
to go on with a quotation that would have 
contradicted his sentiments. He added, 
" The Messias will come, whether suffer- 
ing or triumphant *. I am a Jew. I call- 
ed you at the hour of your birth by the 
name of Manasseh-ben- Solomon. I called 
on you by that name, which I felt had 
clung to the bottom of my heart from that 
liour, and which, echoing from its abyss, 

* The Jews believe in two Messias, a suffering 
and a triumphant one, to reconcile the prophecies 
with their own expectations. 



A TALE. 7 

I almost hoped you would have reeogniz- 
ed. It was a dream, but will you not, my 
beloved child, realize that dream ? Will 
you not? — will you not? The God of 
your fathers is waiting to embrace you — 
and your father is at your feet, imploring 
you to follow the faith of your father A- 
braham, the prophet Moses, and all the 
holy prophets who are with God, and 
who look down on this moment of your 
soul's vacillation between the abominable 
idolatries of those who not only adore 
the Son of the cai*penter, but even im- 
piously compel you to fall down before 
the image of the woman his mother, 
and adore her by the blasphemous name 
of Mother of God, — and the pure voice of 
those who call on you to worship the God 
of your fathers, the God of ages, the eter- 
nal God of heaven and earth, without son 
or mother, without child or descendant, (as 
impiously presumed in their blasphemous 
creed), without even worshipper, save those 
who, like me, sacrifice their hearts to him 



S MELMOTH : 

in solitude, at the risk of those hearts be- 
ing PIERCED BY THEIR OWN CHILDREN. 

" At these words, the young man, over- 
come by all he saw and heard, and quite 
unprepared for this sudden transition from 
Catholicism to Judaism, burst into tears. 
The father seized the moment, " My child, 
you are now to profess yourself the slave 
of these idolaters, who are cursed in the 
law of Moses, and by the commandment 
of God, — or to enrol yourself among the 
faithful, whose rest shall be in the bosom 
of Abraham, and who, reposing there, shall 
see the unbelieving crawling over the burn- 
ing ashes of hell, and supplicate you in 
vain for a drop of water, according to the 
legends of their own prophet. And does 
not such a picture excite your pride to de- 
ny them a drop?"—" I would not deny 
them a drop," sobbed the youth, " I would 
give them these tears." — " Reserve them 
for your father's grave," added the Jew, 
" for to the grav^e you have doomed me. — 
I have lived, sparing, watching, temporiz* . 



A TALE. y 

ing, with these accursed idolaters, for you. 
And now — and now you reject a God who 
is alone able to save, and a father kneeling 
to implore you to accept that salvation." — 
" No, I do not," said the bewildered youth. 
— " What, then, do you determine ?— I am 
at your feet to know your resolution. Be- 
hold, the mysterious instruments of your 
initiation are ready. There is the uncor- 
rupted book of INIoses, the prophet of God, 
as these idolaters themselves confess. 
There are all the preparations for the year 
of expiation — determine w^hether those 
rites shall now dedicate you to the true 
God, or seize your father, (who has put his 
life into your hands), and drag him by the 
throat into the prisons of the Inquisition. 
You may — you can-— will you V 

" In prostrate and tremulous agony, the 
father held up his locked hands to his 
child. I seized the moment — despair had 
made me reckless. I understood not a 
word of what was said, except the refe- 
rence to the Inquisition. I seized on that 

A 2 



10 MELMOTH : 

last word — I grasped, in my despair, at the 
heart of father and child. I rushed from 
behind the curtain, and exclaiming, " If 
he does not betray you to the Inquisition, 
/ will:' I fell at his feet. This mix- 
ture of defiance and prostration, my squa- 
lid figure, my inquisitorial habit, and my 
bursting on this secret and solemn in- 
terview, struck the Jew with a horror he 
vainly gasped to express, till, rising from 
my knees, on which I had fallen from my 
weakness, I added, " Yes, I will betray 
you to the Inquisition, unless you instant- 
ly promise to shelter me from it." The 
Jew glanced at my dress, perceived his 
danger and mine, and, with 2i physical pre- 
sence of mind unparalleled, except in a 
man under strong impressions of mental 
excitation and personal danger, bustled a- 
bout to remove every trace of the expiato- 
ry sacrifice, and of my inquisitorial cos- 
tume, in a moment. In the same breath 
he called aloud for Rehekah, to remove the 
vessels fijom the table ; bid Antonio quit 



A TALE. a 

the apartment, and hastened to clothe me 
in some dress that he had snatched from a 
wardrobe collected from centuries ; while 
he tore off my inquisitorial dress with a 
violence that left me actually naked, and 
the habit in rags. 

" There was something at once fear- 
ful and ludicrous in the scene that follow 
ed, Rebekah, an old Jewish woman, came 
at his call ; but, seeing a third person, re- 
treated in terror, while her master, in his 
confusion, called her in vain by her Cluis- 
tiaji name of Maria. Obliged to remove 
the table alone, he overthrew it, and broke 
the leg of the unfortunate animal fasten- 
ed to it, who, not to be without his share 
in the tumult, uttered the most shrill and 
intolerable screams, while the Jew, snatch- 
ing up the sacrificial knife, repeated eager- 
ly, " Statim mactat gallum," and put the 
wretched bird out of its pain ; then, trem- 
bling at this open avowal of his Judaism, 
he sat down amid the ruins of the over 
thrown table, the fragments of the broken 



12 MELMOTH: 

vessels, and the remains of the martyred 
cock. He gazed at me with a look of stu- 
pified and ludicrous inanity, and demand- 
ed in delirious tones, what " my lords the 
Inquisitors had pleased to visit his humble 
but highly-honoured mansion for ?" I 
was scarce less deranged than he was ; 
and, though we both spoke the same lan- 
guage, and were forced by circumstances 
into the same strange and desperate confi- 
dence with each other, we really needed, 
for the first half-hour, a rational interpreter 
of our exclamations, starts of fear, and 
bursts of disclosure. At last our mutual 
terror acted honestly between us, and we 
understood each other. The end of the 
matter was, that, in less than an hour, I 
felt myself clad in a comfortable garment, 
seated at a table amply spread, watched 
over by my involuntary host, and watch- 
ing him in turn with red wolfish eyes, 
which glanced from his board to his per- 
son, as if I could, at a moment's hint of 
danger from his treachery, have chang- 



A TALE. 13 

ed my meal, and feasted on his life-blood. 
No such danger occurred, — my host was 
more afraid of me than I had reason to be 
of him, and for many causes. He was a 
Jew innate, an impostor, — a wretch, who, 
drawing sustenance from the bosom of our 
holy mother the church, had turned her 
nutriment to poison, and attempted to in- 
fuse that poison into the lips of his son. 
I was but a fugitive from the Inquisition, 
— a prisoner, who had a kind of instinc- 
tive and very venial dislike to giving the 
Inquisitors the trouble of lighting the fag- 
gots for me, which would be much better 
employed in consuming the adherent to 
the law of Moses. In fact, impartiality 
considered, there was every thing in my 
favour, and the Jew just acted as if he felt 
so, — but all this I ascribed to his terrors of 
the Inquisition. 

" That night I slept,—! know not how 
or where. I had wild dreams before I 
slept, if I did sleep ; and after, — such vi- 
sions,— such things, passed in dread and 



14 MELMOTH : 

stem reality before me. I have often in 
my memory searched for the traces of the 
first night I passed under the roof of the 
Jew, but can find nothing,— nothing except 
a conviction of my utter insanity. It might 
not have been so, — I know not how it was. 
I remember his lighting me up a narrow 
stair, and my asking him, was he lighting 
me down the steps of the dungeons of the 
Inquisition ? — his throwing open a door, 
and my asking him, was it the door of the 
torture-room ? — his attempting to undress 
me, and my exclaiming, " Do not bind 
me too tight, — I know I must suffer, but 
be merciful ;" — his throwing me on the 
bed, while I shrieked, " Well, you have 
bound me on the rack, then ? — strain it 
hard, that I may forget myself the sooner ; 
but let your surgeon not be near to watch 
my pulse, — let it cease to throb, and let 
me cease to suffer." I remember no more 
for many days, though I have struggled 
to do so, and caught from time to time 
glimpses of thoughts better lost. Oh, Sir, 



A TALE. 15 

there are some criininals of the imagina- 
tioiij whom if we could plunge into the 
oubliettes of its magnificent but lightly- 
based fabric, its lord would reign more 
happy. * * * 

* # * * 

" Many days elapsed, indeed, before the 
Jew began to feel his immunity somewhat 
dearly purchased, by the additional main- 
tenance of a troublesome, and, I fear, a 
deranged inmate. He took the first op- 
portunity that the recovery of my intel- 
lect offered, of hinting this to me, and in- 
quired mildly what 1 purposed to do, and 
where I meant to go. This question for 
the first time opened to my view that 
range of hopeless and interminable desola- 
tion that lay before me, — the Inquisition 
had laid waste the whole track of life, as 
with fire and sword. I had not a spot to 
stand on, a meal to earn, a hand to grasp, 
a voice to greet, a roof to crouch under, 
in the whole realm of Spain. 

" You are not to learn, Sir, that the power 



16 31ELM0TH: 

of the Inquisition, like that of death, sepa- 
rates you, by its single touch, from all mor- 
tal relations. From the moment its grasp 
has seized you, all human hands unlock their 
hold of yours, — you have no longer father, 
mother, sister, or child. The most devot- 
ed and affectionate of all those relatives, 
who, in the natural intercourse of human 
life, would have laid their hands under 
your feet to procure you a smoother pas- 
sage over its roughnesses, would be the 
first to grasp the faggot that was to reduce 
you to ashes, if the Inquisition were to 
demand the sacrifice. I knew all this ; 
and I felt, besides, that, had I never been 
a prisoner in the Inquisition, I was an iso- 
lated being, rejected by father and mother, 
— the involuntary murderer of my brother, 
the only being on earth who loved me, or 
whom I could love or profit by, — that be- 
ing who seemed to flash across my brief 
human existence, to illuminate and to 
blast. The bolt had perished with the vic- 
tim. In Spain it was impossible for me 



A TALE. 17 

to live without detection, unless I plung- 
ed myself into an imprisonment as pro- 
found and hopeless as that of the Inquisi- 
tion. And, if a miracle were wrought to 
convey me out of Spain, ignorant as I was 
of the language, the habits, and the modes 
of obtaining subsistence, in that or any 
other country, how could I support my- 
self even for a day. Absolute famine 
stared me in the face, and a sense of de- 
gradation accompanying my consciousness 
of my own utter and desolate helplessness, 
was the keenest shaft in the quiver, 
whose contents were lodged in my heart. 
My consequence was actually lessened in 
my own eyes, by ceasing to become the 
victim of persecution, by which I had 
suffered so long. While people think it 
"vcorth their while to torment us, we are 
never without some dignity, though pain- 
ful and imaginary. Even in the Inquisi- 
tion I belonged to somebody, — I was 
watched and guarded; — now, I was the 



18 MELMOTH : 

outcast of the whole earth, and I wept 
with equal bitterness and depression at 
the hopeless vastness of the desert I had 
to traverse. 

" The Jew, not at all disturbed by these 
feelings, went daily out for intelligence, 
and returned one evening in such raptures, 
that I could easily discover he had ascer- 
tained his own safety at least, if not mine. 
He informed me that the current report in 
Madrid was, that I had perished in the 
fall of the burning ruins on the night of 
the fire. He added, that this report had 
received additional currency and strength 
from the fact, that the bodies of those who 
had perished by the fall of the arch, were, 
when discovered, so defaced by fire, and 
so crushed by the massive fragments, as 
to be utterly undistinguishable ; — their re- 
mains had been collected, however, and 
mine were supposed to be among the num- 
ber. A mass had been performed for 
them, and their cinders, occupying but a 



A TALE. 19 

single coffin *, were interred in the vaults 
of the Dominican church, while some of 
the first families of Spain, in the deepest 
mourning, and their faces veiled, testified 
their grief in silence for those whom they 
would have shuddered to acknowledge 
their mortal relationship to, had they been 
still living. Certainly a lump of cinders 
was no longer an object even of religi- 
ous hostility. My mother, he added, was 
among the number of mourners, but with 
a veil so long and thick, and attendance so 
few, that it would have been impossible 
to have known the Duchess di Mon^ada, 
but for the whisper that her appearance 
there had been enjoined for penance. He 
added, what gave me more perfect satis- 
faction, that the holy office was very glad 



* This extraordinary fact occurred after the dread- 
ful fire which consumed sixteen persons in one house, 
in Stephen's Green, Dublin, 1816. The writer of 
this heard the screams of sufferers whom it was im« 
possible to save, for an hour and a half 



20 MEL MOTH : 

to accredit the story of my death ; they 
wished me to be believed dead, and what 
the Inquisition wishes to be believed, is 
rarely denied belief in Madrid. This sign, 
ing my certificate of death, was to me the 
best security for life. In the communica- 
tiveness of his joy, which had expanded 
his heart, if not his hospitality, the Jew, 
as I swallowed my bread and water, (for 
my stomach still loathed all animal food), 
informed me that there was a procession to 
take place that evening, the most solemn 
and superb ever witnessed in Madrid. 
The holy office was to appear in all the 
pomp and plenitude of its glory, accompa- 
nied by the standards of St Dominic and 
the cross, while all the ecclesiastical orders 
in Madrid were to attend with their ap- 
propriate insignia, invested by a strong 
military guard, (which, for some reason or 
other, was judged necessary or proper), 
and, attended by the whole populace of 
Madrid, was to proceed to the principal 
church to humihate themselves for the re- 



A TALE. 21 

cent calamity they had undergone, and 
implore the saints to be more personally 
active in the event of a future conflagra- 
tion. 

" The evening came on — the Jew left 
me ; and, under an impression at once un- 
accountable and irresistible, I ascended 
to the highest apartment in his house, 
and, with a beating heart, listened for the 
toll of the bells that was to announce the 
commencement of the ceremony. I had 
not long to wait. At the close of twilight, 
every steeple in the city was vibrating 
with the tolls of their well-plied bells. I 
was in an upper room of the house. 
There was but one window ; but, hiding 
myself behind the blind, which I withdrew 
from time to time, I had a full view of the 
spectacle. The house of the Jew looked 
out on an open space, through which the 
procession was to pass, and which was al- 
ready so filled, that I wondered how the 
procession could ever make its way through 
such a wedged and impenetrable mass. A t 



22 MELMOTH : 

last, I could distinguish a motion like that 
of a distant power, giving a kind of inde- 
finite impulse to the vast body that rolled 
and blackened beneath me, like the ocean 
under the first and far-felt agitations of the 
storm. 

" The crowd rocked and reeled, but did 
not seem to give way an inch. The pro- 
cession commenced. I could see it ap- 
proach, marked as it was by the crucifix, 
banner, and taper — (for they had reserved 
the procession till a late hour, to give it the 
imposing effect of torch-light.) And I saw 
the multitude at a vast distance give way 
at once. Then came on the stream of the 
procession, rushing, like a magnificent 
river, between two banks of human bo- 
dies, who kept as regular an4 strict dis- 
tance, as if they had been ramparts of 
stone, — the banners, and crucifixes, and 
tapers, appearing like the crests of foam 
on advancing billows, sometimes rising, 
sometimes sinking. At last they came on, 
and the whole grandeur of tlie procession 



A TALE. 23 

burst on my view, and nothing was ever 
more imposing, or more magnificent. The 
habits of the ecclesiastics, the glare of the 
torches struggling with the dying twihght, 
and seeming to say to heaven, We have a 
sun though yours is set ;— the solemn and 
resolute look of the whole party, who trod 
as if their march were on the bodies of 
kings, and looked as if they would have 
said. What is the sceptre to the cross ? — 
the black crucifix itself, trembling in the 
rear, attended by the banner of St Domi- 
nick, with its awful inscription. — It was a 
sight to convert all hearts, and I exulted I 
was a Catholic. Suddenly a tumult seem- 
ed to arise among the crowd — I knew not 
from what it could arise — all seemed so 
pleased and so elated. 

" I drew away the blind, and saw, by 
torch-light, among a crowd of officials who 
clustered round the standard of St Domi- 
nick, the figure of my companion. His 
story was well known. At first a faint 
hiss was heard, then a wikl and smothered 



24 MELMOTH : 

howl. Then I heard voices among the 
crowd repeat, in audible sounds, " What 
is this for ? Why do they ask why the 
Inquisition has been half-burned ? — why 
the virgin has withdrawn her protection ? 
— why the saints turn away their faces 
from us? — when a parricide marches a- 
mong the officials of the Inquisition. Are 
the hands that have cut a father's throat 
fit to support the banner of the cross?" 
These were the words but of a few at first, 
but the whisper spread rapidly among the 
crowd ; and fierce looks were darted, and 
hands were clenched and raised, and some 
stooped to the earth for stones. The pro- 
cession went on, however, and every one 
knelt to the crucifixes as they advanced, 
held aloft by the priests. But the mur- 
murs increased too, and the words, " par- 
ricide, profanation, and victim," resounded 
on every side, even from those who knelt 
in the mire as the cross passed by. The 
murmur increased — it could no longer be 
mistaken for that of adoration. The fore- 



A TALE. 25 

most priests paused in terror ill concealed 
— and this seemed the sio'nal for the terri- 
ble scene that was about to follow. All 
officer belonging to the guard at this time 
ventured to intimate to the chief Inquisi- 
tor the danger that might be apprehended, 
but was dismissed with the short and sul- 
len answer, " Move on — the servants of 
Christ have nothing to fear." The proces- 
sion attempted to proceed, but their pro- 
gress was obstructed by the multitude, 
who now seemed bent on some deadly 
purpose. A few stones were thrown ; but 
the moment the priests raised their cruci- 
fixes, the multitude were on their knees 
again, still, however, holding the stones 
in their hands. The military officers a- 
gain addressed the chief Inquisitor, and 
intreated his permission to disperse the 
crowd. They received the same dull 
and stern answer, " The cross is sufficient 
for the protection of its servants — what- 
ever fears you may feel, I feel none." 
Incensed at the reply, a young officer 

VOL. III. B 



26 MELMOTH : 

sprung on his horse, which he had quitted 
from respect while addressing the Supre- 
lua, and was in a moment levelled by the 
blow of a stone that fractured his skull. 
He turned his blood-swimming eyes on 
the Inquisitor, and died. The multitude 
raised a wild shout, and pressed closer. 
Their intentions were now too plain. 
They pressed close on that part of the pro- 
cession among which their victim was 
placed. Again, and in the most urgent 
terms, the officers implored leave to dis- 
perse the crowd, or at least cover the re- 
treat of the obnoxious object to some 
neighbouring church, or even to the walls 
of the Inquisition. And the wretched 
man himself, with loud outcries, (as he 
saw the danger thickening around him), 
joined in their petition. The Supre- 
ma, though looking pale, bated not a jot 
of his pride. " These are my arms !" he 
exclaimed, pointing to the crucifixes, " and 
their inscription is tv-mrej^nxtc. I forbid a 
sword to be drawn, or a musket to be 



A TALE. 27 

levelled. On, in the name of God." And. 
on they attempted to move, but the pres* 
sure now rendered it impossible. The mul- 
titude, unrepressed by the military, became 
ungovernable ; the'crosses reeled and rock- 
ed like standards in a battle ; the eccle- 
siastics, in confusion and terror, pressed on 
each other. Amid that vast mass, every 
particle of which seemed in motion, there 
was but one emphatic and discriminate 
movement — that wiiich bore a certain part 
of tlie crowd strait on to the spot where 
their victim, though inclosed and inwrapt 
by all that is formidable in earthly, and all 
that is awful in spiritual power — sheltered 
by the crucifix and the sword — stood trem- 
bling to the bottom of his soul. The Su- 
prema saw his error too late, and now call- 
ed loudly on the military to advance, and 
disperse the crowd by any means. They 
attempted to obey him ; but by this time 
they were mingled among the crowd them- 
selves. All order had ceased; and besides, 
there appeared a kind of indisposition to 



28 MELMOTH : 

this service, from the very first, among the 
military. They attempted to charge, how- 
ever ; but, entangled as they were among 
the crowd, who clung round their horses 
hoofs, it was impossible for them even to 
form, and the first shower of stones threw 
them into total confusion. The danger 
increased every moment, for one spirit now 
seemed to animate the whole multitude. 
What had been the stifled growl of a few, 
was now the audible yell of all — " Give 
him to us — we must have him ;" and they 
tossed and roared like a thousand waves 
assailing a wreck. As the military re- 
treated, a hundred priests instantly closed 
round the unhappy man, and with gene- 
rous despair exposed themselves to the fu- 
ry of the multitude. While the Suprema, 
hastening to the dreadful spot, stood in 
the front of the priests, with the cross 
uplifted, — his face was like that of the 
dead, but his eye had not lost a single 
flash of its fire, nor his voice a tone of 



A TALE. 29 

its pride. It ^vas in vain ; the multi- 
tude proceeded calmly, and even respect- 
fully, (when not resisted), to remove all 
that obstructed their progress; in doing 
so, they took every care of the persons of 
priests ^vhom they were compelled to re- 
move, repeatedly asking their pardon for 
the violence they were guilty of. And 
this tranquilUty of resolved vengeance \vas 
the most direful indication of its never 
desisting till its purpose was accomplished. 
The last ring was broken — the last resister 
overcome. Amid yells like those of a 
thousand tigers, the victim ^vas seized and 
dragged forth, grasping in both hands frag- 
ments of the robes of those he had clung 
to in vain, and holding them up in the 
impotence of despair. 

" The cry w^as huslied for a moment, as 
they felt him in their talons, and gazed on 
him with thirsty eyes. Then it was re- 
newed, and the work of blood began. 
They dashed him to the earth — tore him 



30 MELMOTH : 

up again — flung him into the air — tossed 
him from hand to hand, as a bull gores the 
howling mastiff with horns right and left. 
Bloody, defaced, blackened with earth, 
and battered wdth stones, he struggled and 
roared among them, till a loud cry an- 
nounced the hope of a termination to a 
scene alike horrible to humanity, and dis- 
graceful to civilization. The military, 
strongly reinforced, came galloping on, 
and all the ecclesiastics, with torn habits, 
and broken crucifixes, following fast in 
the rear, — all eager in the cause of hu- 
man nature— all on fire to prevent this 
base and barbarous disgrace to the name 
of Christianity and of human nature. 

" Alas ! this interference only hastened 
the horrible catastrophe. There was but 
a shorter space for the multitude to work 
their furious will. I saw, I felt, but I can- 
not describe, the last moments of this hor- 
rible scene. Dragged from the mud and 
stones, they daslied a mangled lump of 



A TALE. 31 

fiesii right against the door of the house 
where I was. With his tongue hanging 
from his lacerated mouth, like that of a 
baited bull ; with one eye torn from the 
socket, and dangling on his bloody cheek ; 
wath a fracture in every limb, and a wound 
for every pore, he still howled for " life — 
life — life — mercy !" till a stone, aimed by 
some pitying hand, struck him down. 
He fell, trodden in one moment into san- 
guine and discoloured nciud by a thou- 
sand feet. The cavalry came on, charg- 
ing with fury. The crowd, saturated 
with cruelty and blood, gave way in grim 
silence. But they had not left a joint of 
his little finger — a hair of his head — a slip 
of his skin. Had Spain mortgaged all her 
reliques from JMadrid to Monserrat, from 
the Pyrennees to Gibraltar, she could not 
have recovered the paring of a nail to ca- 
nonize. The officer who headed the troop 
dashed his horse's hoofs into a bloody form- 
less mass, and demanded, " Where was 
the victim ?" He was answered, " Beneath 



32 MELMOTH : 

your horse's feet *;" and they depart- 
ed. * * * * 

* * * * ^- 

" It is a fact, Sh', that while witnessing 
this horrible execution, I felt all the effects 
vulgarly ascribed to fascination. I shud- 
dered at the first movement — the dull and 
deep whisper among the crowd. I shriek- 
ed involuntarily when the first decisive 
movements began among them ; but when 
at last the human shapeless carrion was 
dashed against the door, I. echoed the wild 
shouts of the multitude with a kind of sa- 
vage instinct. I bounded — I clasped my 
hands for a moment — then I echoed the 
screams of the thing that seemed no lon- 
ger to live, but still could scream ; and T 
screamed aloud and wildly for life — Ufe — 
and mercy ! One face was turned towards 



* This circumstance occurred in Ireland 1797, 
after the murder of the unfortunate Dr Hamilton, 
The officer was answered, on inquiring what was that 
heap of mud at his horse's feet, — " The man you 
came for." 



A TALE. 33 

me as I shrieked in unconscious tones. 
The glance, fixed on me for a moment, 
was in a moment withdrawn. The 
flash of the well-known eyes made no 
impression on me then. My existence 
was so purely mechanical, that, without 
the least consciousness of my own danger, 
(scarce less than that of the victim, had I 
been detected), I remained uttering shout 
for shout, and scream for scream — offering 
worlds in imagination to be able to remove 
from the window, yet feeling as if every 
shriek I uttered was as a nail that fastened 
me to it — dropping my eye-lids, and feel- 
ing as if a hand held them open, or cut 
them away — forcing me to gaze on all that 
passed below, like Regulus, with his lids 
cut off, compelled to gaze on the sun that 
withered up his eye-balls — till sense, and 
sight, and soul, failed me, and I fell grasp- 
ing by the bars of the window, and mi- 
micking, in my horrid trance, the shouts 
of the multitude, and the veil of the de- 

B 2 



34 3iELM0TH : 

voted ^•■. I actually for a moment believed 
myself the object of their cruelty. The 
drama of terror has the irresistible power 
of converting its audience into its victims. 
*^ The Jew had kept apart from the tu- 
mult of the night. He had, I suppose. 



* In the year 180S, when Emmett's insurrection 
broke out in Dublin — {the fact from which this ac- 
count is drawn was related to me by an eye-witness) — 
Lord Kilwarden_, in passing tln*ough Thomas Street, 
was dragged from his carriage, and murdered in the 
most horrid manner. Pike after pike was thrust 
thi'ough his body, till at last he was nailed to a door, 
and called out to his murderers to '^ put him out of 
his pain." At this moment, a shoemaker, who lodged 
in the garret of an opposite house, was drawn to the 
window by the hoiTible cries he heard. He stood at 
the window, gasping with hoiTor, his wife attempting 
vainly to drag him away. He saw the last blow 
struck — he heard the last groan uttered, as the suf- 
ferer cried, '^ put me out of pain," while sixty pikes 
were thrusting at him. The man stood at his win- 
dow as if nailed to it ; and when dragged from it, 
became — an idiot for life. 



A TALE. S5 

been saying within himself, in the lan- 
guage of your admirable poet, 

'' Oh, Father Abraham, what these Christians are !'* 

But when he returned at a late hour, he 
was struck with horror at the state in 
which he found me. I was delirious, — 
raving, and all he could say or do to soothe 
me, was in vain. My imagination had 
been fearfully impressed, and the conster- 
nation of the poor Jew was, I have been 
told, equally ludicrous and dismal. In his 
terror, he forgot all the technical formaUty 
of the Christian names by which he had 
uniformly signalized his household, since 
his residence in JNIadrid at least. He call- 
ed aloud on ]\Iai":asseh-ben- Solomon his 
son, and Rebekah his maid, to assist in 
holding me. " Oh, Father Abraham, my 
ruin is certain, this maniac will discover 
all, and ]Manasseh-ben -Solomon, my son^ 
will die uncircumcised." 

" These words operating on my deli- 
rium, I started up, and, grasping the Jew 



36 MELMOTH : 

by the throat, arraigned him as a prisoner 
of the Inquisition. The terrified wretch, 
falHng on his knees, vociferated, " My 
cock, — my cock, — my cock ! oh ! I am un- 
done !" Then, grasping my knees, " I am 
no Jew, — my son, Manasseh-ben- Solomon, 
is a Christian ; you will not betray him, 
you will not betray me, — me who have 
saved your life. Manasseh, — I mean An- 
tonio, — Hebekah, — no, Maria, help me to 
hold him. Oh God of Abraham, my 
cock, and my sacrifice of expiation, and 
this maniac to burst on the recesses of our 
privacy, to tear open the veil of the taber- 
nacle !" — " Shut the tabernacle," said Re- 
bekah, the old domestic whom I have be- 
fore mentioned ; " yea, shut the tabernacle, 
and close up the veils thereof, for behold 
there be men knocking at 4he door, — men 
who are children of Belial, and they knock 
with staff and stone ; and, verily, they are 
about to break in the door, and demolish 
the carved work thereof with axes and 
hammers." — " Thou liest,"' said the Jew, 



A TxVLE. 37 

in much perturbation : " there is no carved 
work thereabout, nor dare they break it 
down with axes and hammers ; perad ven- 
ture it is but an assault of the children of 
Belial, in their rioting and drunkenness. 
I pray thee, Rebekah, to watch the door, 
and keep off the sons of Belial, even the 
sons of the mighty of the sinful city — the 
city of jNladrid, while I remove this blas- 
pheming carrion, who struggleth with me, 
— yea, struggleth mightily," (and struggle 
I did mightily). But, as I struggled, the 
knocks at the door became louder and 
stronger ; and, as I was carried off, the 
Jew continued to repeat, " Set thy face a- 
gainst them, Rebekah ; yea, set thy face 
like a flint." As he retired, Rebekah ex- 
claimed, " Behold I have set my back a- 
gainst them, for my face now availeth not. 
My back is that which I will oppose, and 
verily I shall prevail." — " I pray thee, Re- 
bekah," cried the Jew, " oppose thy face 
unto them, and verily that shall prevail. 
Try not the adversary with thy back, but 



38 MELMOTH : 

oppose thy face unto them ; and behold, if 
they are men, they shall flee, even though 
they were a thousand, at the rebuke of 
one. I pray thee try thy face once more, 
Rebekah, while I send this scape-goat 
into the wilderness. Surely thy face is 
enough to drive away those who knocked 
by night at the door of that house in Gi- 
beah, in the matter of the wife of the Ben- 
jamite." The knocking all this time in- 
creased. " Behold my back is broken," 
cried Rebekah, giving up her watch 
and ward, *' for, of a verity, the wea- 
pons of the mighty do smite the lintels 
and door-posts ; and mine arms are not 
steel, neither are my ribs iron, and behold 
I fail, — yea, I fail, and fall backwards into 
the hands of the uncircumcised." And so 
saying, she fell backwards as the door gave 
wav, and fell not, as she feared, into the 
hands of the uncircumcised, but into those 
of two of her countrymen, who, it appear- 
ed, had some extraordinary reason for this 
late visit and forcible entrance. 



A TALE. 39 

" The Jew, apprized who they w^ere, 
quitted me, after securing the door, and 
sat up the greater part of the night, in 
earnest conversation with his visitors. 
Whatever was their subject, it left traces 
of the most intense anxiety on the coun- 
tenance of the Jew the next mornmg. 
He went out early, did not return till a 
late hour, and then hastened to the room 
I occupied, and expressed the utmost de- 
light at finding me sane and composed. 
Candles were placed on the table, Rebe- 
kah dismissed, the door secured, and the 
Jew, after taking many uneasy turns about 
the narrow apartment, and often clearing 
his throat, at length sat down, and ven- 
tured to entrust me with the cause of his 
perturbation, in which, with the fatal con- 
sciousness of the unhappy, I already be- 
gan to feel / must have a share. He told 
me, that though the report of my death, 
so universally credited through Madrid, 
had at first set his mind at ease, there was 
now a wild story, which, with all its false- 



40 MELMOTH : 

hood and impossibility, might, in its circu- 
lation, menace us with the most fearful 
consequences. He asked me, was it pos- 
sible I could have been so imprudent as to 
expose myself to view on the day of that 
horrible execution ? and when I confessed 
that 1 had stood at a window, and had in- 
voluntarily uttered cries that I feared 
might have reached some ears, he wrung 
his hands, and a sweat of consternation 
burst out on his pallid features. When he 
recovered himself, he told me it was uni- 
versally believed that my spectre had ap- 
peared on that terrible occasion, — that I 
had been seen hovering in the air, to wit- 
ness the sufferings of the dying wretch, — 
and that my voice had been heard sum- 
moning him to his eternal doom. He 
added, that this story, possessing all the 
credibility of superstition, was now repeat- 
ed by a thousand mouths ; and whatever 
contempt might be attached to its absur- 
dity, it would infallibly operate as a hint 
to the restless vigilance, and unrelaxing 



A TALE. 41 



industry of the holy office, and might ulti- 
mately lead to my discovery. He there- 
fore was about to disclose to me a secret, 
the knowledge of which would enable me 
to remain in perfect security even in the 
centre of INladrid, until some means might 
be devised of effecting my escape, and 
procuring me the means of subsistence in 
some Protestant country, beyond the reach 
of the Inquisition. 

" As he w^as about to disclose this secret 
on which the safety of both depended, and 
which I bent in speechless agony to hear, a 
knock was heard at the door, very unlike 
the knocks of the preceding night. It was 
single, solemn, peremptory, — and followed 
by a demand to open the doors of the house 
in the name of the most holy Inquisition. 
At these terrible words, the wretched Jew 
flung himself on his knees, blew out the 
candles, called on the names of the twelve 
patriarchs, and slipped a large rosary on 
his arm, in less time than it is possible to 
conceive any human frame could go 



42 MELMOTH : 

through such a variety of movements. 
The knock was repeated, — I stood para- 
lyzed ; but the Jew, springing on his feet, 
raised one of the boards of the floor in a 
moment, and, with a motion between con- 
vulsion and instinct, pointed to me to de- 
scend. I did so, and found myself in a 
moment in darkness and in safety. 

" I had descended but a few steps, on 
the last of which I stood trembling, when 
the officers of the Inquisition entered the 
room, and stalked over the very board 
that concealed me. I could hear every 
word that passed. " Don Fernan," said 
an officer to the Jew, who re-entered with 
them, after respectfully opening the door, 
*' why were we not admitted sooner ?" — 
" Holy Father," said the trembling Jew, 
'' my only domestic, Maria, is old and 
deaf, the youth my son is in his bed, and 
I was myself engaged in my devotions." 
— " It seems you can perform them in the 
dark," said another, pointing to the can- 
dles, which the Jew was re-lighting. — 



A TALE. 43 

" AVlien the eye of God is on me, most 
reverend fathers, I am never in darkness." 
— " The eye of God is on you," said the 
officer, sternly seating himself; " and so is 
another eye, to which he has deputed the 
sleepless vigilance and resistless penetra- 
tion of his own, — the eye of the holy of- 
fice. Don Fernan di Nunez," the name 
by which the Jew went, " you are not ig< 
norant of the indulgence extended by the 
church, to those who have renounced the 
errors of that accursed and misbelieving 
race from which you are descended, but 
you must be also aware of its incessant vi- 
gilance being directed towards such indi- 
viduals, from the suspicion necessarily at- 
tached to their doubtful conversion, and 
possible relapse. We know that the black 
blood of Grenada flowed in the tainted 
veins of your ancestry, and that not more 
than four centuries have elapsed, since your 
forefathers trampled on that cross before 
which you are now prostrate. You are an 
old man, Don Fernan, but . not an old 



44 MELMOTH : 

Christian; and, under these circumstan- 
ces, it behoves the holy office to have a 
watchful scrutiny over your conduct." 

" The unfortunate Jew, invoking all the 
saints, protested he would feel the strictest 
scrutiny with which the holy office might 
honour him, as a ground of obHgation and 
a matter of thanksgiving, — renouncing at 
the same time the creed of his race in 
terms of such exaggeration and vehemence, 
as made me tremble for his probable sin- 
cerity in any creed, and his fidelity to me. 
The officers of the Inquisition, taking 
little notice of his protestations, went on 
to inform him of the object of their visit. 
They stated that a wild and incredible tale 
of the spectre of a deceased prisoner of 
the Inquisition having been seen hovering 
in the air near his house, had suggested to 
the wisdom of the holy office, that the 
living individual might be concealed with- 
in its walls. 

" I could not see the trepidation of the 
Jew, but I could feel the vibration of the 



A TALK. 45 

boards on which he stood communicated 
to the steps that supported me. In a 
choaked and tremulous voice, he implored 
the officers to search every apartment of 
his house, and to raze it to the ground, 
and inter him under its dust, if aught 
v^ere found in it which a faithful and or- 
thodox son of the church might not har- 
bour. " That shall doubtless be done," 
said the officer, taking him at his word 
with the utmost sangfroid ; " but, in the 
mean time, suffer me to apprize you, Don 
Fernan, of the peril you incur, if at any 
future time, however remote, it shall be 
discovered that you harboured or aided in 
concealing a prisoner of the Inquisition, 
and an enemy of the holy church, — the 
very fost and lightest part of that penalty 
will be yoiu' dwelling being razed to the 
ground." The Inquisitor raised his voice, 
and paused with emphatic deliberation be- 
tween every clause of the following sen- 
tences, measuring as it were the effect of 
his blows on the increasing terror of liis 



4t6 melmoth: 

auditor, " You will be conveyed to our 
prison, under the suspected character of a 
relapsed Jew. Your son will be commit- 
ted to a convent, to remove him from the 
pestilential influence of your presence ; — 
and your whole property shall be confis- 
cated, to the last stone in your walls, the 
last garment on your person, and the last 
denier in your purse. 

" The poor Jew, who had marked the 
gradations of his fear by groans more audi- 
ble and prolonged at the end of every tre- 
mendous denunciatory clause, at the men- 
tion of confiscation so total and desolating, 
lost all self-possession, and, ejaculating — 
" Oh Father Abraham, and all the holy 
prophets !" — fell, as I conjectured from the 
sound, prostrate on the floor. I gave my- 
self up for lost. Exclusive of his pusilla- 
nimity, the words he had uttered were e- 
nough to betray him to the oflicers of the 
Inquisition ; and, without a moment's he- 
sitation between the danger of falling into 
their hands, and plunging into the dark- 



A TALE. 47 

ness of the recess into which I had de- 
scended, I staggered down a few remain- 
ing steps, and attempted to feel my way 
along a passage, in which they seemed to 
terminate. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



There sat a spirit in the vaults 

In shape^ in hue^ in lineaments^, like life. 

Southey's Thalaba. 



" X AM convinced, that, had the passage 
been as long and intricate as any that ever 
an antiquarian pursued to discover the 
tomb of Cheops in the Pyramids, I would 
have rushed on in the blindness of my des- 
peration, till famine or exhaustion had 
compelled me to pause. But I had no 
such peril to encounter, — the floor of the 
passage was smooth, and the walls were 



A TALE. 49 

matted, and though I proceeded in dark- 
ness, I proceeded in safety ; and provided 
my progress removed me far enough from 
the pursuit or discovery of the Inquisition, 
I scarcely cared how it might terminate. 

" Amid this temporary magnanimity of 
despair, this state of mind which unites 
the extremes of courage atid pusillani- 
mity, I saw a faint light. Faint it was, 
but it was distinct, — I saw clearly it was 
light. Great God ! what a revulsion in 
my blood and heart, in all my physical and 
mental feelings, did this sun of my world 
of darkness create ! I venture to say, 
that my speed in approaching it was in 
the proportion of one hundred steps to 
one, compared to my crawling progress in 
the preceding darkness. As I approached, 
I could discover that the light gleamed 
through the broad crevices of a door, 
which, disjointed by subterranean damps, 
gave me as full a view of the apart- 
ment within, as if it were opened to 

VOL. III. c 



50 3IELM0TH : 

me by the inmate. Through one of 
these crevices, before which I knelt in a 
mixture of exhaustion and curiosity, I 
could reconnoitre the whole of the inte- 
rior. 

" It was a large apartment, hung with 
dark-coloured baize within four feet of the 
floor, and this intermediate part was thick- 
ly matted, probably to intercept the sub- 
terranean damps. In the centre of the 
room stood a table covered with black 
cloth ; it supported an iron lamp of an an- 
tique and singular form, by whose light I 
Iiad been directed, and was now enabled 
to descry furniture that appeared sufficient- 
ly extraordinary. There were, amid maps 
and globes, several instruments, of which 
my ignorance did not permit me then to 
know the use, — some, I have since learn- 
ed, were anatomical ; there was an electri- 
fying machine, and a curious model of a 
rack in ivory ; there were few books, but 
several scrolls of parchment, inscribed with 



A TALE. 51 

larcre characters in red and ochre- coloured 
ink; and around the room were placed 
four skeletons, not in cases, but in a kind 
of upright coffin, that gave their bony 
emptiness a kind of ghastly and impera- 
tive prominence, as if they were the real 
and rightful tenants of that singular apart- 
ment^ Interspersed between them were 
the stuffed figures of animals I knew not 
then the names of, — an alligator, — some 
gigantic bones, which I took for those of 
Sampson, but which turned out to be 
fragments of those of the ^lammoth, — 
and antlers, which in my terror I believed 
to be those of the devil, but afterwards 
learned to be those of an Elk. Then I 
saw figures smaller, but not less horrible, — 
human and brute abortions, in all their 
states of anomalous and deformed con- 
struction, not preserved in spirits, but 
standing in the ghastly nakedness of their 
white diminutive bones ; these I conceiv- 
ed to be the attendant imps of some infer- 



SSLnofOU** 



52 IVIELMOTH : 

nal ceremony, which the grand wizard, 
who now burst on my sight, was to pre- 
side over. 

" i\t the end of the table sat an old 
man, wrapped in a long robe ; his head was 
covered with a black velvet cap, with a 
broad border of furs, his spectacles were of 
such a size as almost to hide his face, and 
he turned over some scrolls of parchment 
with an anxious and trembling hand ; 
then seizing a scull that lay on the table, 
and grasping it in fingers hardly less bony, 
and not less yellow, seemed to apostrophize 
it in the most earnest manner. All my 
personal fears were lost in the thought of 
my being the involuntary witness of some 
infernal orgie. I was still kneeling at the 
door, when my long susjDended respiration 
burst forth in a groan, which reached the 
fioure seated at the table in a moment. 
Habitual vigilance supplied all the defects 
of age on the part of the listener. It was 
but the sensation of a moment to feel the 
door thrown open, my arm seized by an 



A TALE. .5 



o 



arm powerful though withered by age, and 
myself, as I thought, in the talons of a 
demon. 

" The door was closed and bolted. An 
awful figure stood over nie, (for I had 
fallen on the floor), and thundered out, 
" Who art thou, and why art thou here ?" 
I knew not what to answer, and gazed 
with a fixed and speechless look on the 
skeletons and the other furniture of this 
terrible vault. " Hold," said the voice, 
" if thou art indeed exhausted, and needest 
refreshment, drink of this cup, and thou 
shalt be refreshed as with w4ne ; verily, it 
shall come into thy bowels^ as water, and 
as oil into thy bones," — and as he spoke he 
offered to me a cup with some liquid in it. 
I repelled him and his drink, Avhich I 
had not a doubt was some magical drug, 
with horror unutterable; and losing all 
other fears in the overwhelming^ one of be- 
coming a slave of Satan, and a victim of 
one of his agents, as 1 believed this extra- 
ordinary figure, I called on the name of 



54j MELMOTH : 

the Saviour and the saints, and, cross- 
ing myself at every sentence, exclaimed, 
" No, tempter, keep your infernal potions 
for the leprous lips of your imps, or swal- 
low them yourself. I have but this 
moment escaped from the hands of the 
Inquisition, and a million times rather 
would I return and yield myself their vic- 
tim, than consent to become yours, — your 
tender-mercies are the only cruelties I 
dread. Even in the prison of the holy 
office, where the faggots appeared to be 
lit before my eyes, and the chain already 
fastened round my body to bind it to the 
stake, I was sustained by a power that en- 
abled me to embrace objects so terrible to 
nature, sooner than escape them at the 
price of my salvation. The choice was 
offered me, and I made my election, — and 
so would I do were it to be offered a thou- 
sand times, though the last were at the 
stake, and the fire already kindling." 

Here the Spaniard paused in some agi- 
tation. In the enthusiasm of his narra- 



A TALE. ' 55 



tion, he had in some degree disclosed that 
secret which he had declared was incom- 
municable, except in confessing to a priest. 
Melmoth, who, from the narrative of 
Stanton, had been prepared to suspect 
something of this, did not think prudent 
to press him for a farther disclosure, and 
waited in silence till his emotion had sub- 
sided, without remark or question. Mon- 
rada at length resumed his narrative. 

" While I was speaking, the old man 
viewed me wdth a look of calm surprise, 
that made me ashamed of my fears, even 
before I had ceased to utter them. 
" What I" said he at length, fixing appa- 
rently on some expressions that struck 
him, " art thou escaped from the arm 
that dealeth its blow in darkness, even the 
arm of the Inquisition ? Art thou that 
Nazarene youth who sousht refufje in the 
house of our brother Solomon, the son of 
Hilkiah, w^ho is called Feman Nunez by 
the idolaters in this land of his captivity ? 
Verily 1 trusted thou shouldst this night 



56 MELMOTH : 

have eat of my bread, and drank of my 
cup, and been unto me as a scribe, for our 
brother Solomon testified concerning thee, 
saying, His pen is even as the pen of a 
ready writer." 

" I gazed at him in astonishment. Some 
vague recollections of Solomon's being a- 
bout to disclose some safe and secret re- 
treat wandered over my mind ; and, while 
trembling at the singular apartment in 
which we were seated, and the employ- 
ment in which he seemed engaged, I yet 
felt a hope hover about my heart, which 
his knowledge of my situation appeared to 
justify. " Sit down," said he, observing 
with compassion that I was sinking alike 
under the exhaustion of fatigue and the 
distraction of terror ; " sit down, and eat 
a morsel of bread, and drink a cup of 
wine, and comfort thine heart, for thou 
seem est to be as one who hath escaped 
from the snare of the fowler, and from the 
dart of the hunter." I obeyed him invo- 
luntarily. I needed the refreshment he 



A TALE. 57 

offered, and was about to partake of 
it, when an irresistible feeling of re- 
pugnance and horror overcame me ; and, 
as J thrust away the food he offered me, I 
pointed to the objects around me as the 
cause of my reluctance. He looked round 
for a moment, as doubting whether ob- 
jects so familiar to him, could be repul- 
sive to a stranger, and then shaking his 
head, " Thou art a fool," said he, " but 
thou art a Nazarene, and 1 pity thee; 
verily, those who had the teaching of thy 
youth, not only have shut the book of 
knowledge to thee, but have forgot to open 
it for themselves. Were not thy masters, 
the Jesuits, masters also of the healing 
art, and art thou not acquainted with the 
sight of its ordinary implements ? Eat, I 
pray thee, and be satisfied that none of 
these wall hurt thee. Yonder dead bones 
cannot weigh out or withhold thy food ; 
nor can they bind thy joints, or strain 
them with iron, or rend them with steel," 
as would the living arms that were stretch- 

c 2 



5S MELMOTH : :^ 

ed forth to seize thee as their prey. And, 
as the Lord of hosts liveth, their prey 
wouldst thou have been, and a prey unto 
their iron and steel, were it not for the 
shelter of the roof of Adonijah to-night." 

" I took some of the food he offered me, 
crossing myself at every mouthful, and 
drank the wine, which the feverish thirst 
of terror and anxiety made me swallow 
like water, but not without an internal 
prayer that it might not be converted into 
some deleterious and diabolical poison. 
The Jew Adonijah observed me with 
increasing compassion and contempt. — 
*' What," said he, " appals thee ? Were I 
possessed of the powers the superstition of 
thy sect ascribes to me, might I not make 
thee a banquet for fiends, instead of offer- 
ing thee food ? Might I not bring from 
the caverns of the earth the voices of those 
that " peep and mutter," instead of speak- 
ing unto thee with the voice of man ? 
Thou art in my power, yet have I no 
power or will to hurt thee. And dost 



A TALE. 59 

thou, who art escaped from the dun- 
geons of the Inquisition, look as one that 
feareth on the things that thou seest a- 
round thee, the furniture of the cell 
of a secluded leach ? Within this apart- 
ment I have passed the term of sixty 
years, and dost thou shudder to visit it 
for a moment ? These be the skeletons of 
bodies, but in the den thou hast escaped 
from were the skeletons of perished souls. 
Here are relics of the wrecks or the ca- 
prices of nature, but thou art come from 
where the cruelty of man, permanent and 
persevering, unrelenting and unmitigated, 
hath never failed to leave the proofs of its 
power in abortive intellects, crippled frames, 
distorted creeds, and ossified hearts. More- 
over, there are around thee parchments 
and charts scrawled as it were with the 
blood of man, but, were it even so, could 
a thousand such volumes cause such terror 
to the human eye, as a page of the history 
of thy prison, written as it is in blood. 



Co MELMOTH : 

drawn, not from the frozen veins of the 
dead, but from the bursting hearts of the 
living. Eat, Nazarene, there is no poi- 
son in thy food, — drink, there is no drug 
in thy cup. Darest thou promise thyself 
that in the prison of the Inquisition, or 
even in the cells of the Jesuits ? Eat and 
drink without fear in the vault, even in 
the vault of Adonijah the Jew. If thou 
daredst to have done so in the dwellings 
of the Nazarenes, I had never beheld thee 
here. Hast thou fed ?" he added, and I 
bowed. " Hast thou drank of the cup I 
gave thee ?" my torturing thirst returned, 
and I gave him back the cup. He smiled, 
but the smile of age, — the smile of lips 
over which more than an hundred years 
have passed, has an expression more repul- 
sive and hideous than can be deemed ; it 
is never the smile of pleasure, — it is a 
frown of the mouth, and I shrunk before 
its grim wrinkles, as the Jew Adonijah 
added, " If thou hast eat and drank, it is 



A TALE. 61 

time for thee to rest. Come to thy bed, 
it may be harder than they have given 
thee in thy prison, but behold it shall be 
safer. Come and rest thee there, it may 
be that the adversary and the enemy shall 
not there find thee out." 

" I followed him through passages so de- 
vious and intricate, that, bewildered as I 
was with the events of the night, they 
forced on my memory the well-known 
fact, that in Madrid the Jews have sub- 
terranean passages to each other's habita- 
tions, which have hitherto baffled all the 
industry of the Inquisition. I slept that 
night, or rather day, (for the sun had 
risen), on a pallet laid on the floor of a 
room, small, lofty, and matted halfway 
up the walls. One narrow and grated 
window admitted the light of the sun, 
that arose after that eventful night ; and 
amid the sweet sound of bells, and the 
still sweeter of human life, aw^ke and in 
motion around me, I sunk into a slumber 



62 MELMOTH : 

that was unbroken even by a dream, till 
the day was closing ; or, in the language 
of Adonijah, " till the shadows of the 
evening were upon the face of all the 
earth." 



CHAPTER XIV. 



Unde iratos deos timent, qui sic propitios merentur ? 

Seneca, 



" W^HEN I awoke, he was standing by 
my pallet. " Arise," said he, '* eat and 
drink, that thy strength may return unto 
thee." He pointed to a small table as he 
spoke, w^hich was covered with food of the 
plainest kind, and dressed w^ith the utmost 
simplicity. Yet he seemed to think an 
apology was necessary for the indulgence 
of this temperate fare. " I myself," said 



64t MELMOTH : 

lie, " eat not the flesh of any animal, save 
on the new moons and the feasts, yet the 
days of the years of my life have been one 
hundred and seven ; sixty of which have 
been passed in the chamber where thou 
sawest me. Rarely do I ascend to the 
upper chamber of this house, save on occa- 
sions like this, or peradventure to pray, 
with my window open towards the east, 
for the turning away wrath from Jacob, 
and the turning again the captivity of 
Zion. Weil saith the ethnic leach, 

, *' Aer exclusus confer! ad longevitatem." 

" Such hath been my life, as I tell thee. 
The light of heaven hath been hidden from 
mine eyes, and the voice of man is as the 
voice of a stranger in mine ears, save those 
of some of mine own nation, who weep for 
the affliction of Israel ; yet the silver cord 
is not loosed, nor the golden bowl broken ; 
and though mine eye be waxing dim, my 
natural force is not abated." (As he spoke. 



A TALE. 63 

my eyes hung in reverence on the hoary 
majesty of his patriarchal figure, and 1 felt 
as if I beheld an embodied representation 
of the old law in all its stern simplicity — 
the unbending grandeur, and primeval an- 
tiquity.) " Hast thou eaten, and art full ? 
Arise, then, and follow me." 

" We descended to the vault, Avhere I 
found the lamp was always burning. And 
Adonijah, pointing to the parchments that 
lay on the table, said, " This is the matter 
wherein I need thy help; the collection 
and transcription whereof hath been the 
labour of more than half a life, prolonged 
beyond the bounds allotted to mortality ; 
but," pointing to his sunk and blood-shot 
eyes, " those that look out of the windows 
begin to be darkened, and I feel that I 
need help from the quick hand and clear 
eye of youth. Wherefore, it being certi- 
fied unto me by our brother, that thou 
wert a youth who couldst handle the pen 
of a scribe, and, moreover, wast in need of 
a city of refuge, and a strong wall of do- 



66 MEL MOTH : 

fence, against the laying-in-wait of thy 
brethren round about thee, I was will- 
ing that thou shouidst come under my 
roof, and eat of such things as I set before 
thee, and such as thy soul desireth, except- 
ing only the abominable things forbidden 
in the law of the prophet ; and shouidst, 
moreover, receive wages as an hired ser- 
vant." 

" You will perhaps smile. Sir ; but even 
in my wretched situation, I felt a slight 
but painful flush tinge rny cheek, at the 
thought of a Christian, and a peer of Spain, 
becoming the amanuensis of a Jew for hire. 
Adonijah continued, " Then, when my 
task is completed, then will I be gathered 
to my fathers, trusting surely in the Hope 
of Israel, that mine eyes shall " behold the 
King in his beauty, — they shall see the 
land that is very far off." And peradven- 
ture," he added, in a voice that grief ren- 
dered solemn, mellow, and tremulous, 
" peradventure there shall I meet in bliss, 
those with whom I parted in w^oe — even 



A TALE. 67^ 

thou, Zachariab, the son of my loins, and 
thou, Leah, the wife of my bosom ;" apo- 
strophizing two of the silent skeletons that 
stood near. " And in the presence of the 
God of our fathers, the redeemed of Zion 
shall meet — and meet as those who are to 
part no more for ever and ever." At these 
words, he closed his eyes, lifted up his 
hands, and appeared to be absorbed in 
mental prayer. Grief had perhaps sub- 
dued my prejudices — it had certainly sof- 
tened my heart — and at this moment I 
half believed that a Jew might find en- 
trance and adoption amid the family and 
fold of the blessed. This sentiment ope- 
rated on my human sympathies, and I in- 
quired, with unfeigned anxiety, after the 
fate of Solomon the Jew, whose misfortune 
in harbouring me had exposed him to the 
visit of the Inquisitors. " Be at peace," 
said Adonijah, waving his bony and wrin- 
kled hand, as if dismissing a subject below 
his present feelings, " our brother Solo- 
mon is in no peril of death ; neither shall 



68 MELMOTH : 

his goods be taken for a spoil. If our ad- 
versaries are mighty in power, so are we 
mighty also to deal with them by our 
wealth or our wisdom. Thy flight they 
never can trace, thy existence on the face 
of the earth shall also be unknown to them, 
so thou wilt hearken to me, and heed my 
words."' 

" I could not speak, but my expression 
of mute and imploring anxiety spoke for 
me. *' Thou didst use words," said Ado- 
nijah, " last night, w^hereof, though I re- 
member not all the purport, the sound yet 
maketh mine ears to tingle; even mine, 
which have not vibrated to such sounds 
for four times the space of thy youthful 
years. Thou saidst thou wert beset by a 
powder that tempted thee to renounce the 
Most High, w^hom Jew and Christian alike 
profess to worship; and that thou didst 
declare, that w^ere the fires kindled around 
thee, thou wouldst spit at the tempter, and 
trample on the offer, though thy foot press- 
ed the coal which the sons of Dominick 



A TALE. 69 

were lighting beneath its naked sole." — 
" I did;' I cried, " I did— and I would— 
So help me God in mine extremity." 

" Adonijah paused for a moment, as if 
considering whether this were a burst of 
passion, or a proof of mental energy. He 
seemed at last inclined to believe it the 
latter, though all men of far-advanced age 
are apt to distrust any marks of emotion 
as a demonstration rather of weakness than 
of sincerity. " Then," said he, after a long 
and solemn pause, " then thou shalt know 
the secret that hath been a burthen to the 
soul of Adonijah, even as his hopeless soli- 
tude is a burthen to the soul of him who 
traverseth the desert, none accompanying 
him with step, or cheering him with voice. 
From my youth upward, even until now, 
have I laboured, and behold the time of 
my deliverance is at hand ; yea, and shall 
be accomplished speedily. 

"• In the days of my childhood, a ru- 
mour reached mine ears, even mine, of a 
being sent abroad on the earth to tempt 



70 MELMOTH ; 

Jew and Nazarene, and even the disciples 
of Mohammed, whose name is accursed in 
the mouth of our nation, with offers of de- 
liverance at their utmost need and extre- 
mity, so they would do that which my lips 
dare not utter, even though there be no 
ear to receive it but thine. Thou shud- 
derest — w^ell, then, thou art sincere, at 
least, in thy faith of errors. I listened to 
the tale, and mine ears received it, even as 
the soul of the thirsty drinketh in rivers 
of water, for my mind was full of the vain 
fantasies of the Gentile fables, and I long- 
ed, in the perverseness of my spirit, to see, 
yea, and to consort with, yea, and to deal 
with, the evil one in his strength. Like 
our fathers in the wilderness, I despised 
angel's food, and lusted after forbidden 
meats, even the meats of the Egyptian 
sorcerers. And my presumption was re- 
buked as thou seest: — childless, wifeless, 
friendless, at the last period of an existence 
prolonged beyond the bounds of nature, 
am I now left, and, save thee alone, with- 



A TALE. 71 

out one to record its events. I will not 
trouble thee now with the tale of my 
eventful life, farther than to tell thee, that 
the skeletons thou tremblest to behold, 
were once clothed in flesh far fairer than 
thine. They are those of my wife and 
child, whose history thou must not now 
hear — but those of the two others thou 
must both hear and relate." And he 
pointed to the two other skeletons oppo- 
site, in their upright cases. " On my re- 
turn to my country, even Spain, if a Jew 
can be said to have a country, I set myself 
down on this seat, and, lighted by this 
lamp, I took in my hand the pen of a 
scribe, and vowed by a vow, that this lamp 
should not expire, nor this seat be forsaken, 
nor this vault untenanted, until that the 
record is written in a book, and sealed as 
with the king's signet. But, behold, I 
was traced by those who are keen of scent, 
and quick of pursuit, even the sons of Do- 
minick. And they seized me, and laid 
my feet fast in the bonds ; but my writ- 



72 MELMOTH : 

ings they could not read, because they 
were traced in a character unknown to 
this idolatrous people. And behold, after 
a space they set me free, finding no cause 
of offence in me ; and they bade me de- 
part, and trouble them no more. Then 
vowed I a vow unto the God of Israel, 
who had delivered me from their thral- 
dom, that none but he who could read 
these characters should ever transcribe 
them. JNloreover, I prayed, and said, O 
Lord God of Israel ! who knowest that we 
are the sheep of thy fold, and our enemies 
as wolves round about us, and as lions who 
roar for their evening prey, grant, that a 
Nazarene escaped from their hands, and 
fleeing unto us, even as a bird chased from 
her nest, may put to shame the weapons 
of the mighty, and laugh them to scorn. 
Grant also. Lord God of Jacob, that he 
may be exposed to the snare of the enemy, 
even as those of whom I have written, and 
that he may spit at it with his mouth, and 
spurn at it with his feet, and trample on 



A TALE. 73 

the ensnarer, even as they have trampled ; 
and then shall my soul, even mine, have 
peace at the last. Thus I prayed — and 
my prayer was heard, for behold, thou art 
here." 

" As I heard these words, a horrid fore- 
boding, like a night-mare of the heart, 
hung heavily on me. 1 looked alternately 
at the withering speaker, and the hopeless 
task. To bear about that horrible secret 
inurned in my heart, was not that enough? 
but to be compelled to scatter its ashes a- 
broad, and to rake into the dust of others 
for the same purpose of unhallowed expo- 
sure, revolted me beyond feeling and ut- 
terance. As my eye fell listlessly on the 
manuscripts, 1 saw they contained only tJie 
Spanish language written in the Greek- 
characters-^-di mode of writing that, I 
easily conceived, must have been as unin- 
telligible to the officers of the Inquisition, 
as the Hieroglyphics of the Egyptian 
priests. Their ignorance, sheltered by 
their pride, and that still more strongly 

VOL. in. D 



74 MELMOTH : 

fortified by the impenetrable seeresy at- 
tached to their most minute proceedings, 
made them hesitate to entrust to any one 
the circumstance of their being in pos- 
session of manuscript which they could 
not decypher. So they returned the pa- 
pers to Adonijah, and, in his own language, 
" Behold, he abode in safety." But to me 
this was a task of horror unspeakable. I 
felt myself as an added link to the chain, 
the end of which, held by an invisible 
hand, was drawing me to perdition ; and 
I was now to become the recorder of my 
own condemnation. 

*' As I turned over the leaves with a 
trembling hand, the towering form of A- 
donijah seemed dilated with preternatural 
emotion. " And what dost thou tremble at, 
child of the dust ?" he exclaimed, " if thou 
hast been tempted, so have they — if thou 
hast resisted, so have they — if they are at 
rest, so shalt thou be. There is not a pang 
of soul or body thou hast undergone, or 



A TALE. 75 

canst undergo, that they have not suflFered 
before thy birth was dreamt of. Boy, 
thy hand trembles over pages it is un- 
worthy to touch, yet still I must employ 
thee, for I need thee. Miserable link of 
necessity, that binds together minds so un- 
congenial ! I would that the ocean were my 
ink, and the rock my page, and mine arm, 
even mine, the pen that should write there- 
on letters that should last like those on 
the written mountains for ever and ever — 
even the mount of Sinai, and those that 
still bear the record, " Israel hath passed 
the flood *." As he spoke, I again turned 
over the manuscripts. " Does thy hand 
tremble still?" said Adonijah ; "and dost 



* Written mountains, i. e. rocks inscribed with 
characters recordative of some remarkable event, are 
well known to every oriental traveller. I think it is 
in the notes of Dr Coke, on the book of Exodus, 
that I have met with the circumstance alluded to a- 
bove. A rock near the Red Sea is said once to have 
bonie the inscription, " Israel hath passed the flood." 



76 MELMOTH : 

thou still hesitate to record the story of 
those whose destiny a link, wondrous, in- 
visible, and indissoluble, has bound to 
thine. Behold, there are those near thee, 
who, though they have no longet a tongue^ 
speak to thee with that eloquence which is 
stronger than all the eloquence of living 
tongues. Behold, there are those around 
thee, whose mute and motionless arms of 
bone plead to thee as no arms of flesh ever 
pleaded. Behold, there are those who, be- 
ing speechless, yet speak — who, being dead, 
are yet alive — who, though in the abyss of 
eternity, are yet around thee, and call on 
thee, as with a mortal voice. Hear them ! 
— take the pen in thine hand, and write." 
I took the pen in my hand, but could not 
write a line. Adonijah, in a transport of 
ecstasy, snatching a skeleton from its re- 
ceptacle, placed it before me. '* Tell him 
thy story thyself, peradventure he will be- 
lieve thee, and record it." And support* 
ing the skeleton with one hand, he point- 
ed with the other, as bleached and bony 



A TALE. 77 

as that of the dead, to the manuscript that 
lay before me. 

" It was a night of storms in the world 
above us ; and, far below the surface of 
the earth as we were, the murmur of the 
winds, sighing through the passages, came 
on my ear like the voices of the departed, 
— like the pleadings of the dead. Invo- 
luntarily I fixed my eye on the manu- 
script I was to copy, and never withdrew 
till I had finished its extraordinary con* 
tents. 



Calt ot tf^t $nirians. 

" There is an idand in the Indian sea. 
not many leagues from the mouth of 
the Hoogly, which, from the peculiarity 
of its situation and internal circumstances^ 



78 MELMOTH : 

long remained unknown to Europeans, 
and unvisited by the natives of the conti- 
guous islands, except on remarkable occa- 
sions. It is surrounded by shallows that 
render the approach of any vessel of 
weight impracticable, and fortified by 
rocks that threatened danger to the slight 
canoes of the natives, but it was rendered 
still more formidable by the terrors with 
which superstition had invested it. There 
was a tradition that the first temple to the 
black goddess Seeva*, had been erected 
there ; and her hideous idol, with its collar 
of human sculls, forked tongues darting 
from its twenty serpent mouths, and seat- 
ed on a matted coil of adders, had there 
first recieved the bloody homage of the 
mutilated limbs and immolated infants of 
her worshippers. 

" The temple had been overthrown, and* 
the island half depopulated, by an earth- 
quake, that agitated all the shores of In- 

* Vide Maurice's Indian Antiquities. 



A TALE. 79 

dia. It was rebuilt, however, by the zeal 
of the worshippers, who again began to 
re-visit the island, when a tiifaun of fury 
unparalleled even in those fierce latitudes, 
burst over the devoted spot. The pagoda 
was burnt to ashes by the lightning ; the 
inhabitants, their dwellings, and their 
plantations, swept away as with the besom 
of destruction, and not a trace of humani- 
ty, cultivation, or life, remained in the 
desolate isle. The devotees consulted 
their imagination for the cause of these 
calamities ; and, while seated under the 
shade of their cocoa-trees they told their 
long strings of coloured beads, they as- 
cribed it to the wrath of the goddess 
Seeva at the increasing popularity of the 
worship of Juggernaut. They asserted 
that her image had been seen ascending a- 
mid the blaze of lightning that consumed 
her shrine and blasted her worshippers as 
they clung to it for protection, and firmly 
believed she had withdrawn to some hap- 
pier isle, where she might enjoy iier feast 



so MELMOTH : 

of flesh, and draught of blood, unmolest- 
ed by the worship of a rival deity. So 
the island remained desolate, and without 
inhabitant for years. 

" The crews of European vessels, assured 
by the natives that there was neither ani- 
mal, or vegetable, or water, to be found on 
its surface, forbore to visit ; and the In- 
dian of other isles, as he passed it in his 
canoe, threw a glance of melancholy fear 
at its desolation, and flung something over- 
board to propitiate the wrath of Seeva. 

" The island, thus left to itself, became 
vigorously luxuriant, as some neglected 
children improve in health and strength, 
while pampered darlings die under exces- 
sive nurture. Flowers bloomed, and fo- 
liage thickened, without a hand to pluck, 
a step to trace, or a lip to taste them, 
when some Ifishermen, (who had been 
driven by a strong current toward the isle, 
and worked witli oar and sail in vain to 
avoid its dreadedf shore), after making ? 



A TALE. 81 

thousand prayers to propitiate Seeva, were 
compelled to approach within an oar's length 
of it ; and, on their return in unex- 
pected safety, reported they had heard 
sounds so exquisite, that some other god- 
dess, milder than Seeva, must have fixed 
on that spot for her residence. The 
younger fishermen added to this account, 
that they had beheld a female figure of 
supernatural loveliness, glide and disap- 
pear amid the fohage which now luxu- 
riantly overshadowed the rocks ; and, in 
the spirit of Indian devotees, they hesi- 
tated not to call this delicious vision an in- 
carnated emanation of Vishnu, in a love- 
lier form than ever he had appeared be- 
fore, — at least far beyond that which he 
assumed, when he made one of his avatars 
in the figure of a tiger. 

" The inhabitants of the islands, as super- 
stitious as they were imaginative, deified the 
vision of the isles after their manner. The 
old devotees, while invoking her, stuck 
close to the bloody rites of Seeva and Ha- 

D 2 



82 MELMOTH : 

ree, and muttered many a horrid vow over 
their beads, which they took care to ren- 
der effectual by striking sharp reeds into 
their arms, and tinging every bead with 
blood as they spoke. The young women 
rowed their light canoes as near as they 
dared to the haunted isle, making vows to 
Camdeo *, and sending their paper vessels, 
lit with wax, and filled with flowers, to- 
wards its coast, where they hoped their 
darling deity was about to fix his resi- 
dence. The young men also, at least those 
who were in love and fond of music, row- 
ed close to the island to solicit the god 
Krishnoo f to sanctify it by his presence; 
and not knowing what to offer to the 
deity, they sung their wild airs standing 
high on the prow of the canoe, and at last 
threw a figure of wax, with a kind of lyre 
in its hand, towards the shore of the de- 
solate isle. 



* The Cupid of the Indian mythology, 
t The Indian ApoUo. 



A TALE. S3 

For many a night these canoes miglit be 
seen glancing past each other over the 
darkened sea, Hke shooting stars of the 
deep, with their Hghted paper lanthorns, 
and their offerings of flowers and fruits, 
left by some trembling hand on the sands, 
or hung by a bolder one in baskets of cane 
on the rocks ; and still the simple islanders 
felt joy and devotion united in this " vo- 
luntary humility." It was observed, how- 
ever, that the worshippers departed with 
very different impressions of the object of 
their adoration. The women all clung to 
their oars in breathless admiration of the 
sweet sounds that issued from the isle ; and 
when that ceased they departed, murmuring 
over in their huts those " notes angelical," to 
which their own language furnished no ap- 
propriate sounds. The men rested long on 
their oars, to catch a glimpse of the form 
which, by the report of the fishermen, 
w^andered there ; and, when disappointed, 
they rowed home sadly. 



84 MELMOTH : 

" Gradually the isle lost its bad cha- 
racter for terror ; and in spite of some old 
devotees, who told their blood-discoloured 
beads, and talked of Seeva and Haree, and 
even held burning splinters of wood to 
their scorched hands, and stuck sharp 
pieces of iron, which they had purchased 
or stolen from the crews of European ves- 
sels, in the most fleshy and sensitive parts 
of their bodies, — and, moreover, talked of 
suspending themselves from trees with the 
head downwards, till they were consumed 
by insects, or calcined by the sun, or ren- 
dered delirious by their position, — in spite 
of all this, which must have been very af- 
fecting, the young people went on their 
own way, — the girls offering their wreaths 
to Camdeo, and the youths invoking 
Krishnoo, till the devotees, in despair, 
vowed to visit this accursed island, which 
had set every body mad, and find out 
how the unknown deity was to be re- 
cognised and propitiated ; and whether 



A TALE. 85 

flowers, and fruits, and love-vows, and 
the beatings of young hearts, were to 
be substituted for the orthodox and legiti- 
mate offering of nails grown into the 
hands till they appeared through their 
backs, and setoiis of ropes inserted into the 
sides, on which the religionist danced his 
dance of agony, till the ropes or his pa- 
tience failed. In a word, they were de- 
termined to find out what this deity was, 
who demanded no suffering from her wor- 
shippers, — and they fulfilled their resolu« 
tion in a manner worthy of their purpose. 
" One hundred and forty beings, crip- 
pled by the austerities of their rehgion, un- 
able to manage sail or oar, embarked in a 
canoe to reach what they called the accurs- 
ed isle. The natives, intoxicated with the 
belief of their sanctity, stripped them- 
selves naked, to push their boat through 
the surf, and then, making their salavis, 
implored them to use oars at least. The 
devotees, all too intent on their beads, 
and too well satisfied of their importance. 



86 MELMOTH : 

in the eyes of their favourite deities, to ad- 
mit a doubt of their safety, set off in tri- 
umph, — and the consequence may be easily 
conjectured. The boat soon filled and 
sunk, and the crew perished without a 
single sigh of lamentation, except that they 
had not feasted the alligators in the sacred 
waters of the Ganges, or perished at least 
under the shadow of the domes of the 
holy city of Benares, in either of which 
cases their salvation must have been un- 
questionable. 

" This circumstance, apparently so un- 
toward, operated favourably on the po- 
pularity of the new worship. The old 
system lost ground every day. Hands, 
instead of being scorched over the fire, 
were employed only in gathering flowers. 
Nails (with which it was the custom of the 
devotees to lard their persons) actually fell 
in price ; and a man might sit at his ease 
on his hams with as safe a conscience, 
and as fair a character, as if fourscore of 
them occupied the interval between. On 



A TALE. 87 

the other hand, fruits were every day 
scattered on the shores of the favourite 
isle ; flowers, too, bhished on its rocks, in 
all the daz^zling luxuriance of colouring 
with which the Flora of the East delights 
to array herself There was that brilliant 
and superb lily, which, to this day, illus- 
trates the comparison between it and Solo- 
mon, who, in all his glory, was not arrayed 
like one of them. There was the rose un- 
folding its " paradise of leaves," and the 
scarlet blossom of the bombex, which an 
English traveller has voluptuously describ- 
ed as banqueting the eye with " its mass 
of vegetable splendour" unparalleled. And 
the female votarists at last began to imi- 
tate some of " those sounds and sweet 
airs" that every breeze seemed to waft to 
their ears, with increasing strength of me- 
lody, as they floated in their canoes round 
this isle of enchantment. 

" At length one circumstance occurred 
that put its sanctity of character, and that 
of its inmate, out of all doubt. A young 



8S MELMOTH : 

Indian who had in vain offered to his be- 
loved the mystical bouquet, in which the 
arrangement of the flowers is made to ex- 
press love, rowed his canoe to the island, 
to learn his fate from its supposed inhabi- 
tant ; and as he rowed, composed a song, 
which expressed that his mistress despised 
him, as if he were a Paria, but that he 
would love her though he were descended 
from the head of Brahma ; — that her skin 
was more polished than the marble steps 
by w^hich you descend to the tank of a 
Rajah, and her eyes brighter than any 
whose glances were watched by presump- 
tuous strangers through the rents of the 
embroidered purdah * of a ^awaub ; — that 
she w^as loftier in his eyes than the black 
pagoda of Juggernaut, and more brilliant 
than the trident of the temple of Maha- 
deva, when it sparkled in the beams of the 
moon. And as both these objects were 

* The curtain behind which women are conceaU 
ed. 



A TALE. 89 

visible to his eyes from the shore, as he 
rowed on in the soft and glorious serenity 
of an Indian night, no wonder they found 
a place in his verse. Finally, he promised, 
that if she was propitious to his suit, he 
would build her a hut, raised four feet a- 
bove the ground to avoid the serpents ; — 
that her dweUing should be overshadowed 
by the boughs of the tamarind ; and that 
while she slept, he would drive the mus- 
quitoes from her Avith a fan, composed of 
the leaves of the first flowers which she ac- 
cepted as a testimony of his passion. 

" It so happened, that the same night, 
the young female, whose reserve had been 
the result of any thing but indifference, 
attended by two of her companions, rowed 
her canoe to the same spot, with the view 
of discovering whether the vows of her 
lover were sincere. They arrived about 
the same time; and though it was now 
twilight, and the superstition of these 
timid beings gave a darker tinge to tho^ 



90 MELMOTH : 

shadows that surrounded them, they ven- 
tured to land ; and, bearing their baskets 
of flowers in trembling hands, advanced to 
hang them on the ruins of the pagoda, 
amid which it was presumed the new god- 
dess had fixed her abode. They proceed- 
ed, not without difficulty, through thickets 
of flowers that had sprung spontaneously 
in the uncultivated soil — not without fear 
that a tiger might spring on them at every 
step, till they recollected that those ani- 
mals chose generally the large jungles tor 
their retreat, and seldom harboured amid 
flowers. Still less was the alligator to be 
dreaded, amid the narrow streams that 
they could cross without tinging their an- 
cles wdth its pure water. The tamarind, 
the cocoa, and the palm-tree, shed their 
blossoms, and exhaled their odours, and 
waved their leaves, over the head of the 
trembling votarist as she approaclied 
the ruin of the pagoda. It had been a 
massive square building, erected amid 



A TALE. 91 

rocks, that, by a caprice of nature not un- 
common in the Indian isles, occupied its 
centre, and appeared the consequence of 
some volcanic explosion. The earthquake 
that had overthrown it, had mingled the 
rocks and ruins together in a shapeless and 
deformed mass, which seemed to bear alike 
the traces of the impotence of art and na- 
ture, when prostrated by the power that 
has formed and can annihilate both. There 
were pillars, wrought with singular cha- 
racters, heaped amid stones that bore no 
impress but that of some fearful and vio- 
lent action of nature, that seemed to say. 
Mortals, write your lines with the chisel, 
1 write my hieroglyphics in fire. There 
w^ere the disjointed piles of stones carved 
into the form of snakes, on which the hi- 
deous idol of Seeva had once been seated ; 
and close to them the rose was bursting 
through the earth which occupied the fis- 
sures of the rock, as if nature preached a 
milder theology, and deputed her darling 



92 MELMOTH : 

flower as her missionary to her children. 
The idol itself had fallen, and lay in frag- 
ments. The horrid mouth was still visi- 
ble, into which human hearts had been for- 
merly inserted. But now, the beautiful 
peacocks, with their rain-bow trains and 
arched necks, were feeding their young a- 
mid the branches of the tamarind that 
overhung the blackened fragments. The 
young Indians advanced with diminished 
fear, for there was neither sight or sound 
to inspire the fear that attends the ap- 
proach to the presence of a spiritual being 
— all was calm, still, and dark. Yet their 
feet trod with involuntary lightness as they 
advanced to these ruins, which combined 
the devastations of nature with those of 
the human passions, perhaps more bloody 
and wild than the former. Near the ruins 
there had formerly been a tank, as is usual, 
near the pagodas, both for the purposes 
of refreshment and purification ; but the 
steps were now broken, and the water wa^ 



A TALE. is 

stagnated. The young Indians, however, 
took up a few drops, invoked the " god- 
dess of the isle," and approached the only 
remaining arch. The exterior front of this 
building had been constructed of stone, 
but its interior had been hollowed out of 
the rock ; and its recesses resembled, in 
some degree, those in the island of Ele- 
phanta. There were monstrous figures 
carved in stone, some adhering to the 
rock, others detached from it, all frown- 
ing in their shapeless and gigantic hideous- 
ness, and giving to the eye of superstition 
the terrible representation of " gods of 
stone.'' 

" Two of the young votarists, who 
were distinguished for their courage, ad- 
vanced and performed a kind of wild 
dance before the ruins of the ancient 
gods, as they called them, and invok- 
ed (as they might) the new resident of 
the isle to be propitious to the vows of 
their companion, w^ho advanced to hang 



94 MELMOTH : 

her wreath of flowers round the broken 
remains of an idol half-defaced and half- 
hidden among the fragments of stone, but 
clustered over with that rich vegetation 
which seems, in oriental countries, to an- 
nounce the eternal triumph of nature amid 
the ruins of art. Every year renews the 
rose, but what year shall see a pyramid re- 
built? As the young Indian hung her 
wreath on the shapeless stone, a voice 
murmured, " There is a withered flower 
there." — " Yes — yes — there is,'' answered 
the votarist, " and that withered flower is 
an emblem of my heart. I have cherished 
many roses, but suffered one to wither that 
was the sweetest to me of all the wreath. 
Wilt thou revive him for me, unknown 
goddess, and my wreath shall no longer be 
a dishonour to thy shrine ?" — " Wilt thou 
revive the rose by placing it in the warmth 
of thy bosom," said the young lover, ap- 
pearing from behind the fragments of rock 
and ruin that had sheltered him, and from 



A TALE. Q^ 

which he had uttered his oracular re- 
ply, and listened with delight to the em- 
blematical but intelligible language of his 
beloved. " Wilt thou revive the rose?" 
he asked, in the triumph of love, as he 
clasped her to his bosom. The young In- 
dian, yielding at once to love and super- 
stition, seemed half-melting in his embrace, 
when, in a moment, she uttered a wild 
shriek, repelled him with all her strength, 
and crouched in an uncouth posture of 
fear, while she pointed with one quivering 
hand to a figure that appeared, at that mo- 
ment, in the perspective of that tumul- 
tuous and indefinite heap of stone. The 
lover, unalarmed by the shriek of his mis- 
tress, was advancing to catch her in his 
arms, when his eye fell on the object that 
had struck hers, and he sunk on his face 
to the earth, in mute adoration. 

" The form was that of a female, but 
such as they had never before beheld, for 
her skin was perfectly white, (at least in 



96 MELMOTrt : 

tlreir eyes, who had never seen any but 
the dark-red tint of the natives of the Ben* 
galese islands). Her drapery (as well as 
they could see) consisted only of flowers, 
whose rich colours and fantastic grouping 
harmonized well with the peacock's feathers 
twined amongthem, and altogether com pos- 
ed a feathery fan of wild drapery, which, in 
truth, beseemed an "island goddess." Her 
long hair, of a colour they had never be- 
held before, pale auburn, flowed to her 
feet, and was fantastically entwined with 
the flowers and the feathers that formed 
her dress. On her head was a coronal 
of shells, of hue and lustre unknown 
except in the Indian seas — the purple 
and the green vied with the amethyst, 
and the emerald. On her white bare 
shoulder a loxia was perched, and round 
her neck was hung a string of their 
pearl — like eggs, so pure and pellucid, that 
the first sovereign in Europe might have 
exchanged her richest necklace of pearls 



A TALE. 9f 

for them. Her arms and feet were per- 
fectly bare, and her step had a goddess-like 
rapidity and lightness, that aifected the 
imagination of the Indians as much as 
the extraordinary colour of her skin and 
hair. The young lovers sunk in awe 
before this vision as it passed before 
their eyes. While they prostrated them- 
selves, a delicious sound trembled on their 
ears. The beautiful vision spoke to them^ 
but it was in a language they did not un- 
derstand ; and this confirming their belief 
that it was the language of the gods, they 
prostrated themselves to her again. At 
that moment, the loxia, springing from 
her shoulder, came fluttering towards them. 
" He is going to seek for fire- flies to light 
his cell *," said the Indians to each other; 
But the bird, who, with an intelligence 



* From the fire-flies being so often found in the 
nest of the loxia, the Indians imagine he illuminates 
his nest with them. It is more likely they are the 
food of his young. 

VOL. XXL E 



98 MELMOTH : 

peculiar to his species, understood and 
adopted the predilection of the fair being 
he belonged to, for the fresh flowers in 
which he saw her arrayed every day, dart- 
ed at the withered rose-bud in the wreath 
of the young Indian; and, striking his 
slender beak through it, laid it at her 
feet. The omen was interpreted auspi- 
ciously by the lovers, and, bending once 
more to the earth, they rowed back to 
their island, but no longer in separate 
canoes. The lover steered that of his mis- 
tress, while she sat beside him in silence ; 
and the young people who accompanied 
them chaunted verses in praise of the xicJiite 
<roddess, and the island sacred to her and 
to lovers. 



CHAPTER XV. 

But tell me to what saint, I pray. 
What martyr, or what angel bright. 

Is dedicate this holy day. 

Which brings you here so gaily dight ? 

Dost thou not, simple Palmer, know. 
What every child can tell thee here ? — 

Nor saint nor angel claims this show. 
But the bright season of the year. 

QuEEN-Hoo Hall, by Strutt. 

The sole and beautiful inmate of the 
isle, though disturbed at the appearance of 
her worshippers, soon recovered her tran- 
quillity. She could not be conscious of 
fear, for nothing of that world in which 
she lived liad ever borne a hostile appear- 
ance to her. The sun and the shade — the 



100 melmoth: 

flowers and foliage — the tamarinds and 
figs that prolonged her delightful exis- 
tence — the water that she drank, wonder- 
ing at the beautiful being who seemed to 
drink whenever she did — the peacocks, 
who spread out their rich and radiant plu- 
mage the moment they beheld her — and 
the loxia, who perched on her shoulder 
and hand as she walked, and answered her 
sweet voice with imitative chirpings — all 
these were her friends, and she knew none 
but these. 

" The human forms that sometimes ap- 
proached the island, caused her a slight 
emotion ; but it was rather that of curio- 
sity than alarm ; and their gestures were 
so expressive of reverence and mildness, 
their offerings of flowers, in which she de- 
lighted, so acceptable, and their visits so 
silent and peaceful, that she saw them 
without reluctance, and only wondered, 
as they rowed ^way, how they could move 
on the water in safety ; and how creatures 
so dark, and with features so unattractive, 



A TALE. 101 

happened to grow amid the beautiful 
flowers they presented to her as the pro- 
ductions of their abode. The elements 
might be supposed to have impressed her 
imagination with some terrible ideas ; but 
the periodical regularity of these phoeno- 
mena, in the climate she inhabited, divest- 
ed them of their terrors to one who had 
been accustomed to them, as to the alter- 
nation of night and day — who could not 
remember the fearful impression of the 
first, and, above all, who had never heard 
any terror of them expressed hy another, 
-^perhaps the primitive cause of fear in 
most minds. Pain she had never felt — of 
death she had no idea — how, then, could 
she become acquainted with fear ? 

" When a north-wester, as it is termed, 
visited the island, wdth all its terrific ac- 
companiments of midnight darkness, clouds 
of suffocating dust, and thunders like the 
trumpet of doom, she stood amid the leafy 
colonnades of the banyan-tree, ignorant of 
her danger, watching the cowering wings 



102 MELMOTH : 

and drooping heads of the birds, and the 
ludicrous terror of the monkies, as they 
skipt from branch to branch with their 
young. When the hghtning struck a tree, 
she gazed as a child would on a fire- work 
played off for its amusement ; but the next 
day she wept, when she saw the leaves 
would no longer grow on the blasted trunk. 
When the rains descended in torrents, the 
ruins of the pagoda afforded her a shelter ; 
and she sat listening to the rushing of the 
mighty waters, and the murmurs of the 
troubled deep, till her soul took its colour 
from the sombrous and magnificent ima- 
gery around her, and she believed herself 
precipitated to earth with the deluge — 
borne downward, like a leaf, by a cataract 
— engulphed in the depths of the ocean — 
rising again to light on the swell of the 
enormous billows, as if she were heaved on 
the back of a whale — deafened with the 
roar — giddy with the rush — till terror and 
delioht embraced in that fearful exercise 
of imagination. So she lived like a flower 



A TALE. 103 

amid sun and storm, blooming in the light, 
and bending to the shower, and drawing 
the elements of her sweet and wild exis- 
tence from both. And both seemed to 
mingle their influences kindly for her, as 
if she was a thing that nature loved, even 
in her angry mood, and gave a commission 
to the storm to nurture her, and to the 
deluge to spare the ark of her innocence, 
as it floated over the waters. This exis- 
tence of felicity, half physical, half imagi- 
native, but neither intellectual or impas- 
sioned, had continued till the seventeenth 
year of this beautiful and mild being, when 
a circumstance occurred that changed its 
hue for ever. 

" On the evening of the day after the In- 
dians had departed, Immalee, for that w^as 
the name her votarists had given her, was 
standing on the shore, when a being ap- 
proached her unlike any she had ever beheld. 
The colour of his face and hands resembled 
her own more than those she was accustom- 
ed to see, but his garments, (which were 



104 MELMOTH : 

European), from their square uncouthness^, 
their shapelessness, and their disfiguring 
projection about the hips, (it was the fa- 
shion of the year 1680), gave her a mixed 
sensation of ridicule, disgust, and wonder, 
which her beautiful features could express 
only by a smile — that smile, a native of 
the face from which not even surprise 
could banish it. 

" The stranger approached, and the 
beautiful vision approached also, but not 
like an European female with low and 
graceful bendings, still less like an Indian 
girl with her low salams, but like a young 
fawn, all animation, timidity, confidence, 
and cowardice, expressed in almost a sin- 
gle action. She sprung from the sands — 
ran to her favourite tree ; — returned again 
with her guard of peacocks, who expanded 
their superb trains with a kind of instinc- 
tive motion, as if they felt the danger that 
menaced their protectress, and, clapping her 
hands with exultation, seemed to invite 
them to share in the delight she felt in 



A TALE. 105 

gazing at the new flower that had g7^oxvn 
in the sand. 

" The stranger advanced, and, to Im- 
malee's utter astonishment, addressed her 
in the language which she herself had re- 
tained some words of since her infancy, 
and had endeavoured in vain to make her 
peacocks, parrots, and loxias, answer her 
in corresponding sounds. But her lan- 
guage, from want of practice, had become 
so limited, that she w^as delighted to hear 
its most unmeaning sounds uttered by hu- 
man lips ; and when he said, according to 
the form of the times, " How do you, fair 
maid ?" she answered, " God made me," 
from the words of the Christian Catechism 
that had been breathed into her infant lip. 
" God never made a fairer creature," re- 
plied the stranger, grasping her hand, and 
fixing on her eyes that still burn in the 
sockets of that arch- deceiver. " Oh yes!" 
answered Immalee, " he made many things 
more beautiful. The rose is redder than 
I am — the palm-tree is taller than I am — 

E 2 



106 MELMOTH: 

and the wave is bluer than I am ; — but they 
all change, and I never change. I have 
grown taller and stronger, though the 
rose fades every six moons ; and the rock 
splits to let in the bats, when the earth 
shakes ; and the waves fight in their anger 
till they turn grey, and far different from 
the beautiful colour they have when the 
moon comes dancing on them, and send- 
ing all the young, broken branches of her 
light to kiss my feet, as I stand on the soft 
sand. I have tried to gather them every 
night, but they all broke in my hand the 
moment I dipt it into water." — " And 
have you fared better with the stars?" said 
the stranger smiling. — " No," answered the 
innocent being, " the stars are the flowers 
of heaven, and the rays of the moon the 
boughs and branches ; but though they are 
so bright, they only blossom in the night, 
— and I love better the flowers that I can 
gather, and twine in my hair. When I 
have been all night wooing a star, and it 
has listened and descended, springing 



A TALE. 107 

downwards like a peacock from its nest, 
it lias hid itself often afterwards playfully 
amid the mangoes and tamarinds where it 
fell ; and though I have searched for it till 
the moon looked wan and weary of light- 
ing me, I never could find it. But where 
do you come from ? — you are not scaly 
and voiceless like those who grow in the 
waters, and show their strange shapes as I 
sit on the shore at sun-set ; — nor are you 
red and diminutive like those who come 
over the w^aters to me from other worlds, 
in houses that can live on the deep, and 
walk so swiftly, w^ith their legs plunged 
in the w^ater. Where do you come from ? 
— you are not so bright as the stars that 
live in the blue sea above me, nor so de- 
formed as those that toss in the darker sea 
at my feet. Where did you grow, and 
how came you here? — there is not a canoe 
on the sand ; and though the shells bear 
the fish that live in them so lightly over 
the w^aters, they never would bear me. 
When I placed my foot on their scolloped 



108 melmoth: 

edge of crimson and purple, they sunk in- 
to the sand." — " Beautiful creature," said 
the stranger, *' I come from a world where 
there are thousands like me." — " That is 
impossible," said Immalee, " for I live 
here alone, and other worlds must be like 
this." — " What I tell you is true, how- 
ever," said the stranger. Immalee paused 
for a moment, as if making the first effort 
of reflection — an exertion painful enough 
to a being whose existence was composed 
of felicitous tacts and unreflecting instincts 
— and then exclaimed, " We both must 
have grown in the world of voices, for I 
know what you say better than the chirp of 
the loxia, or the cry of the peacock. That 
must be a delightful world where they all 
speak — what would I give that my roses 
grew in the world of answers !" 

" At this moment the stranger made cer- 
tain signals of hunger, which Immalee un- 
dei-stood in a m.oment, and told him to fol- 
low her to where the tamarind and the iig 
were shedding their fruit — where the stream 



A TALE. 109 

was so clear, you could count the purple 
shells in its bed — and where she would 
scoop for him in the cocoa-shell the cool 
waters that flowed beneath the shade of 
the mango. As they went, she gave him 
all the information about herself that she 
could. She told him that she was the 
daughter of a palm-tree, under whose shade 
she had been first conscious of existence, 
but that her poor father had been long 
withered and dead — that she was very old, 
having seen many roses decay on their 
stalks ; and though they were succeeded 
by others, she did not love them so well 
as the first, which were a great deal larger 
and brighter — that, in fact, every thing 
had grown smaller latterly, for she was 
now able to reach to the fruit which for- 
merly she was compelled to wait for till it 
dropt on the ground ; — but that the water 
was grown taller, for once she was forced 
to drink it on her hands and knees, and 
now she could scoop it in a cocoa- shell. 
Finally, she added, she was much older 



110 melmoth: 

than the moon, for she had seen it waste 
away till it was dimmer than the light of 
a fire-fly ; and the moon that was lighting 
them now would decline too, and its suc- 
cessor be so small, that she would never 
again give it the name she had given to 
the first— Sun of the Night. " But," said 
her companion, " how are you able to 
speak a language you never learned from 
your loxias and peacocks ?" — " I will tell 
you," said Immalee, with an air of solem- 
nity, which her beauty and innocence made 
at once ludicrous and imposing, and in 
which she betrayed a slight tendency to 
that wish to mystify that distinguishes her 
delightful sex, — " there came a spirit to 
me from the w^orld of voices, and it whis- 
pered to me sounds that I never have for- 
gotten, long, long before I was born." — 
" Really ?" said the stranger. " Oh yes ! 
— long before I could gather a ^g, or ga- 
ther the water in my hand, and that must 
be before I was born. When I was born, 
I was not so high as the rose-bud, at which 



A TALE. Ill 

I tried to catch, now I am as near the 
moon as the palm-tree — sometimes I catch 
her beams sooner than he does, therefore I 
must be very old, and very high." At 
these words, the stranger, with an expres- 
sion indescribable, leaned against a tree. 
He viewed that lovely and helpless being, 
while he refused the fruits and water she 
offered him, with a look, that, for the first 
time, intimated compassion. The stranger 
feeling did not dwell long in a mansion 
it was unused to. The expression was 
soon exchanged for that half-ironical, half- 
diabolical glance Immalee could not un- 
derstand. " And you live here alone," he 
said, *' and you have lived in this beauti- 
ful place without a companion ?" — " Oh 
no !" said Immalee, " I have a companion 
more beautiful than all the flowers in the 
isle. There is not a rose-leaf that drops in 
the river so bright as its cheek. J\Iy 
friend lives under the water, but its colours 
are so bright. It kisses me too, but its 
lips are very cold ; and when I kiss it, it 



112 MELMOTH: 

seems to dance, and its beauty is all bro- 
ken into a thousand faces, that come smil- 
ing at me like little stars. But, though 
my friend has a thousand faces, and I 
have but one, still there is one thing that 
troubles me. There is but one stream 
where it meets me, and that is where 
are no shadows from the trees — and I never 
can catch it but when the sun is bright. 
Then when I catch it in the stream, I kiss 
it on my knees ; but my friend has grown 
so tall, that sometimes I wish it were 
smaller. Its lips spread so much wider, 
that I give it a thousand kisses for one 
that I get." " Is your friend male or fe- 
male," said the stranger. — " What is that ?" 
answered Immalee. — *' I mean, of what 
sex is your friend ?" 

But to this question he could obtain no 
satisfactory answer ; and it was not till his 
return the next day, when he revisited the 
isle, that he discovered Immalee's friend 
was w^hat he suspected. He found this 
innocent and lovely being bending over a 



A TALE. 11 



a 



stream that reflected her image, and woo- 
ing it with a thousand wild and graceful 
attitudes of joyful fondness. The stranger 
gazed at her for some time, and thoughts 
it would be difficult for man to penetrate 
into, threw their varying expression over 
his features for a moment. It was the 
first of his intended victims he had ever 
beheld with compunction. The joy, too, 
with which Immalee received him, almost 
brought back human feelings to a heart 
that had long renounced them ; and, for a 
moment, he experienced a sensation like 
that of his master when he visited para- 
dise, — pity for the flowers he resolved to 
wither for ever. He looked at her as she 
fluttered round him "with outspread arms 
and dancing eyes ; and sighed, while she 
welcomed him in tones of such wild sweet- 
ness, as suited a being who had hitherto 
conversed with nothing but the melody of 
birds and the murmur of waters. With 
all her ignorance, however, she could not 
help testifying her amazement at his ar- 



114 MELMOTH: 

riving at the isle without any visible 
means of conveyance. He evaded answer- 
ing her on this point, but said, " Immalee, 
I come from a world wholly unlike that 
you inhabit, amid inanimate flowers, and 
unthinking birds. I come from a world 
where all, as I do, think and speak.'^ Im- 
malee was speechless with wonder and 
dehght for some time ; at length she ex- 
claimed, " Oh, how they must love each 
other ! even I love my poor birds and 
flowers, and the trees that shade, and the 
waters that sing to me !'* The stranger 
smiled. " In all that world, perhaps there 
is not another being beautiful and inno- 
cent as you. It is a world of suffering, 
guilt, and care." It was with much diffi- 
culty she was made to comprehend the 
meaning of these words, but when she did, 
she exclaimed, " Oh, that I could live in 
that world, for I would make every one 
happy !" — *' But you could not, Immalee," 
said the stranger ; " this world is of such 
extent that it would take your whole life 



A TALE. 115 

to traverse it, and, during your progress, 
you never could be conversant ^vith more 
than a small number of sufferers at a time, 
and the evils they undergo are in many 
instances such as you or no human power 
could relieve." At these words, Immalee 
burst into an agony of tears. " Weak, 
but lovely being," said the stranger, " could 
your tears heal the corrosions of disease ? — 
cool the burnino' throb of a cancered heart ? 
— wash the pale slime from the clinging 
lips of famine ? — or, more than all, quench 
the fire of forbidden passion?" Immalee 
paused aghast at this enumeration, and 
could only faulter out, that wherever she 
went, she would bring her flowers and sun- 
shine among the healthy, and they should 
all sit under the shade of her own tamarind.. 
That for disease and death, she had long 
been accustomed to see flowers wither and 
die their beautiful death of nature. " And 
perhaps," she added, after a reflective pause, 
" as I have often known them to retain 
their delicious odour even after they were 



116 MELMOTH : 

faded, perhaps iichat thinks may live too 
after the form has faded, and that is a 
thought of joy." Of passion, she said 
she knew nothing, and could propose 
no remedy for an evil she v/as uncon- 
scious of. She had seen flowers fade with 
the season, but could not imagine why the 
flower should destroy itself. " But did 
you never trace a worm in the flower ?" 
said the stranger, with the sophistry of 
corruption. " Yes," answered Immalee, 
" but the worm was not the native of the 
flower; its own leaves never could have 
hurt it." This led to a discussion, which 
Immalee's impregnable innocence, though 
combined with ardent curiosity and quick 
apprehension, rendered perfectly harmless 
to her. Her playful and desultory an- 
swers, — her restless eccentricity of ima- 
gination, — her keen and piercing, though 
ill-poised intellectual weapons, — and, above 
all, her instinctive and unfailing tact in 
matters of right and wrong, formed alto- 
gether an array that discomfited and baffled 



A TALE. 117 

tlie tempter more than if he had been com- 
pelled to encounter half the xici^anglers of 
the European academies of that day. In 
the logic of the schools he was well-versed, 
but in this logic of the heart and of nature, 
he was " ignorance itself." It is said, that 
the " awless lion" crouches before " a maid 
in the pride of her purity." The tempter 
was departing gloomily, when he saw tears 
start from the bright eyes of Immalee, and 
caught a wild and dark omen from her in- 
nocent grief. " And you weep, Immalee ?" 
" Yes," said the beautiful being, " I always 
weep when I see the sun set' in clouds ; and 
will you, the sun of my heart, set in darkness 
too ? and will you not rise again '^. will you 
not ?" and, with the graceful confidence of 
pure innocence, she pressed her red de- 
licious lip to his hand as she spoke. 
*' Will you not ? I shall never love my 
roses and peacocks if you do not return, 
for they cannot speak to me as you do, 
nor can I give them one thought, but you 
can give me many. Oh, I w^ould like to 



118 MELMOTH: 

have many thoughts about the world that 
suffers, from which you came ; and I be- 
lieve you came from it, for, till I saw you, 
I never felt a pain that was not pleasure ; 
but now, it is all pain when I think you 
will not return." — " I will return," said 
the stranger, " beautiful Immalee, and will 
shew you, at my return, a glimpse of that 
world from which I come, and in which 
you will soon be an inmate." — " But shall 
I see you there," said Immalee, " other- 
wise how shall I talk thoughts ? " — " Oh 
yes, — oh certainly." — " But why do you 
repeat the same words twice ; your once 
would have been enough." — " Well then, 
yes." — " Then take this rose from me, and 
let us inhale its odour together, as I say to 
my friend in the fountain, when I bend to 
kiss it ; but my friend withdraws its rose 
before 1 have tasted it, and I leave mine 
on the water. Will you not take my 
rose," said the beautiful suppliant, bending 
towards him. " I will," said the stranger ; 
and he took a flower from the cluster Im- 



A TALE. 119 

malee held out to him. It was a withered 
one. He snatched it, and hid it in his 
breast. " And will you go without a ca- 
noe across tliat dark sea r" said Immalee. 
— " We shall meet again, and meet in the 
It or Id of suffering,'' said the stranger. — 
" Thank you, — oh, thank you," repeated 
Immalee, as she saw him plunge fearless 
amid the surf. The stranger answered on- 
ly, " We shall meet again." Twice, as he 
parted, he threw a glance at the beautiful 
and isolated being ; a lingering of huma- 
nity trembled round his heart, — but he tore 
the withered rose from his bosom, and to 
the waved arm and angel-smile of Immalee, 
he answered, " We shall meet again." 



CHAPTER XVI. 



Piu non ho la dolce speranza. 

DiDONE. 



*' OEVEN mornings and evenings Immalee 
paced the sands of her lonely isle, without 
seeing the stranger. She had still his pro- 
mise to console her, that they should meet 
in the world of suffering ; and this she re- 
peated to herself as if it was full of hope 
and consolation. In this interval she tried 
to educate herself for her introduction into 
this worlds and it was beautiful to see her 



A TALE. 121 

attempting, from vegetable and animal 
analogies, to form some image of the in- 
comprehensible destiny of man. In the 
shade she watched the withering flower. — 
" The blood that ran red through its veins 
yesterday is purple to-day, and will be 
black and dry to-morrow," she said ; " but 
it feels no pain — it dies patiently, — and 
the ranunculus and tulip near it are un- 
touched by grief for their companion, or 
their colours would not be so resplendent. 
But can it be thus in the world that 
thinks ? Could I see him wither and die, 
without withering and dying along with 
him. Oh no ! when that flower fades, I 
will be the dew that falls over him !" 

" She attempted to enlarge her compre- 
hension, by observing the animal world. 
A young loxia had fallen dead from its 
pendent nest ; and Immalee, looking into 
the aperture which that intelligent bird 
forms at the lower extremity of the nest 
to secure it from birds of prey, perceived 
the old ones Avith fire-flies in their small 

VOL. III. F 



122 MELMOTH: 

beaks, their young one lying dead before 
them. At this sight Immalee burst into 
tears. — " Ah ! you cannot weep," she said, 
" what an advantage I have over you! 
You eat, though your young one, your 
own one, is dead ; but could 1 ever drink 
of the milk of the cocoa, if he could no 
longer taste it? I begin to comprehend 
what he said — to think, then, is to suffer 
— and a world of thought must be a world 
of pain ! But how delicious are these 
tears ! Formerly I wept for pleasure — but 
there is a pain sweeter than pleasure, that 
I never felt till I beheld him. Oh ! who 
would not think, to have the joy of tears ?" 
" But Immalee did not occupy this inter- 
val solely in reflection ; a new anxiety be- 
gan to agitate her ; and in the intervals of 
her meditation and her tears, she searched 
with avidity for the most glowing and fan- 
tastically wreathed shells to deck her arms 
and hair with. She changed her drapery of 
flowers every day, and never thought them 
fresh after the first hour ; then she filled her 



A TALE. 123 

largest shells with the most limpid water, 
and her hollow cocoa nuts with the most 
delicious figs, interspersed with roses, and 
arranged them picturesquely on the stone 
bench of the ruined pagoda. The time, 
however, passed over without the arrival 
of the stranger, and Immalee, on visiting 
her fairy banquet the next day, wept over 
the withered fruit, but dried her eyes, and 
hastened to replace them. 

" She was thus employed on the eighth 
morning, when she saw the stranger ap- 
proach ; and the wild and innocent delight 
with which she bounded towards him, ex- 
cited in him for a moment a feelins: of 
gloomy and reluctant compunction, which 
Immalee's quick susceptibility traced in 
his pausing step and averted eye. She 
stood trembling in lovely and pleading 
diffidence, as if intreating pardon for an 
unconscious offence, and asking permis- 
sion to approach by the very attitude in 
which she forbore it, while tears stood in 
her eyes ready to fall at another repelling 



134 MELMOTH: 

motion. This sight " whetted his ahiiost 
blunted purpose." She must learn to 
suffer, to qualify her to become my pupil, 
he thought. " Immalee, you weep," he 
added, approaching her. " Oh yes !" said 
Immalee, smiling like a spring morning 
through her tears ; " you are to teach me 
to suffer, and I shall soon be very fit for 
your world — but I had rather weep for 
you, than smile on a thousand roses." — 
" Immalee," said the stranger, repelling 
the tenderness that melted him in spite of 
himself, " Immalee, I come to shew you 
something of the world of thought you 
are so anxious to inhabit, and of which 
you must soon become an inmate. Ascend 
this hill w^here the palm-trees are cluster- 
ing, and you shall see a glimpse of part of 
it." — " But I would like to see the whole, 
and all at once !" said Immalee, with the 
natural avidity of thirsty and unfed intel- 
lect, that believes it can swallow all things, 
and digest all things. " The whole, and 
all at once !" said her conductor, turning to 



A TALE. 125 

smile at her as she bounded after him, 
breathles and glowing with newly excited 
feeling. '• I doubt the part you will 
see to-night will be more than enough to 
satiate even your curiosity." As he spoke 
he drew a tube from his vest, and bid her 
apply it to her sight. The Indian obeyed 
him ; but, after gazing a moment, uttered 
the emphatic exclamation, ** I am there ! 
— or are they here ?" and sunk on the 
earth in a frenzy of delight. She rose 
again in a moment, and eagerly seizing 
the telescope, applied it in a wrong direc- 
tionj which disclosed merely the sea to her 
view, and exclaimed sadly, " Gone ! — 
gone ! — all that beautiful world lived and 
died in a moment — all that I love die so 
— my dearest roses live not half so long 
as those I neglect — you were absent for 
seven moons since I first saw you, and the 
beautiful world lived only a moment." 

" The stranger again directed the tele- 
scope towards the shore of India, from 
which they were not far distant, and Im- 



126 MELMOTH : 

malee again exclaimed in rapture, " Alive 
and more beautiful than ever ! — all living, 
thinking things ! — their very walk tkinhs. 
No mute fishes, and senseless trees, but 
wonderful rocks *, on which they look 
with pride, as if they were the works of 
their own hands. Beautiful rocks! how 
I love the perfect straitness of your sides, 
and the crisped and flower-like knots of 
your decorated tops ! Oh that flowers 
grew, and birds fluttered round you, and 
then 1 would prefer you even to the rocks 
under which I watch the setting sun ! Oh 
what a world must that be where nothing 
is natural, and every thing beautiful! — 
thought must have done all that. But, 
how little every thing is ! — thought should 
have made every thing larger — thought 
should he a gocL But," she added with 
quick inteUigence and self-accusing diffi- 
dence, " perhaps I am wrong. Sometimes 



* Intellige " buildings^'* 



A TALE. 127 

I have thought I could lay my hand on 
the top of a palm-tree, but when, after a 
long, long time, 1 came close to it, I could 
not have reached its lowest leaf were I ten 
times higher than I am. Perhaps your 
beautiful world may grow higher as I ap- 
proach it." — " Hold, Immalee," said the 
stranger, taking the telescope from her 
hands, " to enjoy this sight you should 
understand it." — " Oh yes !" said Immalee, 
with submissive anxiety, as the world of 
sense rapidly lost ground in her imagina- 
tion against the new-found world of mind, 
— " yes — let me think." — " Immalee, have 
you any religion ?" said the visitor, as an 
indescribable feeling of pain made his 
pale brow still paler. Immalee, quick 
in understanding and sympathising with 
physical feeling, darted away at these 
words, returned in a moment with a ban- 
yan leaf, with which she wiped the drops 
from his livid forehead ; and then seating 
herself at his feet, in an attitude of pro- 
found but eager attention, repeated, " Ee- 



128 MELMOTH : 

ligion! what is that? is it a new thought r" 
— " It is the consciousness of a Beinir su- 
perior to all worlds and their inhabitants, 
because he is the Maker of all, and will be 
their judge — of a Being whom we cannot 
see, but in whose power and presence we 
must believe, though invisible — of one who 
is every where unseen ; always acting, 
though never in motion ; hearing all things, 
but never heard." Immalee interrupted 
with an air of distraction — " Hold ! too 
nnany thoughts will kill me — let me pause. 
I have seen the shower that came to re- 
fresh the rose-tree beat it to the earth.'* 
After an effort of solemn recollection, she 
added, *^ The voice of dreams told me 
something like that before I was born, but 
it is so long ago, — sometimes I have had 
thoughts within me like that voice. I 
have thought I loved the things around 
me too much, and that I should love things 
beyond me — flowers that could not fade, 
and a sun that never sets. 1 could have 
sprung, like a bird into the air, after such 



A TALE. 129 

a thought — but there was no one to shew 
me that path upward." And the young- 
enthusiast Hfted towards heaven eyes in 
which trembled the tears of ecstatic ima- 
ginings, and then turned their mute plead- 
ings on the stranger. 

" It is right," he continued, " not only 
to have thoughts of this Being, but to ex- 
press them by some outward acts. The 
inhabitants of the world you are about to 
see, call this, woi^ship^ — and they have 
adopted (a Satanic smile curled his lip as 
he spoke) very different modes;, so diffe- 
rent, that, in fact, there is but one point in 
which they all agree — that of making their 
religion a torment ; — the religion of some 
prompting them to torture themselves, and 
the religion of some prompting them to 
torture others. Though, as I observed, 
they all agree in this important point, yet 
unhappily they differ so much about the 
mode, that there has been much distur- 
bance about it in the world that thinks." — 
" In the world that thinks /" repeated Im- 

F 2 



130 MELMOTH : 

malee, " Impossible ! Surely they must 
know that a difference cannot be accepta- 
ble to Him who is One." — " And have 
yon then adopted no mode of expressing 
your thoughts of this Being, that is, of 
worshipping him?" said the stranger, — 
" I smile when the sun rises in its 
beauty, and I weep when I see the even- 
ing star rise," said Immalee. — ^' And do 
you recoil at the inconsistencies of va- 
ried modes of worship, and yet you 
yourself employ smiles and tears in your 
address to the Deity ?" — " I do, — for 
they are both the expressions of joy with 
me," said the poor Indian ; " the sun 
is as happy when he smiles through the 
rain-clouds, as when he burns in the mid- 
height of heaven, in the fierceness of his 
beauty; and I am happy whether I smile 
or I weep." — " Those whom you are about 
to see," said the stranger, offering her the 
telescope, " are as remote in their forms 
of worship as smiles from tears ; but they 
are not, like you, equally happy in both.'' 



A TALE. 131 

Immalee applied her eye to the telescope, 
and exclaimed in rapture at what she saw. 
" What do you see ?" said the stranger. 
Immalee described w^hat she saw with 
many imperfect expressions, which, per- 
haps, may be rendered more intelligible by 
the explanatory words of the stranger. 

" You see," said he, " the coast of In- 
dia, the shores of the world near you. — 
There is the black pagoda of Juggernaut, 
that enormous building on which your eye 
is first fixed. Beside it stands a Turkish 
mosque — you may distinguish it by a fi- 
gure like that of the half-moon. It is the 
will of him who rules that world, that its 
inhabitants should worship him by that 
sign * At a small distance you may see 
a low building with a trident on its sum- 
mit — that is the temple of Maha-deva, one 



* Tippoo Saib wished to substitute the Mohame- 
dan for the Indian mythology throughout his domi- 
nions. This circumstance, though long antedated, 
is therefore imaginable. 



132 melmoth: 

of the ancient goddesses of the country. '— 
" But the houses are nothing to me," said 
Immalee, " shew me the livinef thino^s 
that go there. The houses are not half 
so beautiful as the rocks on the shore, 
draperied all over with sea- weeds and 
mosses, and shaded by the distant palm- 
tree and cocoa." — " But those buildings," 
said the tempter, " are indicative of the 
various modes of thinking of those who 
frequent them. If it is into their thoughts 
you wish to look, you must see them ex- 
pressed by their actions. In their dealings 
with each other, men are generally deceit- 
ful, but in their dealings with their gods, 
they are tolerably sincere in the expression 
of the character they assign them in their 
imaginations. If that character be formi- 
dable, they express fear; if it be one of 
cruelty, they indicate it by the sufferings 
they inflict on themselves; if it be gloomy, 
the image of the god is faithfully reflected 
in the visage of the worshipper. Look 
and judge." 



A TALE. 133 

'* Immalee looked and saw a vast sandy 
plain, with the dark j^agoda of Juggernaut 
in the perspective. On this plain lay the 
bones of a thousand skeletons, bleaching 
in the burning and unmoistened air. A 
thousand human bodies, hardly more alive, 
and scarce less emaciated, were trailing 
their charred and blackened bodies over 
the sands, to perish under the shadow of 
the temple, hopeless of ever reaching that 
of its walls. 

*' Multitudes of them dropt dead as they 
crawled. Multitudes still living, faintly 
w^aved their hands, to scare the vultures 
that hovered nearer and nearer at every 
swoop, and scooped the poor remnants of 
flesh from the living bones of the scream- 
ing victim, and retreated, with an answer- 
ing scream of disappointment at the scan- 
ty and tasteless morsel they had torn a- 
way." 

" Many tried, in their false and fanatic 
zeal, to double their torments, by crawling 
through the sands on their hands and 



134 MELMOTH : 

knees; but hands through the backs of 
which the nails had grown, and knees 
worn literally to the bone, struggled but 
feebly amid the sands and the skeletons, 
and the bodies that were soon to be skele- 
tons, and the vultures that were to make 
them so. 

" Immalee withheld her breath, as if 
she inhaled the abominable effluvia of this 
mass of putrefaction, which is said to deso- 
late the shores near the temple of Jugger- 
naut, like a pestilence. 

" Close to this fearful scene, came on a 
pageant, whose splendour made a brilliant 
and terrible contrast to the loathsome and 
withering desolation of animal and intel- 
lectual life, amid which its pomp came 
towering, and sparkling, and trembling on. 
An enormous fabric, more resembling a 
moving palace than a triumphal car, sup- 
ported the inshrined image of Juggernaut, 
and was dragged forward by the unit- 
ed strength of a thousand human bodies, 
priests, victims, brahmins, faqueers and all. 



A TALE. 135 

In spite of this huge force, the impulse 
was so unequal, that the whole edifice rock- 
ed and tottered from time to time, and 
this singular union of instability and splen- 
dour, of trembling decadence and terrific 
glory, gave a faithful image of the mere- 
tricious exterior, and internal hollowness, 
of idolatrous religion. As the procession, 
moved on, sparkling amid desolation, and 
triumphant amid death, multitudes rushed 
forward from time to time, to prostrate 
themselves under the wheels of the enor- 
mous machine, which crushed them to a- 
toms in a moment, and passed on ;— others 
" cut themselves with knives and lancets 
after their manner," and not believing 
themselves worthy to perish beneath the 
wheels of the idol's chariot, sought to pro- 
pitiate him by dying the tracks of those 
wheels with their blood ; — their relatives 
and friends shouted with delight as they saw 
the streams of blood dye the car and its line 
of progress, and hoped for an interest in 
these voluntary sacrifices, with as much e- 



136 MELMOTH : 

nergy, and perhaps as much reason, as the 
Catholic votarist does in the penance of St 
Bruno, or the ex-oculation of St JLucia, or 
the martyrdom of St Ursula and her eleven 
thousand virgins, which, being interpreted, 
means the martyrdom of a single female 
named Undecimilla, which the Catholic 
legends read Undecim 3Iille. 

" The procession went on, amid that 
mixture of rites that characterizes idolatry 
in all countries, — half resplendent, half hor- 
rible — appealing to nature while they rebel 
against her — mingling flowers with blood, 
and casting alternately a screaming infant, 
or a garland of roses, beneath the car of the 
idol. 

" Such was the picture that presented to 
the strained, incredulous eyes of Immalee, 
those mingled features of magnificence 
and horror, — of joy and suffering, — of 
crushed flowers and mangled bodies, — 
of magnificence calling on torture for its 
triumph, — and the steam of blood and the 
incense of the rose, inhaled at once by the 



A TALE. 137 

triumpliant nostrils of an incarnate demon, 
who rode amid the wrecks of nature and 
the spoils of the heart ! Immalee gazed on 
in horrid curiosity. She saw, by the aid 
of the telescope, a boy seated on the front 
of the moving temple, who " perfected the 
praise" of the loathsome idol, with all the 
outrafjeous lubricities of the Phallic wor- 
ship. From the slightest consciousness of 
the meaning of this phenomenon, her un- 
imaginable purity protected her as with a 
shield. It was in vain that the tempter 
plied her with questions, and hints of ex- 
planation, and offers of illustration. He 
found her chill, indifferent, and even in- 
curious. He gnashed his teeth and gnaw- 
ed his lip en parerithese. But when she 
saw mothers cast their infants under the 
wheels of the car, and then turn to watch 
the wild and wanton dance of the Almahs, 
and appear, by their open lips and clapped 
hands, to keep time to the sound of the 
silver bells that tinkled round their slight 
ankles, while their infants were writhing 



138 MELMOTH: 

in their dying agony, — she dropt the te- 
lescope in horror, and exclaimed, " The 
world that thinks does not feel. I never 
saw the rose kill the bud !" 

" But look again," said the tempter, 
'*to that square building of stone, round 
which a few stragglers are collected, and 
whose summit is surmounted by a trident. 
— that is the temple of Maha-deva, a god- 
dess who possesses neither the power or 
the popularity of the great idol Jugger- 
naut. Mark how her worshippers ap- 
proach her." Immalee looked, and saw 
women offering flowers, fruits, and per- 
fumes ; and some young girls brought 
birds in cages, whom they set free ; others, 
after making vows for the safety of some 
absent, sent a small and gaudy boat of pa- 
per, illuminated with wax, down the 
stream of an adjacent river, with injunc- 
tions never to sink till it reached him. 

" Immalee smiled with pleasure at the 
rites of this harmless and elegant super- 
stition. " This is not the religion of tor- 



A TALE. 139 

ment," said she. — " Look again," said the 
stranger. She did, and beheld those very 
women whose hands had been employed 
in liberating birds from their cages, sus- 
pending, on the branches of the trees 
which shadowed the temple of Maha-deva, 
baskets containing their new-born infants, 
who were left there to perish with hun- 
ger, or be devoured by the birds, while 
their mothers danced and sung in honour 
of the goddess. 

" Others were occupied in conveying, 
apparently with the most zealous and ten- 
der watchfulness, their aged parents to the 
banks of the river, where, after assisting 
them to perform their ablations, with all 
the intensity of filial and divine piety, they 
left them half immersed in the water, to be 
devoured by alligators, who did not suf- 
fer their wretched prey to linger in long 
expectation of their horrible death ; while 
others were deposited in the jungles near 
the banks of the river, where they met 
with a fate as certain and as horrible, from 



140 melmoth: 

the tigers who infested it, and whose yell 
soon hushed the feeble wail of their unre- 
sisting victims. 

" Immalee sunk on the earth at this 
Spectacle, and clasping both hands over 
her eyes, remained speechless with grief 
and horror. 

" Look yet again," said the stranger, 
" the rites of all religions are not so bloody." 
Once more she looked, and saw a Turkish 
mosque, towering in all the splendour that 
accompanied the first introduction of the 
religion of Mahomet among the Hindoos. 
It reared its gilded domes, and carved mi- 
narets, and crescented pinnacles, rich with 
all the profusion which the decorative ima- 
gination of Oriental architecture, at once 
light and luxuriant, gorgeous and aerial, 
delights to lavish on its favourite works. 

" A group of stately Turks were ap- 
proaching the mosque, at the call of the 
muezzin. Around the building arose 
neither tree nor shrub ; it borrowed neither 
shade nor ornament from nature ; it had 



A TALE. 141 

none of those soft and graduating shades 
and hues, which seem to unite the works 
of God and the creature for the glory of the 
former, and calls on the inventive magnifi- 
cence of art, and the spontaneous loveliness 
of nature, to magnify the Author of both ; 
it stood the independent work and em- 
blem of vigorous hands and proud minds, 
such as appeared to belong to those who 
now approached it as worshippers. Their 
finely featured and thoughtful counte- 
nances, their majestic habits, and lofty fi- 
gures, formed an imposing contrast to the 
unintellectual expression, the crouching 
posture, and the half naked squalidness of 
some poor Hindoos, who, seated on their 
hams, were eating their mess of rice, as 
the stately Turks passed on to their devo- 
tions. Immalee viewed them with a feel- 
ing of awe and pleasure, and began to 
think there might be some good in the re- 
ligion professed by these noble-looking 
beings. But, before they entered the 
mosque, they spurned and spit at the un- 



142 MELMOTH : 

offending and terrified Hindoos; they 
struck them with the flats of their sabres, 
and, terming them dogs of idolaters, they 
cursed them in the name of God and the 
prophet. Immaiee, revolted and indignant 
at the sight, though she could not hear the 
words that accompanied it, demanded the 
reason of it. " Their religion," said the stran- 
ger, " binds thera to hate all who do not wor- 
ship as they do." — " Alas !" said Immaiee, 
weeping, " is not that hatred which their 
religion teaches, a proof that theirs is the 
worst ? But why," she added, her features 
illuminated with all the wild and sparkling 
intelligence of wonder, while flushed with 
recent fears, " why do 1 not see among 
them some of those lovelier beings, whose 
habits differ from theirs, and whom you 
call women ? Why do they not worship 
also; or have they a milder religion of 
their own ?" — " That religion," replied the 
stranger, " is not very favourable to those 
beings, of whom you are the loveliest ; it 
teaches that men shall have different com- 



A TALE. 143 

pan ions in the world of souls ; nor does it 
clearly intimate that women shall ever ar- 
rive there. Hence you may see some of 
these excluded beings w^andering amid 
those stones that designate the place of 
their dead, repeating prayers for the dead 
whom they dare not hope to join ; and 
others, who are old and indigent, seated 
at the doors of the mosque, reading aloud 
passages from a book lying on their knees, 
(which they call the Koran), with the hope 
of soliciting alms, not of exciting devotion." 
At these desolating w^ords, Immalee, w^ho 
had in vain looked to any of these systems 
for that hope or solace which her pure 
spirit and vivid imagination alike thirsted 
for, felt a recoiling of the soul unutterable 
at religion thus painted to her, and ex- 
hibiting only a frightful picture of blood 
and cruelty, of the inversion of every prin- 
ciple of nature, and the disruption of every 
tie of the heart. 

" She flung herself on the ground, and 
exclaiming, ** There is no God, if there be 



144 MELMOTH : 

none but theirs !" then, starting up as if to 
take a last view, in the desperate hope that 
all was an illusion, she discovered a small 
obscure building overshaded by palm-trees, 
and surmounted by a cross ; and struck by 
the unobtrusive simplicity of its appear- 
ance, and the scanty number and peaceable 
demeanour of the few who were approach- 
ing it, she exclaimed, that this must be a 
new religion, and eagerly demanded its 
name and rites. The stranger evinced 
some uneasiness at the discovery she had 
made, and testified still more reluctance to 
answer the questions which it suggested ; 
but they were pressed with such restless 
and coaxing importunity, and the beauti-, 
ful being who urged them made such an 
an artless transition from profound and 
meditative grief to childish, yet intelligent 
curiosity, that it w^as not in man, or more 
or less than man, to resist her. 

Her glowing features, as she turned them 
toward him, with an expression half impa- 
tient, half pleading, were indeed those 



A TALE. 145 

** * of a stilled infant smiling through its 
tears." Perhaps, too, another cause might 
have operated on this prophet of curses, 
and made him utter a blessing where he 
meant malediction ; but into this we dare 
not inquire, nor will it ever be fully known 
till the day when all secrets must be dis- 
closed. However it was, he felt himself 
compelled to tell her it was a new religion, 
the religion of Christ, whose rites and wor- 
shippers she beheld. " But what are the 
rites ?" asked Immalee. " Do they mur- 
der their children, or their parents, to prove 
their love to God ? Do they hang them 
on baskets to perish, or leave them on the 
banks of rivers to be devoured by fierce and 
hideous animals?" — " The religion they 
profess forbids that," said the stranger, with 
reluctant truth ; " it requires them to ho- 
nour their parents, and to cherish their 



* I trust the absurdity of this quotation here will 
be forgiven for its beauty. It is borrowed from Miss 
Baillie, the first dramatic poet of the age. 
VOL. III. G 



146 MELMOTH : 

children." — " But why do they not spurn 
from the entrance to their church those 
who do not think as they do ?" — " Because 
their rehgion enjoins them to be mild, be- 
nevolent, and tolerant ; and neither to re- 
ject or disdain those who have not attained 
its purer light." — " But why is there no 
splendour or magnificence in their wor- 
ship ; nothing grand or attractive ?" — " Be- 
cause they know that God cannot be ac- 
ceptably worshipped but by pure hearts 
and crimeless hands ; and though their re- 
ligion gives every hope to the penitent 
guilty, it flatters none with false promises 
of external devotion supplying the homage 
of the heart ; or artificial and picturesque 
religion standing in the place of that single 
devotion to God, before whose throne, 
though the proudest temples erected to his 
honour crumble into dust, the heart burns 
on the altar still, an inextinguishable and 
acceptable victim." 

" As he spoke, (perhaps constrained by 
a higher power), Immalee bowed her glow- 



A TALE. 147 

ing face to the earth, and then raising it 
with the look of a new-born angel, ex- 
claimed, " Christ shall be my God, and I 
will be a Christian !" Again she bowed in 
the deep prostration which indicates the 
united submission of soul and body, and 
remained in this attitude of absorption so 
long, that, when she rose, she did not 
perceive the absence of her companion. — 
" He fled murmuring, and with him fled 
the shades of night." 



CHAPTER XIV. 



^' W-Tiy, I did say something about getting a licence 

from the Cadi." 

Blue Beard. 



*' The visits of the stranger were inter- 
rupted for some time, and when he re- 
turned, it seemed as if their purpose was 
no longer the same. He no longer at- 
tempted to corrupt her principles, or so- 
phisticate her understanding, or mystify 
her views of religion. On the latter sub- 
ject he was quite silent, seemed to re- 
gret he had ever touched on it, and not 



A TALE. 149 

all her restless avidity of knowledge, or 
caressing importunity of manner, could 
extract from him another syllable on the 
subject. He repayed her amply, how- 
ever, by the rich, varied, and copious 
stores of a mind, furnished with matter 
apparently beyond the power of human 
experience to have collected, confined, as 
it is, within the limits of threescore years 
and ten. But this never struck Immalee ; 
she took " no note of time ;" and the 
tale of yesterday, or the record of past cen- 
turies, were synchronized in a mind to 
which facts and dates were alike unknown ; 
and which was alike unacquainted with 
the graduating shades of manner, and the 
linked progress of events. 

" They often sat on the shore of the 
isle in the evening, where Immalee always 
prepared a seat of moss for her visitor, and 
gazed together on the blue deep in silence ; 
for Immalee's newly-awaked intellect and 
heart felt that bankruptcy of language, 
which profound feeling will impress on the 



150 MELMOTH : 

most cultivated intellect, and which, in 
her case, was increased alike by her inno- 
cence and her ignorance ; and her visitor 
had perhaps reasons still stronger for his 
silence. This silence, however, was often 
broken. There was not a vessel that sail- 
ed in the distance which did not suggest 
an eager question from Immalee, and did 
not draw a slow and extorted reply from the 
stranger. His knowledge was immense, 
various, and profound, (but this was rather 
a subject of delight than of curiosity to his 
beautiful pupil) ; and from the Indian ca- 
noe, rowed by naked natives, to the splendid, 
and clumsy, and ill-managed vessels of the 
Rajahs, that floated like huge and gilded fish 
tumbling in uncouth and shapeless mirth 
on the wave, to the gallant and well-manned 
vessels of Europe, that cameonlike the gods 
of ocean bringing fertility and knowledge, 
the discoveries of art, and the blessings of 
civilization, wherever their sails were un- 
furled and their anchors dropt, — he could 
tell her all, — describe the destination of 



A TALK. 151 

every vessel, — the feelings, characters, and 
national habits of the many-minded in- 
mates, — and enlarge her knowledge to a 
degree which books never could have done ; 
for colloquial communication is always the 
most vivid and impressive medium, and 
lips have a prescriptive right to be the 
first intelligencers in instruction and in 
love. 

" Perhaps this extraordinary being, with 
regard to whom the laws of mortality and 
the feelings of nature seemed to be alike 
suspended, felt a kind of sad and wild re- 
pose from the destiny that immitigably 
pursued him, in the society of Immalee. 
We know not, and can never tell, what 
sensations her innocent and helpless beauty 
inspired him with, but the result was, that 
he ceased to regard her as his victim ; and, 
when seated beside her listening to her 
questions, or answering them, seemed to 
enjoy the few lucid intervals of his insane 
and morbid existence. Absent from her, 
he returned to the world to torture and 



152 MELMOTH : 

to tempt in the mad-house where the 
Englishman Stanton was tossing on his 
straw " 

" Hold !" said Melmoth ; " what name 
have you mentioned ?" — " Have patience 
with me, Senhor," said Mon9ada, who did 
not like interruption ; " have patience, and 
you will find we are all beads strung on 
the same string. Why should we jar 
against each other? our union is indis- 
soluble." He proceeded with the story of 
the unhappy Indian, as recorded in the 
parchments of Adonijah, which he had 
been compelled to copy, and of which he 
was anxious to impress every line and let- 
ter on his listener, to substantiate his own 
extraordinary story. 

"• When absent from her, his purpose 
was what I have described ; but while pre- 
sent, that purpose seemed suspended ; he 
gazed often on her with eyes whose wild 
and fierce lustre was quenched in a dew 
that he hastily wiped away, and gazed on 
her again. While he sat near her on the 



A TALE. 153 

flowers she had collected for him, — while 
he looked on those timid and rosy lips that 
waited his signal to speak, like buds that 
did not dare to blow till the sun shone on 
them, — while he heard accents issue from 
those lips which he felt it would be as im- 
possible to pervert as it would be to teach 
the nightingale blasphemy,- -he sunk down 
beside her, passed his hand over his livid 
brow, and, wiping off some cold drops, 
thought for a moment he was not the Cain 
of the moral world, and that the brand was 
effaced, — at least for a moment. The habi- 
tual and impervious gloom of his soul soon 
returned. He felt again the gnawings of 
the worm that never dies, and the scorch- 
ings of the fire that is never to be quenched. 
He turned the fatal light of his dark eyes 
on the only being who never shrunk from 
their expression, for her innocence made 
her fearless. He looked intensely at her, 
while rage, despair, and pity, convulsed his 
heart ; and as he beheld the confiding and 
conciliating smile with which this gentle 

G 2 



154 MELMOTH : 

being met a look that might have withered 
the heart of the boldest within him, — a 
Semele gazing in supplicating love on the 
lightnings that were to blast her,— one hu- 
man drop dimmed their portentous lustre, 
as its softened rays fell on her. Turning 
fiercely away, he flung his view on the ocean, 
as if to find, in the sight of human life, 
some fuel for the fire that was consuming 
his vitals. The ocean, that lay calm and 
bright before them as a sea of jasper, never 
reflected two more different countenances, 
or sent more opposite feelings to two hearts. 
Over Immalee's, it breathed that deep and 
delicious reverie, which those forms of na- 
ture that unite tranquillity and profundity 
diffuse over souls whose innocence gives 
them a right to an unmingled and exclu- 
sive enjoyment of nature. None but crime- 
less and unimpassioned minds ever truly- 
enjoyed earth, ocean, and heaven. At 
our first transgression, nature expels us, 
as it did our first parents, from her para- 
dise for ever. 

" To the stranger the view was fraught 



A TALE. 155 

with far different visions. He viewed it 
as a tiger views a forest abounding with 
prey ; there might be the storm and the 
wreck ; or, if the elements were obstinate- 
ly calm, there might be the gaudy and 
gilded pleasure barge, in which a Rajah 
and the beautiful women of his haram were 
inhaling the sea breeze under canopies of 
silk and gold, overturned by the unskil- 
fulness of their rowers, and their plunge, 
and struggle, and dying agony, amid the 
smile and beauty of the calm ocean, pro- 
duce one of those contrasts in which his 
fierce spirit delighted. Or, were even this 
denied, he could watch the vessels as they 
floated by, and, from the skiff to the huge 
trader, be sure that every one bore its 
freight of woe and crime. There came on 
the European vessels full of the passions and 
crimes of another world,— of its sateless cu- 
pidity, remorseless cruelty, its inteUigence, 
all awake and ministrant in the cause of 
its evil passions, and its very refinement 
operating as a stimulant to more inventive 



156 MELMOTH : 

indulgence, and more systematized vice. 
He saw them approach to traffic for " gold, 
and silver, and the souls of men;" — ^to 
grasp, with breathless rapacity, the gems 
and precious produce of those luxuriant 
climates, and deny the inhabitants the rice 
that supported their inoffensive existence ; 
— to discharge the load of their crimes, their 
lust and their avarice, and after ravaging 
the land, and plundering the natives, de- 
part, leaving behind them famine, de- 
spair, and execration ; and bearing with 
them back to Europe, blasted constitu- 
tions, inflamed passions, ulcerated hearts, 
and consciences that could not endure 
the extinction of a light in their sleeping 
apartment. 

" Such were the objects for which be 
watched ; and one evening, when solicited 
by Immalee's incessant questions about 
the worlds to which the vessels were has- 
tening, or to which they were returning, 
he gave her a description of the world, 
after his manner, in a spirit of mingled 



A TALE. 157 

derision, malignity, and impatient bitter- 
ness at the innocence of her curiosity. 
There was a mixture of fiendish acrimony, 
biting irony, and fearful truth, in his wild 
sketch, which was often interrupted by 
the cries of astonishment, grief, and terror, 
from his hearer. " They come," said he, 
pointing to the European vessels, " from a 
world where the only study of the inhabi- 
tants is how to increase their cAvn suffer- 
ings, and those of others, to the utmost 
possible degree ; and, considering they 
have only had 4000 years practice at the 
task, it must be allowed they are tolerable 
proficients." — " But is it possible ?" — " You 
shall judge. In aid, doubtless, of this de- 
sirable object, they have been all originally 
gifted with imperfect constitutions and 
evil passions ; and, not to be ungrateful, 
they pass their lives in contriving how to 
augment the infirmities of the one, and 
aggravate the acerbities of the other. 
They are not like you, Immalee, a being 
who breathes amid roses, and subsists onlv 



158 MELMOTH : 

on the juices of fruits, and the lymph of 
the pure element. In order to render 
their thinking powers more gross, and 
their spirits more fiery, they devour ani- 
mals, and torture from abused vegetables 
a drink, that, without quenching thirst, 
has the power of extinguishing reason, in- 
flaming passion, and shortening life — the 
best result of all — for life under such cir- 
cumstances owes its only felicity to the 
shortness of its duration." 

" Immalee shuddered at the mention of 
animal food, as the most delicate Euro- 
pean would at the mention of a cannibal 
feast; and while tears trembled in her 
beautiful eyes, she turned them wistfully 
on her peacocks with an expression that 
made the stranger smile. " Some," said 
he, by way of consolation, " have a taste 
by no means so sophisticated, — they con- 
tent themselves at their need with the flesh 
of .their fellow-creatures ; and as human 
life is always miserable, and animal life 
never so, (except from elementary causes). 



A TALE. 159 

one would imagine this the most humane 
and salutary way of at once gratifying the 
appetite, and diminishing the mass of hu- 
man suffering. But as these people pique 
themselves on their ingenuity in aggravat- 
ing the sufferings of their situation, they 
leave thousands of human beings yearly to 
perish by hunger and grief, and amuse 
themselves in feeding on animals, whom, 
by depriving of existence, they deprive of 
the only pleasure their condition has allot- 
ted them. When they have thus, by un- 
natural diet and outrageous stimulation, 
happily succeeded in corrupting infirmity 
into disease, and exasperating passion into 
madness, they proceed to exhibit the proofs 
of their success, with an expertness and 
consistency truly admirable. They do not, 
like you, Immalee, live in the lovely inde- 
pendence of nature — lying on the earth, 
and sleeping with all the eyes of heaven 
unveiled to watch you — treading the same 
grass till your light step feels a friend in 
every blade it presses — and conversing 



160 MELMOTH : 

with flowers, till you feel yourself and 
them children of the united family of na- 
ture, whose mutual language of love you 
have almost learned to speak to each other 
— no, to effect their purpose, their food, 
which is of itself poison, must be rendered 
more fatal by the air they inhale; and 
therefore the more civilized crowd all to- 
gether into a space which their own re- 
spiration, and the exhalation of their bo- 
dies, renders pestilential, and which gives 
a celerity inconceivable to the circulation 
of disease and mortality. Four thousand 
of them will live together in a space small- 
er than the last and lightest colonnade of 
your young banyan-tree, in order, doubt- 
less, to increase the effects of foetid air, ar- 
tificial heat, unnatural habits, and imprac- 
ticable exercise. The result of these judi- 
cious precautions is just what may be 
guessed. The most trifling complaint be- 
comes immediately infectious, and, during 
the ravages of the pestilence, which this 
habit generates, ten thousand lives a-day 



A TALE. 161 

are the customary sacrifice to the habit of 
living in cities." — " But they die in the 
arms of those they love," said Immalee, 
whose tears flowed fast at this recital; 
" and is not that better than even life 
in solitude, — as mine v^as before I beheld 
you?" 

" The stranger was too intent on his 
description to heed her. " To these cities 
they resort nominally for security and pro- 
tection, but really for the sole purpose to 
which their existence is devoted, — that of 
aggravating its miseries by every ingenui- 
ty of refinement. For example, those who 
live in uncontrasted and untantalized mi- 
sery, can hardly feel it — suffering becomes 
their habit, and they feel no more jealousy 
of their situation than the bat, who clings 
in blind and famishing stupefaction to the 
cleft of a rock, feels of the situation of the 
butterfly, who drinks of the dew, and 
bathes in the bloom of every flower. But 
the people of the other worlds have in- 
vented, by means of living in cities, a new 



162 MELMOTH : 

and singular mode of aggravating human 
wretchedness — that of contrasting it with 
the wild and wanton excess of superfluous 
and extravagant splendour." 

" Here the stranger had incredible diffi- 
culty to make Immalee comprehend how 
there could be an unequal division of the 
means of existence; and when he had done 
his utmost to explain it to her, she conti- 
nued to repeat, (her white finger on her 
scarlet lip, and her small foot beating the 
moss), in a kind of pouting inquietude, 
" Why should some have more than they 
can eat, and others nothing to eat?" — 
" This," continued the stranger, " is the 
most exquisite refinement on that art of 
torture which those beings are so expert 
' in — to place misery by the side of opu- 
lence — to bid the wretch who dies for 
want feed on the sound of the splendid 
equipages which shake his Jiovel as they 
pass, but leave no relief behind — to bid 
the industrious, the ingenious, and the 
imaginative, starve, while bloated medio- 



A TALE. 163 

crity pants from excess — to bid the dying 
sufferer feel that life might be prolonged 
by one drop of that exciting liquor, which, 
wasted, produces only sickness or madness 
in those whose lives it undermines; — to 
do this is their principal object, and it is 
fully attained. The sufferer through whose 
rags the wind of winter blows, like arrows 
lodging in every pore — whose tears freeze 
before they fall — whose soul is as dreary 
as the night under whose cope his resting- 
place must be — w^hose glued and clammy 
lips are unable to receive the food which 
famine, lying like a burning coal at his vi- 
tals, craves — and who, amid the horrors of 
a houseless winter, might prefer its deso- 
lation to that of the den that abuses the 
name of home — without food — without 
light — where the bowlings of the storm 
are answered by the fiercer cries of hun- 
ger — and he must stumble to his murky 
and strawless nook over the bodies of his 
children, who have sunk on the floor, not 



# 



164 MELMOTH : 

for rest, but despair. Such a being, is he 
not sufficiently miserable ?" 

" Immalee's shudderings were her only 
answer, (though of many parts of his de- 
scription she had a very imperfect idea). 
" No, he is not enough so yet," pursued 
the stranger, pressing the picture on her ; 
^* let his steps, that know not where they 
wander, conduct him to the gates of the 
affluent and the luxurious — let him feel 
that plenty and mirth are removed from 
him but by the interval of a wall, and yet 
more distant than if severed by worlds — 
let him feel that while his world is dark- 
ness and cold, the eyes of those within are 
aching with the blaze of light, and hands 
relaxed by artificial heat, are soliciting with 
fans the refreshment of a breeze — let him 
feel that every groan he utters is answered 
by a song or a laugh — and let him die on 
the steps of the mansion, while his last 
conscious pang is aggravated by the 
thought, that the price of the hundredth 



A TALE. 165 

part of the luxuries that lie untasted be- 
fore heedless beauty and sated epicurism, 
would have protracted his existence, while 
it poisons theirs — let him die of want on 
the tlweshold of a banquet-hall, and then 
admire with me the ingenuity that dis- 
plays itself in this new combination of mi- 
sery. The inventive activity of the peo- 
ple of the world, in the multiplication of 
calamity, is inexhaustibly fertile in resour- 
ces, ^ot satisfied with diseases and fa- 
mine, with sterility of the earth, and tem- 
pests of the air, they must have laws and 
marriages, and kings and tax-gatherers, 
and wars and fetes, and every variety of 
artificial misery inconceivable to you." 

" Immalee, overpowered by this torrent of 
words, to her unintelligible words, in vain 
asked a connected explanation of them. 
The demon of his superhuman misanthro- 
py had now fully possessed him, and not 
even the tones of a voice as sweet as the 
strings of David's harp, had power to ex- 



166 MELMOTH : 

pel the evil one. So he went on flinging 
about his fire-brands and arrows, and then 
saying, " Am I not in sport ? These people *," 
said he, " have made unto themselves kings, 
that is, beings whom they voluntarily invest 
with the privilege of draining, by taxation, 
whatever wealth their vices have left to 
the rich, and whatever means of subsis- 
tence their want has left to the poor, till 
their extortion is cursed from the castle to 
the cottage — and this to support a few 
pampered favourites, who are harnessed by 
silken reins to the car, which they drag 



* As, by a mode of criticism equally false and 
unjust, the worst sentiments of my worst characters, 
(from the ravings of Bertram to the blasphemies of 
Cardonneau), have been represented as my own, I 
must here trespass so far on the patience of the read- 
er a3 to assure him, that the sentiments ascribed to 
the stranger are diametrically opposite to mine, and 
that I have purposely put them into the mouth of an 
agent of the enemy of mankind. 



A TALE. 167 

over the prostrate bodies of the multitude. 
Sometimes exhausted by the monotony of 
perpetual fruition, which has no parallel 
even in the monotony of suffering, (for the 
latter has at least the excitement of hope, 
which is for ever denied to the former), 
they amuse themselves by making vsrar, 
that is, collecting the greatest number of 
human beings that can be bribed to the 
task, to cut the throats of a less, equal, 
or greater number of beings, bribed 
in the same manner for the same pur- 
pose. These creatures have not the least 
cause of enmity to each other — they do 
not know, they never beheld each other. 
Perhaps they might, under other circum- 
stances, wish each other well, as far as hu- 
man malignity would suffer them; but 
from the moment they are hired for legal- 
ized massacre, hatred is their duty, and 
murder their delight. The man who 
would feel reluctance to destroy the rep- 
tile that crawls in his path, will equip him- 



168 MELMOTH : 

self with metals fabricated for the purpose 
of destruction, and smile to see it stained 
with the blood of a being, whose existence 
and happiness he would have sacrificed his 
own to promote, under other circumstan- 
ces. So strong is this habit of aggravating 
misery under artificial circumstances, that 
it has been known, when in a sea-fight a 
vessel has blown up, (here a long explana- 
tion was owed to Immalee, which may be 
spared the reader), the people of that world 
have plunged into the water to save, at 
the risk of their own lives, the lives of 
those with whom they were grappling 
amid fire and blood a moment before, and 
whom, though they would sacrifice to their 
passions, their pride refused to sacrifice to 
the elements." — " Oh that is beautiful ! — 
that is glorious !" said Immalee, clasping 
her white hands ; " 1 could bear all you 
describe to see that sight !" 

" Her smile of innocent delight, her 
spontaneous burst of high-toned feeling, 



A TALE. 169 

had the usual effect of adding a darker 
shade to the frown of the stranger, and a 
sterner curve to the repulsive contraction 
of his upper lip, which was never raised 
but to express hostility or contempt. 

" But what do the kings do ?" said Im- 
malee, " while they are making men kill 
each other for nothing ?" — " You are ig- 
norant, Immalee," said the stranger, " very 
ignorant, or you would not have said it 
was for nothing. Some of them fight for 
ten inches of barren sand — some for the 
dominion of the salt w^ave — some for any 
thing — and some for nothing — but all for 
pay and poverty, and occasional excitement, 
and the love of action, and the love of 
change, and the dread of liome, and the 
consciousness of evil passions, and the 
hope of death, and the admiration of the 
showy dress in which they are to perish. 
The best of the jest is, they contrive not 
only to reconcile themselves to these cruel 
and wicked absurdities, but to dignify 
them with the most imposing names their 

VOL. IIL H 



170 MELMOTH : 

perverted language supplies — the names of 
fame, of glory, of recording memory, and 
admiring posterity. 

*' Thus a wretch whom want, idleness, 
or intemperance, drives to this reckless and 
heart-withering business, — who leaves his 
wife and children to the mercy of stran- 
gers, or to famish, (terms nearly synoni- 
mous), the moment he has assumed the 
blushing badge that privileges massacre, 
becomes, in the imagination of this intoxi- 
cated people, the defender of his country, 
entitled to her gratitude and to her praise. 
The idle stripling, who hates the cultiva- 
tion of intellect, and despises the meanness 
of occupation, feels, perhaps, a taste for ar- 
raying his person in colours as gaudy as 
the parrot's or the peacock's ; and this ef- 
feminate propensity is baptised by the 
prostituted name of the love of glory — and 
this complication of motives borrowed from 
vanity and from vice, from the fear of dis- 
tress, the wantonness of idleness, and the 
appetite for mischief, finds one convenient 



A TALE. 171 

and sheltering appellation in the single 
sound — patriotism. And those beings who 
never knew one generous impulse, one in- 
dependent feeling, ignorant of either the 
principles or the justice of the cause for 
which they contend, and wholly uninte- 
rested in the result, except so far as it in- 
volves the concerns of their own vanity, 
cupidity, and avarice, are, while living, 
hailed by the infatuated world as its be- 
nefactors, and when dead, canonized as its 
martyrs. He died in his country's cause, 
is the epitaph inscribed by the rash hand 
of indiscriminating eulogy on the grave of 
ten thousand, who had ten thousand dif- 
ferent motives for their choice and their 
fate, — who might have lived to be their 
country's enemies if they had not happened 
to fall in her defence, — and whose love of 
their country, if fairly analysed, was, under 
its various forms of vanity, restlessness, the 
love of tumult, or the love of show — pure- 
ly love of themselves. There let them 
rest — nothing but the wish to disabuse 



172 melmoth: 

their idolaters, who prompt the sacrifice, 
and then applaud the victim they have 
made, could have tempted me to dwell 
thus long on beings as mischievous in 
their lives, as they are insignificant in their 
death. 

"*' Another amusement of these people, 
so ingenious in multiplying the sufferings 
of their destiny, is what they call law. 
They pretend to find in this a security for 
their persons and their properties — with 
how much justice, their own felicitous ex- 
perience must inform them ! Of the secu- 
rity it gives to the latter, judge, Immalee, 
%vhen I tell you, that you might spend 
your life in their courts, without being 
able to prove that those roses you have 
gathered and twined in your hair were 
your own — that you might starve for this 
day's meal, while proving your right to a 
property which must incontestihly be 
yours, on the condition of your being 
able to fast on a few years, and survive to 
'enjoy it — and that, finally, with the sen- 



A TALE. 173 

timents of all upright men, the opinions of 
the judges of the land, and the fullest con- 
viction of your own conscience in your fa- 
vour, you cannot obtain the possession of 
what you and all feel to be your own, 
while your antagonist can start an objec- 
tion, purchase a fraud, or invent a lie. So 
pleadings go on, and years are wasted, and 
property consumed, and hearts broken, — 
and law triumphs. One of its most admi- 
rable triumphs is in that ingenuity by 
which it contrives to convert a difficulty 
into an impossibility, and punish a man 
for not doing what it has rendered imprac- 
ticable for him to do. 

" When he is unable to pay his debts, 
it deprives him of liberty and credit, to in- 
sure that inability still further ; and while 
destitute alike of the means of subsistence, 
or the power of satisfying his creditors, he 
is enabled, by this righteous arrangement, 
to console himself, at least, with the reflec- 
tion, that he can injure his creditor as 
much as he has suffered from him — that 



1T4 MELMOTH : 

certain loss is the reward of immitigable 
cruelty — and that, while he famishes in 
prison, the page in which his debt is re- 
corded rots away faster than his body; and 
the angel of death, with one obliterating 
sweep of his wing, cancels misery and 
debt, and presents, grinning in horrid tri- 
umph, the release of debtor and debt, sign- 
ed by a hand that makes the judges trem- 
ble on their seats." — " But they have reli- 
gion," said the poor Indian, trembling at 
this horrible description ; " they have that 
religion which you shewed me — ^its mild 
and peaceful spirit — its quietness and re- 
signation — no blood — no cruelty." — " Yes, 
— ^true," said the stranger, with some re- 
luctance, " they have rehgion ; for in their 
zeal for suffering, they feel the torments 
of one world not enough, unless aggravat- 
ed by the terrors of another. They have 
such a religion, but what use have they 
made of it ? Intent on their settled pur- 
pose of discovering misery wherever it 
could be traced, and inventing it where it 



A TALE. . 175 

could not, they have found, even in the 
pure pages of tliat book, which, they pre- 
sume to say, contains their title to peace 
on earth, and happiness hereafter, a right 
to hate, plunder, and murder each other. 
Here they have been compelled to exercise 
an extraordinary share of perverted inge- 
nuity. The book contains nothing but 
what is good, and evil must be the minds, 
and hard the labour of those evil minds, to 
extort a tinge from it to colour their pre- 
tensions withal. But mark, in pursuance 
of their great object, (the aggravation of 
general misery), mark how subtilly they 
have wrought. They call themselves by 
various names, to excite passions suitable 
to the names they bear. Thus some for- 
bid the perusal of that book to their disci- 
ples, and others assert, that from the ex- 
clusive study of its pages alone, can the 
hope of salvation be learned or substantiat- 
ed. It is singular, however, that with all 
their ingenuity, they have never been able 
to extract a subject of difference from the 



176 MELMOTH : 

essential contents of that book, to which 
they all appeal — so they proceed after their 
manner. 

" They never dare to dispute that it 

contains irresistible injunctions, that 

those who believe in it should live in ha- 
bits of peace, benevolence, and harmony, — 
that they should love each other in pro- 
sperity, and assist each other in adversity. 
They dare not deny that the spirit that 
book inculcates and inspires, is a spirit 
whose fruits are love, joy, peace, long-suf- 
fering, mildness, and truth. On these 
points they never presumed to differ.— 
They are too plain to be denied, so they 
contrive to make matter of difference out 
of the various habits they wear ; and they 
cut each other's throats for the love of God, 
on the important subject *, whether their 
iackets should be red or white — or whether 



* The Catholics and Protestants were thus distin- 
guished in the wars of the League. 



A TALE. 177 

their priests should be arrayed in silk rib- 
bons *, or white linen f , or black household 
garments i — or whether they should im- 
merse their children in water, or sprinkle 
them with a few drops of it — or whether 
they should partake of the memorials of 
the death of him they all profess to love, 

standing or on their knees — or But 

I weary you with this display of human 
wickedness and absurdity. One point is 
plain, they all agree that the language of 
the book is, " Love one another," while 
they all translate that language, *' Hate one 
another." But as they can find neither 
materials or excuse from that book, they 
search for them in their own minds, — and 
there they are never at a loss, for human 
minds are inexhaustible in malignity and 
hostility; and when they borrow the name 
of that book to sanction them, the deifica- 
tion of their passions becomes a duty, and 
their worst impulses are hallowed and 

* Catholics. t Protestants. X Dissenters. 
H 2 



178 melmoth: 

practised as virtues." — " Are there no pa- 
rents or children in these horrible worlds?" 
said Immalee, turning her tearful eyes on 
this traducer of humanity ; " none that 
love each other as I loved the tree under 
which I was first conscious of existence, or 
the flowers that grew with me ?" — " Pa- 
rents ? — children ?" said the stranger ; " Oh 
yes ! There are fathers who instruct their 

sons " And his voice was lost — he 

struggled to recover it. 

" After a long pause, he said, ** There 
are some kind parents among those sophis- 
ticated people."^ — " And who are they ?" 
said Immalee, whose heart throbbed spon- 
taneously at the mention of kindliness. — 
" Those," said the stranger, with a wither- 
ing smile, " who murder their children at 
the hour of their birth, or, by medical art, 
dismiss them before they have seen the 
light ; and, in so doing, they give the only 
credible evidence of parental affection." 

** He ceased, and Immalee remained 
silent in melancholy meditation on what 



A TALE. 179 

she had heard. The acrid and searing 
irony of his language had made no impres- 
sion on one with whom " speech was 
truth," and who could have no idea why a 
circuitous mode of conveying meaning 
could be adopted, when even a direct one 
was often attended with difficulty to her- 
self. But she could understand, that he 
had spoken much of evil and of suffering, 
names unknown to her before she beheld 
him, and she turned on him a glance that 
seemed at once to thank and reproach him 
for her painful initiation into the mys- 
teries of a new existence. She had, in- 
deed, tasted of the tree of knowledge, and 
her eyes were opened, but its fruit was 
bitter to her taste, and her looks conveyed 
a kind of mild and melancholy gratitude, 
that would have wrung the heart for giv- 
ing its first lesson of pain to the heart of a 
being so beautiful, so gentle, and so inno- 
cent. The stranger marked this blended 
expression, and exulted. 

" He had distorted life thus to her ima- 



180 MELMOTH : 

gination, perhaps with the purpose of ter- 
rifying her from a nearer view of it ; per- 
haps in the wild hope of keeping her fca* 
ever in this solitude, where he might 
sometimes see her, and catch, from the 
atmosphere of purity that surrounded 
her, the only breeze that floated over 
the burning desert of his own existence. 
This hope was strengthened by the ob- 
vious impression his discourse had made 
on her. The sparkling intelligence, — the 
breathless curiosity, — ^the vivid gratitude 
of her former expression, — were all extin- 
guished, and her down cast and thought- 
ful eyes were full of tears. 

*' Has my conversation wearied you, 
Immalee r" said he* — " It has grieved me, 
yet I wish to listen still," answered the 
Indian. " I love to hear the murmur of 
the stream, though the crocodile may be 
beneath the waves." — " Perhaps you wish 
to encounter the people of this world, so 
full of crime and misfortune." — " I do, for 
it is the world you came from, and when 



A TALt. 185 

you return to it all will be happy but me," 
— " And is it, then, in my power to con- 
fer happiness ?" said her companion ; " is 
it for this purpose I wander among man- 
kind ?" A mingled and indefinable ex- 
pression of derision, malevolence, and de- 
spair, overspread his features, as he added, 
" You do me too much honour, in devis- 
ing for me an occupation so mild and so 
congenial to my spirit." 

" Iramalee, whose eyes were averted, did 
not see this expression, and she replied, 
" I know not, but you have taught me the 
joy of grief ; before I saw you I only smil- 
ed, but since I saw you, I weep, and my 
tears are delicious. Oh ! they are far dif- 
ferent from those 1 shed for the setting 
sun, or the faded rose ! And yet I know 
not — " And the poor Indian, oppressed by 
emotions she could neither understand or 
express, clasped her hands on her bosom, 
as if to hide the secret of its new palpita- 
tions, and, with the instinctive diffidence 
of her purity, signified the change of her 



182 MELMOTH: 

feelings, by retiring a few steps from her 
companion, and casting on the earth eyes 
which could contain their tears no longer. 
The stranger appeared troubled, — an emo- 
tion new to himself agitated him for a mo- 
ment, — then a smile of self-disdain curled 
his hp, as if he reproached himself for the 
indulgence of human feeling even for a mo- 
ment. Again his features relaxed, as he 
turned to the bending and averted form of 
Immalee, and he seemed like one conscious 
of agony of soul himself, yet inclined to 
sport with the agony of another's. This 
union of inward despair and outward le- 
vity is not unnatural. Smiles are the le- 
gitimate offspring of happiness, but laugh- 
ter is often the misbegotten child of mad- 
ness, that mocks its parent to her face. 
With such an expression he turned to- 
wards her, and asked, " But what is your 
meaning, Immalee ?" — A long pause fol- 
lowed this question, and at length the In- 
dian answered, " I know not," with that 
natural and delicious art which teaches the 



A TALE. 183 

sex to disclose their meaning in words that 
seem to contradict it. *' I know not," 
means, " I know too well." Her com- 
panion understood this, and enjoyed his 
anticipated triumph. " And why do yoa^- 
tears flow, Immalee ?" — " I know not," 
said the poor Indian, and her tears flowed 
faster at the question. 

" At these words, or rather at these 
tears, the stranger forgot himself for a mo- 
ment. He felt that melancholy triumph 
which the conqueror is unable to enjoy ; 
that triumph which announces a victory 
over the weakness of others, obtained at 
the expence of a greater weakness in our- 
selves. A human feeling, in spite of him, 
pervaded his whole soul, as he said, in ac- 
cents of involuntary softness, " What 
would you have me do, Immalee ?" The 
difficulty of speaking a. language that 
might be at once intelligible and reserved, 
— that might convey her wishes without 
betraying her heart, — and the unknown 
nature of her new emotions, made Ira- 



184 MELMOTH : 

malee faulter long before she could an- 
swer, " Stay with me, — return not to that 
world of evil and sorrow. — Here the flowers 
will always bloom, and the sun be as bright 
as on the first day I beheld you. — Why 
will you go back to the world to thinly 
and to be unhappy ?" The wild and dis- 
cordant laugh of her companion, startled 
and silenced her. *•' Poor girl," he ex- 
claimed, with that mixture of bitterness 
and commiseration, that at once terrifies 
and humiliates ; " and is this the destiny 
I am to fulfil ? — to listen to the chirping 
of birds, and watch the opening of buds ? 
Is this to be my lot ?" and with another 
wild burst of unnatural laughter, he flung 
away the hand which I m malee had ex- 
tended to him as she had finished her sim- 
ple appeal. — " Yes, doubtless, I am well 
fitted for such a fate, and such a partner. 
Tell me," he added, with still wilder fierce- 
ness, " tell me from what line of my 
features, — from what accent of my voice, 
— from what sentiment of my discourse, 



A TALE. 185 

have you extracted the foundation of a 
hope that insults me with the view of fe- 
licity ?" Immalee, who might have re- 
plied, ** I understand a fury in your words, 
but not your words," had yet sufficient aid 
from her maiden pride, and female pene- 
tration, to discover that she was rejected 
by the stranger ; and a brief emotion of in- 
dignant grief struggled with the tender- 
ness of her exposed and devoted heart. 
She paused a moment, and then checking 
her tears, said, in her firmest tones, " Go, 
then, to your world, — since you wish to be 
unhappy — go ! — Alas ! it is not necessary 
to go there to be unhappy, for I must be 
so here. Go, — but take with you these 
roses, for they will all wither when you are 
gone ! — take with you these shells, for I 
shall no longer love to wear them when you 
no longer see them !" And as she spoke, 
with simple, but emphatic action, she un- 
twined from her bosom and hair the shells 
and flowers with which they were adorned, 
and threw them at his feet ; then turning 



186 MELMOTH : 

to throw one glance of proud and melan- 
choly grief at him, she was retiring. 
" Stay, Immalee, — stay, and hear me for 
a moment," said the stranger; and he 
would, at that moment, have perhaps dis- 
covered the ineffable and forbidden secret 
of his destiny, but Immalee, in silence, 
which her look of profound grief made 
eloquent, shook sadly her averted head, 
and departed. 



CHAPTER XVII. 



Miseram mc omnia terrent, et maris sonitus, et 
scopuli, et solitude, et sanctitudo ApoUinis. 

Latin Play. 



" JMany days elapsed before the stranger 
revisited the isle. How he was occupied, 
or what feelings agitated him in the inter- 
val, it would be beyond human conjecture 
to discover. Perhaps he sometimes ex- 
ulted in the misery he had inflicted,— 
perhaps he sometimes pitied it. His 
stormy mind was like an ocean that had 
swallowed a thousand wrecks of gallant 



188 melmoth: 

ships, and now seemed to dally with the 
loss of a little slender skiff, that could 
hardly make way on its surface in the pro- 
foundest calm. Impelled, however, by 
malignity, or tenderness, or curiosity, or 
weariness of artific a! Ufe, so vividly con- 
trasted by the unadulterated existence of 
Immalee, into whose pure elements no- 
thing but flowers and fragrance, the spark- 
ling of the heavens, and the odours of earth, 
had transfused their essence - or, possibly, 
by a motive more powerful than all, — his 
own will; which, never analysed, and 
hardly ever confessed to be the ruling 
principle of our actions, governs nine- 
tenths of them. — He returned to the shore 
of the haunted isle, the name by which it 
was distinguished by those who knew not 
how to classify the new goddess who was 
supposed to inhabit it, and who were as 
much puzzled by this new specimen ia 
their theology, as Linnaeus himself could 
have been by a non-descript in botany. 
Alas ! the varieties in moral botany far 



A TALE. 189 

exceed the wildest anomalies of those in 
the natural. However it was, the stranger 
returned to the isle. But he had to traverse 
many paths, where human foot but his 
had never been, and to rend away branches 
that seemed to tremble at a human touch, 
and to cross streams into which no foot 
but his had ever been dipped, before he 
could discover w^here Immalee had conceal- 
ed herself 

*' Concealment, however, was not in her 
thoughts. When he found her, she was 
leaning against a rock ; the ocean was 
pouring its eternal murmur of waters at 
her feet ; she had chosen the most desolate 
spot she could find ; — there w^as neither 
flower or shrub near her; — the calcined 
rocks, the offspring of volcano — the rest- 
less roar of the sea, whose waves almost 
touched her small foot, that seemed by its 
heedless protrusion at once to court and 
neglect danger — these objects were all 
that surrounded her. The first time he 
had beheld her, she was embowered amid 



190 MELMOTH : 

flowers and odours, amid all the glorious 
luxuries of vegetable and animal nature ; 
the roses and the peacocks seemed emulous 
which should expand their leaves or their 
plumes, as a shade to that loveliness which 
seemed to hover between them, alternately 
borrowing the fragrance of the one, and 
the hues of the other. Now she stood as 
if deserted even by nature, whose child she 
was ; the rock was her resting-place, and 
the ocean seemed the bed where she pur- 
posed to rest ; she had no shells on her 
bosom, no roses in her hair— her character 
seemed to have changed with her feelings ; 
she no longer loved all that is beautiful in 
nature ; she seemed, by an anticipation of 
her destiny, to make alliance with all that 
is awful and ominous. She had begun to 
love the rocks and the ocean, the thunder 
of the wave, and the sterility of the sand, 
— awful objects, the incessant recurrence 
of whose very sound seems intended to re- 
mind us of grief and of eternity. Their 
restless monotony of repetition, corre- 



A TALE. 191 

spends with the beatings of a heart which 
asks its destiny from the phenomena of na- 
ture, and feels the answer is — " Misery.'* 

" Those who love may seek the luxuries 
of the garden, and inhale added intoxica- 
tion from its perfumes, which seem the 
offerings of nature on that altar which is 
already erected and burning in the heart of 
the worshipper ; — but let those who have 
loved seek the shores of the ocean, and 
they shall have their answer too. 

" There was a sad and troubled air 
about her, as she stood so lonely, that 
seemed at once to express the conflict of 
her internal emotions, and to reflect the 
gloom and agitation of the physical objects 
around her ; for nature was preparing for 
one of those awful convulsions — one of 
those abortive throes of desolation, that 
seems to announce a more perfect wrath 
to come ; and while it blasts the vegeta- 
tion, and burns up the soil of some visit- 
ed portion, seems to proclaim in the 



192 MELMOTH : 

murmur of its receding thunders, that 
it will return in that day, when the 
universe shall pass away as a scroll, and 
the elements melt with fervent heat, 
and return to fulfil the dreadful pro- 
mise, which its partial and initiatory 
devastation has left incomplete. Is there 
a peal of thunder that does not mutter a 
menace, " For me, the dissolution of the 
world is reserved, I depart, but 1 shall 
return?" Is there a flash of lightning 
that does not say, visibly, if not audibly, 
" Sinner, I cannot now penetrate the reces- 
ses of your soul ; but how will you en- 
counter my glare, when the hand of the 
judge is armed with me, and my penetrat- 
ing glance displays you to the view of as- 
sembled worlds ?" 

" The evening was very dark ; heavy 
clouds, rolling on like the forces of an hos- 
tile army, obscured the horizon from east 
to west. There was a bright but ghastly 
blue in the heaven above, like that in the 



A TALE. 193 

eye of the dying, where the last forces of 
life are collected, while its powers are ra- 
pidly forsaking the frame, and feeling 
their extinguishment must shortly be. 
There was not a breath of air to heave the 
ocean, — the trees drooped without a whis- 
per to woo their branches or their buds, — 
the birds had retired, with that instinct 
which teaches them to avoid the fearful 
encounter of the elements, and nestled 
with cowering wings and drooping heads 
among their favourite trees. There was 
not a human sound in the isle ; the very 
rivulet seemed to tremble at its own tink- 
lings, and its small waves flowed as if a 
subterranean hand arrested and impeded 
their motion. Nature, in these grand and 
terrific operations, seems in some degree to 
assimilate herself to a parent, whose most 
fearful denunciations are preceded by an 
awful silence, or rather to a judge, whose 
final sentence is felt with less horror than 
the pause that intervenes before it is pro- 
nounced. 
VOL. lit. I 



194 MELMOTH : 

" Immalee gazed on the awful scene by 
which she was surrounded, without any 
emotion derived from physical causes. To 
her, light and darkness had hitherto been 
the same ; she loved the sun for its lustre, 
and the lightning for its transitory brilli- 
ancy, and the ocean for its sonorous music, 
and the tempest for the agitation which it 
gave to the trees, under whose bending 
and welcoming shadow she danced, in time 
kept by the murmur of their leaves, that 
hung low, as if to crown their votarist. 
And she loved the night, when all was 
still, but what she was accustomed to call 
the music of a thousand streams, that 
made the stars rise from their beds, to 
sparkle and nod to that wild melody. 

" Such she had been. Now, her eye 
was intently fixed on the declining light, 
and the approaching darkness, — that preter- 
natural gloom, that seems to say to the 
brightest and most beautiful of the works 
of God, " Give place to me, thou shalt 
shine no more." 



A TALE. 195 

" The darkness increased, and the clouds 
collected like an army that had mustered 
its utmost force, and stood in obdured and 
collected strength against the struggling 
light of heaven. A broad, red, and dusky 
line of gloomy light, gathered round 
the horizon, like an usurper watching 
the throne of an abdicated sovereign, 
and expanding its portentous circle, sent 
forth alternately flashes of lightning, pale 
and red; — the murmur of the sea increased, 
and the arcades of the banyan-tree, that 
had struck its patriarchal root not five 
hundred paces from where Immalee stood, 
resounded the deep and almost unearthly 
murmur of the approaching storm through 
all its colonnades ; the primeval trunk 
rocked and groaned, and the everlasting 
fibres seemed to ^vdthdraw their grasp fi-om 
the earth, and quiver in air at the sound. 
Nature, with every voice she could inspire 
from earth, or air, or water, announced 
danger to her children. 

" That was the moment the stranger 



196 MELMOTH : 

diose to approach Immalee ; of danger he 
was insensible, of fear he was unconscious ; 
his miserable destiny had exempted him 
from both, but what had it left him ? No 
hope — but that of plunging others into his 
own condemnation. No fear — but that 
his victim might escape him. Yet with 
all his diabolical heartlessness, he did feel 
some relentings of his human nature, as 
he beheld the young Indian ; her cheek 
was pale, but her eye was fixed, and her 
figure, turned from him, (as if she preferred 
to encounter the tremendous rage of the 
storm), seemed to him to say, " Let me 
fall into the hands of God, and not into 
those of man." 

" This attitude, so unintentionally as- 
sumed by Immalee, and so little expressive 
of her real feelings, restored all the malig- 
nant energies of the stranger's feelings ; 
the former evil purposes of his heart, and 
the habitual character of his dark and 
fiendish pursuit, rushed back on him. 
Amid this contrasted scene of the convul- 



A TALE. 197 

sive rage of nature, and the passive help- 
lessness of her unsheltered loveliness, he 
felt a glow of excitement, like that which 
pervaded him, when the fearful powers of 
his " charmed life" enabled him to pene- 
trate the cells of a madhouse, or the dun- 
geons of an Inquisition. 

" He saw this pure being surrounded 
by the terrors of nature, and felt a wild and 
terrible conviction, that though the light- 
ning might blast her in a moment, yet 
there was a bolt more burning and more 
fatal, which was wielded by his own hand, 
and which, if he could aim it aright, must 
transfix her very soul. 

" Armed with all his malignity and all 
his power, he approached Immalee, armed 
only with her purity, and standing like the 
reflected beam of the last ray of light 
on whose extinction she was gazing. 
There was a contrast in her form and her 
situation, that might have touched any 
feelings but those of the wanderer. 

" The hght of her figure shining out a* 



198 MELMOTH : 

mid the darkness that enveloped her, — its 
undulating softness rendered still softer 
to the eye by the rock against which it 
reclined, — its softness, brightness, and flexi- 
bility, presenting a kind of playful hos- 
tility to the tremendous aspect of nature 
overcharged with wrath and ruin. 

" The stranger approached her unob- 
served ; his steps were unheard amid the 
rush of the ocean, and the deep, portentous 
murmur of the elements ; but, as he ad- 
vanced, he heard sounds that perhaps ope- 
rated on his feelings as the whispers of Eve 
to her flowers on the organs of the serpent. 
Both knew their power, and felt their time. 
Amid the fast approaching terrors of a 
storm, more terrible than any she had ever 
witnessed, the poor Indian, unconscious, 
or perhaps insensible of its dangers, was 
singing her wild song of desperation and 
love to the echoes of the advancing storm. 
Some words of this strain of despair and 
passion reached the ear of the stranger. 
They w^re thus : 



A TALE. 199 

** The night is growing dark — but what 
is that to the darkness that his absence has 
cast on my soul ? The lightnings are 
glancing round me — but what are they to 
the gleam of his eye when he parted from 
me in anger ? 

" I lived but in the light of his presence 
— why should I not die when that light is 
withdrawn ? Anger of the clouds, what 
have I to fear from you ? You may scorch 
me to dust, as I have seen you scorch the 
branches of the eternal trees — but the trunk 
still remained, and my heart will be his 
for ever. 

" Roar on, terrible ocean ! thy waves, 
which I cannot count, can never wash his 
image from my soul,— thou dashest a thou- 
sand waves against a rock, but the rock is 
unmoved — and so would be my heart a- 
mid the calamities of the world with which 
he threatens me, — whose dangers I never 
would have known but for him, and whose 
dangers for him I will encounter." 

" She paused in her wild song, and then 



goo MELMOTH : 

renewed it, regardless alike of the terrors 
of the elements, and the possible presence 
of one whose subtle and poisonous po- 
tency was more fatal than all the elements 
in their united wrath. 

" When we first met, my bosom was 
covered with roses — now it is shaded with 
the dark leaves of the ocynum. When he 
saw me first, the living things all loved 
me — now I care not whether they love 
me or not — ^I have forgot to love them. 
When he came to the isle every niglit, I 
hoped the moon would be bright — now I 
care not whether she rises or sets, whether 
she is clouded or bright. Before he came, 
every thing loved me, and I had more 
things to love than 1 could reckon by the 
hairs of my head — now I feel I can love 
but one, and that one has deserted me. 
Since I have seen him all things have 
changed. The flowers have not the co- 
lours they once had — there is no music 
in the flow of the waters — the stars do not 



A TALE. 201 

smile on me from heaven as they did, — 
and I myself begin to love the storm bet- 
ter than the calm." 

" As she ended her melancholy strain, 
she turned from the spot where the in- 
creasing fury of the storm made it no 
longer possible for her to stand, and turn- 
ing, met the gaze of the stranger fixed on 
her. A suffusion, the most rich and vivid, 
mantled over her from brow to bosom; 
she did not utter her usual exclamation of 
joy at his sight, but, with averted eyes 
and faultering step, followed him as he 
pointed her to seek shelter amid the ruins 
of the pagoda. They approached it in si- 
lence ; and, amid the convulsions and fury 
of nature, it was singular to see two beings 
walk on together without exchanging a 
word of apprehension, or feeling a thought 
of danger, — the one armed by despair, the 
other by innocence. Immalee would ra- 
ther have sought the shelter of her fa- 
vourite banyan-tree, but the stranger tried 
to make her comprehend, that her danger 

I 2 



202 MELMOTH : 

would be much greater there than in the 
spot he pointed out to her. " Danger !" 
said the Indian, while a bright and wild 
smile irradiated her features ; " can there 
be danger when you are near me ?" — " Is 
there, then, no danger in my presence ? — 
few have met me without dreading, and 
without feeling it too !" and his counte- 
nance, as he spoke, grew darker than the 
heaven at which he scowled. " Immalee," 
he added, in a voice still deeper and more 
thrilling, from the unwonted operation of 
human emotion in its tones ; " Immalee, 
you cannot be weak enough to believe 
that I have power of con trou ling the ele- 
ments? If I had," he continued, " by the 
heaven that is frowning at me, the first 
exertion of my power should be to collect 
the most swift and deadly of the lightnings 
that . are hissing around us, and transfix 
you where you stand !" — " Me ?" repeated 
the trembling Indian, her cheek growing 
paler at his words, and the voice in which 
they were uttered, than at the redoubling 



A TALE. 203 

fury of the storm, amid whose pauses she 
scarce heard them. — " Yes — you — you — 
lovely as you are, and innocent, and pure, 
before a fire more deadly consumes your 
existence, and drinks your heart-blood — 
before you are longer exposed to a danger 
a thousand times more fatal than those 
with which the elements menace you — the 
danger of my accursed and miserable pre- 
sence !'* 

" Immalee, unconscious of his meaning, 
but trembling with impassioned grief at 
the agitation with which he spoke, ap- 
proached him to soothe the emotion of 
which she krtew neither the name or the 
cause. Through the fractures of the ruin 
the red and ragged lightnings disclosed, 
from time to time, a glimpse of her figure, 
— her dishevelled hair, — her pallid and ap- 
pealing look,— her locked hands, and the 
imploring bend of her slight form, as if 
she was asking pardon for a crime of which 
she was unconscious, — and soliciting an in- 
terest in griefs not her own. AH around 



204 MELMOTH : 

her wild, unearthly, and terrible,— the floor 
strewed with fragments of stone, and 
mounds of sand, — the vast masses of ruin- 
ed architecture, whose formation seemed the 
work of no human hand, and whose destruc- 
tion appeared the sport of demons, — the 
yawning fissures of the arched and ponde- 
rous roof, through which heaven darkened 
and blazed alternately with a gloom that 
wrapt every thing, or a light more fear- 
ful than that gloom. — All around her 
gave to her form, when it it was momently 
visible, a relief so strong and so touching, 
that it might have immortalized the hand 
who had sketched her as the embodied pre- 
sence of an angel who had descended to 
the regions of woe and wrath, — of dark- 
ness and of fire, on a message of reconcilia- 
tion, — and descended in vain. 

" The stranger threw on her, as she 
bent before him, one of those looks that, 
but her own, no mortal eye had yet 
encountered unappalled. Its expression 
seemed only to inspire a higher feeling of 



A TALE. 205 

devotedness in the victim. Perhaps an 
involuntary sentiment of terror mingled 
itself with that expression, as this beauti- 
ful being sunk on her knees before her 
writhing and distracted enemy ; and, by 
the silent supplication of her attitude, 
seemed to implore him to have mercy on 
himself. As the lightnings flashed around 
her, — as the earth trembled beneath her 
white and slender feet, — as the elements 
seemed all sworn to the destruction of 
every living thing, and marched on from 
heaven to the accomplishment of their pur- 
pose, with Vce victis written and legible to 
every eye, in the broad unfolded banners of 
that resplendent and sulphurous light that 
seemed to display the day of hell — the feel- 
ings of the devoted Indian seemed concen- 
trated on the ill-chosen object of their ido- 
latry alone. Her graduating attitudes 
beautifully, but painfully, expressed the 
submission of a female heart devoted to its 
object, to his frailties, his passions, and his 
very crimes. When subdued by the image 



206 MELMOTH : 

of power, which the mind of man exercises 
over that of woman, that impulse becomes 
irresistibly humiliating. Iramalee had at 
first bowed to conciliate her beloved, and 
her spirit had taught her frame that first 
inclination. In her next stage of suffer- 
ing, she had sunk on her knees, and, 
remaining at a distance from him, she 
had trusted to this state of prostration 
to produce that effect on his heart which 
those who love always hope compassion 
may produce, — that illegitimate child of 
love, often more cherished than its pa- 
rent. In her last efforts she clung to 
his hand — she pressed her pale lips to it, 
and was about to utter a few words — her 
voice failed her, but her fast dropping 
tears spohe to the hand which she held, — 
and its grasp, which for a moment convul- 
sively returned hers, and then flung it 
away, answered her. 

" The Indian remained prostrate and a- 
ghast. " Immalee," said the stranger, in 
a struggling voice, " Do you wish me to 



A TALE. 207 

tell you the feelings with which my pre- 
sence should inspire you ?" — " No — no- 
no !'* said the Indian, applying her white 
and delicate hands to her ears, and then 
clasping them on her bosom ; " I feel them 
too much." — " Hate me — curse me !" said 
the stranger, not heeding her, and stamp- 
ing till the reverberation of his steps on 
the hollow and loosened stones almost con- 
tended with the thunder ; " hate me, for 
I hate you — I hate all things that live 
— all things that are dead — I am myself 
hated and hateful !"-— " Not by me," said 
the poor Indian, feeling, through the 
blindness of her tears, for his averted 
hand. " Yes, by you, if you knew whose 
I am, and whom I serve." Immalee a- 
roused her newly-excited energies of heart 
and intellect to answer this appeal. " Who 
you are, I know not — but I am yours. — 
Whom you serve, I know not — but him 
will 1 serve—I will be yours for ever. 
Forsake me if you will, but when I am 
dead, come back to this isle, and say to 



208 MELMOTH : 

yourself, The roses have bloomed and 
faded — the streams have flowed and been 
dried up — the rocks have been removed 
from their places — and the lights of heaven 
have altered in their courses, — but there 
was one v^ho never changed, and she is not 
here !" 

'* As she spoke the enthusiasm of pas- 
sion struggling with grief, she added, 
" You have told me you possess the hap- 
py art of writing thought. — Do not write 
one thought on my grave, for one word 
traced by your hand would revive me. 
Do not weep, for one tear would make 
me live again, perhaps to draw a tear from 
you." — " Immalee !" said the stranger. The 
Indian looked up, and, with a mingled 
feeling of grief, amazement, and compunc- 
tion, beheld him shed tears. The next 
moment he dashed them away with the 
hand of despair; and, grinding his teeth, 
burst into that wild shriek of bitter and 
convulsive laughter that announces the 
object of its derision is ourselves. 



•A TALE. 209 

" Immalee, whose feelings were almost 
exhausted, trembled in silence at his feet. 
" Hear me, wretched girl !" he cried in 
tones that seemed alternately tremulous 
with malignity and compassion, with ha- 
bitual hostility and involuntary softness ; 
*' hear me ! I know the secret sentiment 
you struggle with better than the inno- 
cent heart of which it is the inmate knows 
it. Suppress, banish, destroy it. Crush 
it as you would a young reptile before its 
growth had made it loathsome to the eye, 
and poisonous to existence !" — " I never 
crushed even a reptile in my life," answer- 
ed Immalee, unconscious that this matter- 
of-fact answer was equally applicable in 
another sense. " You love, then," said 
the stranger ; " but," after a long and o- 
minous pause, " do you know whom it is 
you love?" — " You!" said the Indian, with 
that purity of truth that consecrates the 
impulse it yields to, and would blush more 
for the sophistications of art than the confi- 
dence of nature ; " you ! You have taught 



210 MELMOTH : 

me to think, to feel, and to weep." — " And 
you love me for this ?" said her companion, 
with an expression half irony, half commise- 
ration. " Think, Immalee, for a moment, 
how unsuitable, how unworthy, is the ob- 
ject of the feelings you lavish on him. A 
being unattractive in his form, repulsive 
in his habits, separated from life and hu- 
manity by a gulph impassable ; a disinhe- 
nted child of nature, who goes about to 
curse or to tempt his more prosperous bre- 
thren ; one who what withholds me 

from disclosing all ?'* 

" At this moment a flash of such vivid 
and terrific brightness as no human sight 
could sustain, gleamed through the ruins, 
pouring through every fissure instant and 
intolerable light. Immalee, overcome by 
terror and emotion, remained on her 
knees, her hands closely clasped over her 
aching eyes. 

" For a few moments that she remain- 
ed thus, she thought she heard other 
sounds near her, and that the stranger was 



A TALE. 211 

answering a voice that spoke to him. She 
heard him say, as the thunder rolled to a 
distance, " This hour is mine, not thine- — 
begone, and trouble me not." When she 
looked up again, all trace of human emo- 
tion was gone from his expression. The 
dry and burning eye of despair that he 
fixed on her, seemed never to have owned 
a tear; the hand with which he grasped 
her, seemed never to have felt the flow of 
blood, or the throb of a pulse ; amid the 
intense and increasing heat of an atmo- 
sphere that appeared on fire, its touch was 
as cold as that of the dead. 

*' Mercy !" cried the trembling Indian, 
as she in vain endeavoured to read a hu- 
man feeling in those eyes of stone, to 
which her own tearful and appealing ones 
were uplifted—" mercy !" And while she 
uttered the word, she knew not what she 
deprecated or dreaded. 

" The stranger answered not a word, 
relaxed not a muscle ; it seemed as if he 
felt her not with the hands that grasped 



212 MELMOTH : 

her, — as if he saw her not with the eyes 
that glared fixedly and coldly on her. He 
bore, or rather dragged, her to the vast 
arch that had once been the entrance to 
the pagoda, but which, now shattered and 
ruinous, resembled more the gulphing 
yawn of a cavern that harbours the in- 
mates of the desert, than a work wrought 
by the hands of man, and devoted to the 
worship of a deity. " You have called for 
mercy," said her companion, in a voice 
that froze her blood even under the burn- 
ing atmosphere, whose air she could scarce 
respire. " You have cried for mercy, and 
mercy you shall have. Mercy has not 
been dealt to me, but 1 have courted my 
horrible destiny, and my reward is just 
and sure. Look forth, trembler — look 
forth, — I command thee !" And he stamp- 
ed with an air of authority and impatience 
that completed the terror of the delicate 
and impassioned being who shuddered in 
his grasp, and felt half-dead at his frown. 
*^ In obedience to his command, she re- 



A TALE. 213 

moved the long tresses of her auburn hair, 
which had vainly swept, in luxuriant and 
fruitless redundance, the rock on which 
the steps of him she adored had been fix- 
ed. With that mixture of the docility of 
the child, and the mild submission of wo- 
man, she attempted to comply with his 
demand, but her eyes, filled with tears, 
could not encounter the withering horrors 
of the scene before her. She wiped those 
brilliant eyes with hairs that were every 
day bathed in the pure and crystal lymph, 
and seemed, as she tried to gaze on the de- 
solation, like some bright and shivering 
spirit, who, for its further purification, or 
perhaps for the enlargement of the know- 
ledge necessary for its destination, is com- 
pelled to witness some evidence of the Al- 
mighty's wrath, unintelligible in its first 
operations, but doubtless salutary in its fi- 
nal results. 

" Thus looking and thus feeling, Im- 
malee shudderingly approached the en- 
trance of that building, which, blending 



214 MELMOTH : 

the ruins of nature with those of art, seem- 
ed to announce the power of desolation 
over both, and to intimate that the prime- 
val rock, untouched and unmodulated by 
human hands, and thrown upwards per- 
haps by some volcanic eruption, perhaps 
deposited there by some meteoric discharge, 
and the gigantic columns of stone, whose 
erection had been the work of two centu- 
ries, — were alike dust beneath the feet of 
that tremendous conqueror, whose victo- 
ries alone are without noise and without 
resistance, and the progress of whose 
triumph is marked by tears instead of 

blood. 

" Immalee, as she gazed around her, 

felt, for the first time, terror at the as- 
pect of nature. Formerly, she had 
considered all its phenomena as equally 
splendid or terrific. And her childish, 
though active imagination, seemed to con- 
secrate alike the sun-light and the storm, 
to the devotion of a heart, on whose pure 



A TALE. 215 

altar the flowers and the fires of nature 
flung their undivided offering. 

" But since she had seen the stranger, 
new emotions had pervaded her young 
heart. She learned to weep and to fear ; 
and perhaps she saw, in the fearful aspect 
of the heavens, the developement of that 
mysterious terror, which always trembles 
at the bottom of the hearts of those who 
dare to love. 

" How often does nature thus become 
an involuntary interpreter between us and 
our feelings ! Is the murmur of the ocean 
without a meaning ? — Is the roll of the 
thunder without a voice ? — Is the blasted 
spot on which the rage of both has been 
exhausted without its lesson? — Do not 
they all tell us some mysterious secret, 
which we have in vain searched our hearts 
for ? — Do we not find in them, an answer 
to those questions with which we are for 
ever importuning the mute oracle of our 
destiny? — Alas! how deceitful and inade- 



216 MELMOTH : 

quate we feel the language of man, after 
love and grief have made us acquainted 
with that of nature ! — the only one, perhaps, 
capable of a corresponding sign for those 
emotions, under which all human expres- 
sion faints. What a difference between 
words without meaning, and that meaning 
without words, which the sublime pheno- 
mena of nature, the rocks and the ocean, 
the moon and the twilight, convey to those 
who have " ears to hear." 

" How eloquent of truth is nature in her 
very silence ! How fertile of reflections 
amid her profoundest desolations ! But 
the desolation now presented to the eyes of 
Immalee, was that which is calculated to 
cause terror, not reflection. Earth and 
heaven, the sea and the dry land, seemed 
mingling together, and about to replunge 
into chaos. The ocean, deserting its eter- 
nal bed, dashed its waves, whose white 
^irf gleamed through the darkness, far 
into the shores of the isle. They came on 



A TALE. 217 

like the crests of a thousand warriors, 
plumed and tossing in their pride, and, 
like them, perishing in the moment of 
victory. There was a fearful inversion of 
the natural appearance of earth and sea, as 
if all the barriers of nature w^ere broken, 
and all her laws reversed. 

The waves deserting their station, left, 
from time to time, the sands as dry as 
those of the desert; and the trees and 
shrubs tossed and heaved in ceaseless agi- 
tation, like the waves of a midnight storm. 
There was no light, but a livid grey that 
sickened the eye to behold, except when 
the bright red lightning burst out like the 
eye of a fiend, glancing over the work of 
ruin, and closing as it beheld it completed. 

" Amid this scene stood two beings, 
one whose appealing loveliness seepjed to 
have found favour with the elements even 
in their wrath, and one whose fearless 
and obdurate eye appeared to defy them. 
" Immalee," he cried, " is this a place or 
an hour to talk of love ! — all nature is ap- 

VOL. III. K 



218 MELMOTH : 

palled — heaven is dark — the animals have 
hid themselves — and the very shrubs, as 
they wave and shrink, seem alive with 
terror." — " It is an hour to implore pro- 
tection," said the Indian, clinging to him 
timidly. " Look up," said the stranger, 
while his own fixed and fearless eye seem- 
ed to return flash for flash to the baffled 
and insulted elements; " Look up, and 
if you cannot resist the impulses of your 
heart, let me at least point out a fitter ob- 
ject for them. Love," he cried, extending 
his arm towards the dim and troubled 
sky, " love the storm in its might of de- 
struction — seek alliance with those swift 
and perilous travellers of the groaning 
air, — the meteor that rends, and the 
thunder that shakes it ! Court, for shel- 
tering tenderness, those masses of dense 
and rolling cloud, — the baseless moun- 
tains of heaven 1 Woo the kisses of the 
fiery lightnings, to quench themselves on 
your smouldering bosom ! Seek all that 
is terrible in nature for your companions 



A TALE. 219 

and your lover ! — woo them to burn and 
blast you — perish in their fierce embrace, 
and you will be happier, far happier, than 
if you lived in mine ! Lived ! — Oh who 
can be mine and live ! Hear me, Imma- 
leel" he cried, while he held her hands 
locked in his — while his eyes, rivetted on 
her, sent forth a light of intolerable lustre 
— while a new feeling of indefinite enthu- 
siasm seemed for a moment to thrill his 
whole frame, and new-modulate the tone 
of his nature ; " Hear me ! If you will be 
mine, it must be amid a scene like this for 
ever — amid fire and darkness — amid ha- 
tred and despair — amid " and his voice 

swelling to a demoniac shriek of rage and 
horror, and his arms extended, as if to 
grapple with the fearful objects of some ima- 
ginary struggle, he was rushing from the 
arch under which they stood, lost in the 
picture which his guilt and despair had 
drawn, and whose images he was for ever 
doomed to behold. 

" The slender form that had clung to 



220 MELMOTH : 

him was, by this sudden movement, pro- 
strated at his feet; and, with a voice choak- 
ed with terror, yet with that perfect de- 
Yotedness which never issued but from 
the heart and lip of woman, she answered 
his frightful questions with the simple de- 
mand, " Will you be there ?" — " Yes ! — 
THERE I must be, and for ever ! And will 
you, and dare you, be with me?" And a 
kind of wild and terrible energy nerved 
his frame, and strengthened his voice, as he 
spoke and cowered over pale and prostrate 
loveliness, that seemed in profound and 
reckless humiliation to court its own de- 
struction, as it a dove exposed its breast, 
v/ithout flight or struggle, to the beak of a 
vulture. " Well, then,'' said the stranger, 
while a brief convulsion crossed his pale 
visage, " amid thunder I w^ed thee — bride 
of perdition I mine shalt thou be for ever ! 
Come, and let us attest our nuptials be- 
fore the reeling altar of nature, with the 
lightnings of heaven for our bed-lights, 
and the curse of nature for our marriage- 



A TAI.E. 221 

benediction !" The Indian shrieked in 
terror, not at his words, which she did not 
understand, but at the expression which 
accompanied them. " Come," he repeat- 
ed, " while the darkness yet is witness to 
our ineffable and eternal union." Imma- 
lee, pale, terrified, but resolute, retreated 
from him," 

*' At this moment the storm, which had 
obscured the heavens and ravaged the 
earth, passed away with the rapidity com- 
mon in those climates, where the visita- 
tion of an hour does its work of destruc- 
tion unimpeded, and is instantly succeed- 
ed by the smiling lights and brilliant skies 
of which mortal curiosity in vain asks the 
question. Whether they gleam in triumph 
or in consolation over the mischief they 
witness ? 

" As the stranger spoke, the clouds 
passed away, carrying their diminished 
burden of wrath and terror where suffer- 
ings were to be inflicted, and terrors to 
be imdergone, by the natives of other 



222 MELMOTH : 

climes — and the bright moon burst forth 
with a glory unknown in European 
climes. The heavens were as blue as 
the waves of the ocean, which they seem- 
ed to reflect; and the stars burst forth 
with a kind of indignant and aggra- 
vated brilliancy, as if they resented the 
usurpation of the storm, and asserted the 
eternal predominance of nature over the 
casual influences of the storms that ob- 
scured her. Such, perhaps, will be the 
developement of the moral world. We 
shall be told why we suffered, and for 
what; but a bright and blessed lustre 
shall follow the storm, and all shall yet be 
light. 

" The young Indian caught from this 
object an omen ahke auspicious to her 
imagination and her heart. She burst 
from him— she rushed into the light of na- 
ture, whose glory seemed like the promise 
of redemption, gleaming amid the dark- 
ness of the fall. She pointed to the moon, 
that sun of the eastern nights, whose broad 



A TALE. 223 

and brilliant light fell like a mantle of 
glory over rock and ruin, over tree and 
flower. 

" Wed me by this light," cried Imma- 
lee, " and I will be yours for ever !" And 
her beautiful countenance reflected the 
full light of the glorious planet that rode 
bright through the cloudless heaven — and 
her white and naked arms, extended to- 
wards it, seemed like two pure attesting 
pledges of the union. " Wed me by this 
light," she repeated, sinking on her knees, 
" and. I will be yours for ever !" 

" As she spoke, the stranger approach- 
ed, moved w^ith what feelings no mortal 
thought can discover. At that mo- 
ment a trifling phenomenon interfered to 
alter her destiny. A darkened cloud at 
that moment covered the moon — it seem- 
ed as if the departed storm collected in 
wrathful haste the last dark fold of its 
tremendous drapery, and was about to 
pass away for ever. 

" The eyes of the stranger flashed on 
Immalee the brightest rays of mingled 



224 MELMOTH : 

fondness and ferocity. He pointed to the 
darkness, — " Wed me by tpiis light !" 
he exclaimed, " and you shall he mine for 
ever and ever r Immalee, shuddering at 
the grasp in which he held her, and try- 
ing in vain to watch the expression of his 
countenance, yet felt enough of her dan- 
ger to tear herself from him. " Farewell 
for ever!" exclaimed the stranger, as he 
rushed from her. 

*' Immalee, exhausted by emotion and 
terror, had fallen senseless on the sands 
that filkd the path to the ruined pagoda. 
He returned — he raised her in his arms — 
her long dark hair streamed over them 
like the drooping banners of a defeated 
army — her arms sunk down as if declining 
the support they seemed to implore— her 
cold and colourless cheek rested on his 
shoulder, 

" Is she dead ?" he murmured. '* Well, 
be it so — let her perish — let her be any 
thing but mine r He flung his senseless 
burden on the sands, and departed — nor 
did he ever revisit the island. 



CHAPTER XVIL 



Que donne le monde aux siens plus souvent. 

Echo Fen I. 
Que dois-je vaincre ici^ sans jamais relacher. 

Echo la chair. 
Qui fit le cause des maux, qui me sent surveuus^ 

Echo Venufi. 
Que faut dire apres d'une telle infidelle. 

Echo Fi d'elle. 
Magdaleniade, % Father Pierre de St Juouis. 

1 HiiEE years had elapsed since the part- 
ing of Immalee and the stranger, when 
one evening the attention of some Spanisii 
gentlemen, who were walking in a public 
place in Madrid, was arrested by a figure 
that passed them, habited in. the dress of 

K 2 



226 MELMOTH : 

the country, (only without a sword), and 
walking very slowly. They stopt by a 
kind of simultaneous movement, and seem- 
ed to ask each other, with silent looks, 
what had been the cause of the impression 
this person's appearance had made on them. 
There was nothing remarkable in his fi- 
gure, — his demeanour was quiet; it was 
the singular expression of his countenance 
which had struck them with a sensation 
they could neither define or account for. 
^ " As they paused, the person returned 
alone, and walking slowly — and they again 
encountered that singular expression of 
the features, (the eyes particularly), which 
no human glance could meet unappalled. 
Accustomed to look on and converse with 
all things revolting to nature and to man, 
— for ever exploring the mad-house, the 
jail, or the Inquisition, — the den of famine, 
the dungeon of crime, or the death-bed of 
despair, — his eyes had acquired a light and 
a language of their own — a light that none 



A TALE. 227 

could gaze on, and a language that few 
dare understand. 

" As he passed slowly by them, they 
observed two others whose attention was 
apparently fixed on the same singular ob- 
ject, for they stood pointing after him, 
and speaking to each other with gestures 
of strong and obvious emotion. The cu- 
riosity of the groupe for once overcame 
the restraint of Spanish reserve, and ap- 
proaching the two cavaliers, they inquired 
if the singular personage who had passed 
was not the subject of their conversation, 
and the cause of the emotion which ap- 
peared to accompany it. The others re- 
plied in the affirmative, and hinted at their 
knowledge of circumstances in the charac- 
ter and history of that extraordinary being 
that might justify even stronger marks of 
emotion at his presence. This hint opera- 
ted still more strongly on their curiosity — 
the circle of listeners began to deepen. 
Some of them, it appeared, had, or pre- 
tended to have, some information relative 



228 MELMOTH : 

to this extraordinary subject. And that 
kind of desultory conversation commenced, 
whose principal ingredients are a plentiful 
proportion of ignorance, curiosity, and 
fear, mingled with some small allowance 
of information and truth ; — that conversa- 
tion, vague, unsatisfactory, but not uninter- 
esting, to which every speaker is welcome 
to contribute his share of baseless report, — 
wild conjecture, — anecdote the more incre- 
dible the better credited, — and conclusion 
the more falsely drawn the more likely to 
carry home conviction. 

^' The conversation passed very much 
in language incoherent as this : — '* But 
why, if he be whaf he is described, what 
he is known to be, — why is he not seized 
by order of government ? — why is he not 
immured in the Inquisition ?" — " He has 
been often in the prison of the holy office 
— oftener, perhaps, than the holy fathers 
wished," said another. " But it is a well- 
known fact, that whatever transpired on 
his examination, he was liberated almost 



A TALE. 229 

hnmediately." Another added, " That the 
stranger had been in almost every prison 
in Europe, but had always contrived either 
to defeat or defy the power in whose grasp 
he appeared to be inclosed, — and to be active 
in his purposes of mischief in the remotest 
parts of Europe at the moment he was 
supposed to be expiating them in others." 
Another demanded, " If it was known to 
what country he belonged r" and was an- 
swered, " He is said to be a native of Ire- 
land — (a country that no one knows, and 
which the natives are particularly reluc- 
tant to dwell in from various causes) — and 
his name is Melmoth." The Spaniard 
had great difficulty in expressing the 
thetay unpronounceable by continental lips. 
" Another, who had an appearance of more 
intelligence than the rest, added the ex- 
traordinary fact of the stranger's being 
seen in various and distant parts of the 
earth within a time in which no power 
merely human could be supposed to tra- 
verse them-— that his marked and fearful 



230 MELMOTH : 

habit was every where to seek out the 
most wretched, or the most profligate, of 
the community among which he flung 
himself— what was his object in seeking 
them was unknown." — " It is well known," 
said a deep-toned voice, falling on the ears 
of the startled listeners like the toll of a 
strongbut muffled bell, — " it is well known 
both to him and them." 

" It was now twilight, but the eyes of 
all could distinguish the figure of the 
stranger as he passed ; and some even a- 
verred they could see the ominous lustre 
of those eyes which never rose on human 
destiny but as planets of woe. The groupe 
paused for some time to watch the retreat 
of the figure that had produced on them 
the effect of the torpedo. It departed 
slowly, — no one offered it molestation. 

" I have heard," said one of the com- 
pany, " that a delicious music precedes 
the approach of this person when his des- 
tined victim, — the being whom he is per- 
mitted to tempt or to torture, — is about to 



A TALE. 231 

appear or to approach him. I have heard 
a strange tale of such music being heard ; 
and — Holy Mary be our guide ! did you 
ever hear such sounds?" — " Where — 
what ? — " and the astonished listeners took 
off their hats, unclasped their mantles, 
" opened their lips, and drew in their 
breath," in delicious ecstasy at the sounds 
that floated round them. - " No wonder," 
said a young gallant of the party, " no 
wonder that such sounds harbinger the 
approach of a being so heavenly. She 
deals with the good spirits ; and the bless- 
ed saints alone could send such music 
from above to welcome her. As he spoke, 
all eyes were turned to a figure, which, 
though moving among a groupe of brilliant 
and attractive females, appeared the only 
one among them on whom the eye could 
rest with pure and undivided light and 
love. She did not catch observation — ob- 
servation caught her, and was proud of 
its prize. 

At the approach of a large party of fe- 



^3^ MELMOTH : 

males, there was all that anxious and flat- 
tering preparation among the cavaliers, — 
all that eager arrangement of capas, and 
hats, and plumes, — that characterized the 
manners of a nation still half- feudal, and 
always gallant and chivalrous. These pre- 
liminary movements were answered by 
corresponding ones on the part of the fair 
and fatal host approaching. The creaking 
of their large fans — the tremulous and 
purposely-delayed adjustment of their float- 
ing veils, whose partial concealment flat- 
tered the imagination beyond the most 
fiill and ostentatious disclosure of the 
charms they seemed jealous of — the folds 
of the mantilla, of whose graceful falls, 
and complicated manoeuvres, and coquet- 
tish undulations, the Spanish women 
know how to avail themselves so well — 
all these announced an attack, which the 
cavaliers, according to the modes of gal- 
lantry in that day (1683), were well pre- 
pared to meet and parry. 

" But, amid the bright host that advan- 



A TALE. 233 

ced against them, there was one whose 
arins were not artificial, and the effect of 
whose singular and simple attractions 
made a strong contrast to the studied ar- 
rangements of her associates. If her fan 
moved, it was only to collect air — if she 
arranged her veil, it w^as only to hide her 
face — if she adjusted her mantilla, it was 
but to hide that form, whose exquisite 
symmetry defied the voluminous drapery 
of even that day to conceal it. Men of 
the loosest gallantry fell back as she ap- 
proached, with involuntary awe — the li- 
bertine who looked on her was half-con- 
verted—the susceptible beheld her as one 
who realized that vision of imagination 
that must never be embodied here — and 
the unfortunate as one whose sight alone 
was consolation — the old, as they gazed on 
her, dreamt of their youth—and the young 
for the first time dreamt of love— the only 
love which deserves the name— that which 
purity alone can inspire, and perfect purity 
alone can reward. 



234 MELMOTH : 

*•' As she mingled among the gay groupes 
that filled the place, one might observe a 
certain air that distinguished her from 
every female there, — not by pretension to 
superiority, (of that her unequalled loveli- 
ness must have acquitted her, even to the 
vainest of the groupe), but by an untainted, 
unsophisticated character, diffusing itself 
over look and motion, and even thought — 
turning wildness into grace — giving an em- 
phasis to a single exclamation, that made 
polished sentences sound trifling — for ever 
trespassing against etiquette with vivid and 
fearless enthusiasm, and apologizing the 
next moment with such timid and grace- 
ful repentance, that one doubted whe- 
ther the offence or the apology were most 
delightful. 

" She presented altogether a singular 
contrast to the measured tones, the min- 
cing gait, and the organized uniformity of 
dress, and manner, and look, and feeling, 
of the females about her. The harness of 
art was upon every limb and feature from 



A TALE. 235 

their birth, and its trappings concealed or 
crippled every movement which nature 
had designed for graceful. But in the 
movement of this young female, there was 
a bounding elasticity, a springiness, a luxu- 
riant and conscious vitality, that made eve- 
ry action the expression of thought ; and 
then, as she shrunk from the disclosure, 
made it the more exquisite interpreter of 
feeling. There was around her a mingled 
hght of innocence and majesty, never 
united but in her sex. Men may long re- 
tain, and even confirm, the character of 
power which nature has stamped on their 
frames, but they very soon forfeit their 
claim to the expression of innocence. 

" Amid the vivid and eccentric graces 
of a form that seemed like a comet in the 
world of beauty, bound by no laws, or by 
laws that she alone understood and obeyed, 
there was a shade of melancholy, that, to a 
superficial observer, seemed transitory and 
assumed, perhaps as a studied relief to the 
glowing colours of a picture so brilliant. 



236 MELMOTH : 

but which, to other eyes, announced, that 
with all the energies of intellect occupied, 
— with all the instincts of sense excited, — 
the heart had as yet no inmate, and want- 
ed one. 

" The groupe who had been conversing 
about the stranger, felt their attention ir- 
resistibly attracted by this object ; and the 
low murmur of their fearful whispers was 
converted into broken exclamations of de- 
light and wonder, as the fair vision passed 
them. She had not long done so, w^hen 
the stranger was seen slowly returning, 
seeming, as before, known to all, but 
knowing none. As the female party turn- 
ed, they encountered him. His emphatic 
glance selected and centered in one alone. 
She saw him too, recognized him, and, ut- 
tering a wild shriek, fell on the earth sense- 
less. 

" The tumult occasioned by this acci- 
dent, which so many witnessed, and none 
knew the cause of, for some moments drew 
off the attention of all from the stranger — 



A TALE. 237 

all were occupied either in assisting or in- 
quiring after the lady who had fainted. 
She w^as borne to her carriage by more as- 
sistants than she needed or wished for — 
and just as she was hfted into it, the voice 
of some one near her uttered the word 
" Immalee !" She recognized the voice, 
and turned, with a look of anguish and 
a feeble cry, towards the direction from 
which it proceeded. Those around her 
had heard the sound, — but as they did not 
understand its meaning, or know to whom 
it was addressed, they ascribed the lady's 
emotion to indisposition, and hastened to 
place her in her carriage. It drove away, 
but the stranger pursued its course with 
his eyes — the company dispersed, he re- 
mained alone — twilight faded into dark- 
ness — he appeared not to notice the change 
— a few still continued lingering at the 
extremity of the walk to mark him — they 
were wholly unmarked by him. 

" One w^ho rem.ained the longest said, 
that he saw him use the action of one who 



238 MELMOTH : 

wipes away a tear hastily. To his eyes 
the tear of penitence was denied for ever. 
Could this have been the tear of passion ? 
If so, how much woe did it announce to 
its object ! 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

Oh what was love made for, if 'tis not the same 
Through joy and through torment, through glory 

and shame ! 
1 know not, I ask not, what guilt's in thine heart, 
I but know^ I must love thee, whatever thou art. 

MooRE. 

The next day, the young female who 
had excited so much interest the preced- 
ing evening, was to quit Madrid, to pass 
a few weeks at a villa belonging to her fa- 
mily, at a short distance from the city. 
That family, including all the company, 
consisted of her mother Donna Clara di 
AHaga, the wife of a wealthy merchant, 



210 MELMOTH . 

who was monthly expected to return from 
the Indies; her brother Don Fernan di 
AHaga, and several servants; for these 
wealthy citizens, conscious of their opu- 
lence and formerly higli descent, piqued 
themselves upon travelling with no less 
ceremony and pompous tardiness than ac- 
companied the progress of a grandee. So 
the old square-built, lumbering carriage, 
moved on like a hearse ; the coachman sat 
fast asleep on the box ; and the six black 
horses crawled at a pace like the progress 
of time when he visits affliction. Beside 
the carriage rode Fernan di Aliaga and 
his servants, with umbrellas and huge 
spectacles; and within it were placed 
Donna Clara and her daughter. The in- 
terior of this arrangement was the coun- 
terpart of its external appearance, — -all an- 
nounced dullness, formality, and withering 
monotony. 

" Donna Clara was a woman of a cold 
and grave temper, with all the solemnity 
of a Spaniard, and all the austerity of a 



A TALE. 241 

bigot. Don Fernan presented that union 
of fiery passion and saturnic manners not 
unusual among Spaniards. His dull and 
selfish pride was wounded by the recollec- 
tion of his family having been in trade ; 
and, looking on the unrivalled beauty of 
his sister as a possible means of his obtain- 
ing an alliance with a family of rank, he 
viewed her with that kind of selfish parti- 
ality as little honourable to him who feels 
it, as to her who was its object. 

" And it was amid such beings that the 
vivid and susceptible Immalee, the daugh- 
ter of nature, " the gay creature of the 
elements," was doomed to wither away 
the richly. coloured and exquisitely. scented 
flower of an existence so un genially trans- 
planted. Her singular destiny seemed to 
have removed her from a physical wilder- 
ness, to place her in a moral one. And, 
perhaps, her last state was worse than her 
first. 

" It is certain that the gloomiest pro- 
spect presents nothing so chilling as the as- 

VOL. III. L 



242 MELMOTll : 

pect of human faces, in which we try in 
vain to trace one corresponding expression; 
and the sterility of nature itself is luxury 
compared to the sterility of human hearts, 
which communicate all the desolation they 
feel. 

" They had been some time on their 
way, when Donna Clara, who never spoke 
till after a long preface of silence, perhaps 
to give what she said a weight it might 
otherwise have wanted, said, with oracular 
deliberation, " Daughter, I hear you faint- 
ed in the public walks last night — did you 
meet with any thing that surprised or ter- 
rified you?" — " No, INIadam."— " What, 
then, could be the cause of the emotion 
you betrayed at the sight, as I am told — 
I know nothing — of a personage of extra- 
ordinary demeanour?" — " Oh, I cannot, 
dare not tell !" said Isidora, dropping her 
veil over her burning cheek. Then the ir- 
repressible ingenuousness of her former na- 
ture, rushing over her heart and frame like a 
flood, she sunk from the cushion on which 



A TALE. 243 

she sat at Donna Clara's feet, exclaiming, 
" Oh, mother, I will tell you all !"— " No!" 
said Donna Clara, repelling her with a 
cold feeling of offended pride ; " no ! — 
there is no occasion. I seek no confidence 
Avithheld and bestowed in the same breath; 
nor do 1 like these violent emotions— they 
are unmaidenly. Your duties as a child are 
easily understood — they are merely perfect 
obedience, profound submission, and un- 
broken silence, except when you are ad- 
dressed by me, your brother, or Father 
Jose. Surely no duties were ever more 
easily performed — rise, then, and cease to 
weep. If your conscience disturbs you, 
accuse yourself to Father Jose, who will, 
no doubt, inflict a penance proportioned 
to the enormity of your offence. I trust 
only he will not err on the side of indul- 
gence." And so saying, Donna Clara, 
who had never uttered so long a speech 
before, reclined back on her cushion, and 
began to tell her beads with much devo- 
tion, till the arrival of the carriage at its 



244 MEI.MOTH : 

destination awoke her from a profound and 
peaceful sleep. 

" It was near noon, and dinner in a cool 
low apartment near the garden awaited 
only the approach of Father Jose, the con- 
fessor. He arrived at length. He was a 
man of an imposing figure, mounted on a 
stately mule. His features, at first view, 
bore strong traces of thought; but, on 
closer examination, those traces seemed ra- 
ther the result of physical conformation, 
than of any intellectual exercise. The 
channel was open, but the stream had not 
been directed there. However, though 
defective in education, and somewhat nar- 
row in mind, Father Jose was a good 
man, and meant well. He loved power, 
and he was devoted to the interests of the 
Catholic church; but he had frequently 
doubts, (which he kept to himself), of 
the absolute necessity of celibacy, and he 
felt' (strange effect!) a chill all over him 
when he heard of the fires of an auto da 
fe. Dinner was concluded; the fruit and 



A TALE. 245 

wine, the latter untasted by the females, 
were on the table, — the choicest of them 
placed before Father Jose, — when Isidora, 
after a profound reverence to her mother and 
thepriest, retired, asusual, to her apartment. 
Donna Clara turned to the confessor wuth 
a look that demanded to be answered. " It 
is her hour for siesta," said the priest, help- 
ing himself to a bunch of grapes. " No, 
Father, no!" said Donna Clara sadly ; " her 
maid informs me she does not retire to 
sleep. She was, alas ! too w^ell accustomed 
to that burning climate where she w^as lost 
in her infancy, to feel the heat as a Chris- 
tian should. No, she retires neither to 
pray or sleep, after the devout custom of 

Spanish w^omen, but, I fear, to" " To 

do what r" said the priest, with horror in 
his voice — " To think, I fear," said Donna 
Clara ; " for often I observe, on her return, 
the traces of tears on her face. I tremble. 
Father, lest those tears be shed for that 
heathen land, that region of Satan, where 
her youth was past." — " I'll give her a pe... 



246 MELMOTH : 

nance," said Father Jose, " that will save 
her the trouble of shedding tears on the 
score of memory at least — these grapes are 
delicious." — " But, Father," pursued Don- 
na Clara, with all the weak but restless 
anxiety of a superstitious mind, " though 
you have made me easy on that subject, I 
still am wretched. Oh, Father, how she 
will talk sometimes ! — like a creature self- 
taught, that needed neither director or 
confessor but her own heart." — '* How 1" 
exclaimed Father Jose, " need neither 
confessor or director! — she must be beside 
herself" — " Oh, Father," continued Donna 
Clara, "she will say things in her mild 
and unanswerable manner, that, armed 
with all my authority, I" " How- 
how is that?" said the priest, in a tone of 
severity — " does she deny any of the tenets 
of the holy Catholic church ?"— *« No ! no ! 
no !" said the terrified Donna Clara cross- 
ing herself " How then ?"— " Why, she 
speaks in a manner in which I never heard 
you, reverend Father, or any of the reve- 



A TALE. 247 

rend brethren, whom my devotion to the 
holy church has led me to hear, speak be- 
fore. It is in vain I tell her that true re- 
ligion consists in hearing mass — in going 
to confession — in performing penance — in 
observing the fasts and vigils — in under- 
going mortification and abstinence — in be- 
lieving all that tlie holy church teaches — 
and hating, detesting, abhorring, and 

execrating " " Enough, daughter — 

enough," said Father Jose ; " there can be 
no doubt of the orthodoxy of your creed ?" 
— " I trust not, holy Father," said the an- 
xious Donna Clara. " 1 were an infidel 
to doubt it," interposed the priest ; " I 
might as well deny this fruit to be ex- 
quisite, or this glass of Malaga to be 
worthy the table of his Holiness the Pope, 
if he feasted all the Cardinals. But 
how, daughter, as touching the suppos- 
ed or apprehended defalcations in Don- 
na Isidora's creed ?" — " Holy Father, I 
have already explained my own religious 
sentiments." — '* Yes — yes — we have had 



248 MELMOTH : 

enough of them ; now for your daughter's." 
— " She will sometimes say," said Don- 
na Clara, bursting into tears — " she will 
say, but never till greatly urged, that 
religion ought to be a system whose 
spirit was universal love. Do you un- 
derstand any thing of that. Father ?" — 
" Humph — humph !" — *' That it must be 
something that bound all who professed it 
to habits of benevolence, gentleness, and 
humility, under every difference of creed 
and of form." — " Humph — humph!" — ** Fa- 
ther," said Donna Clara, a little piqued at 
the apparent indifference with which Fa- 
ther Jose listened to her communications, 
and resolved to rouse him by some terri- 
fic evidence of the truth of her suspicions, 
" Father, I have heard her dare to ex- 
press a hope that the heretics in the train 
of the English ambassador might not be 

everlastingly" " Hush !— I must not 

hear such sounds, or it might be my duty 
to take severer notice of these lapses. 
However, daughter," continued Father 



A TALE. 240 

Jose, " thus far I will venture for your 
consolation. As sure as this fine peach is 
in my hand — another, if you please— and 
as sure as I shall finish this other glass of 
Malaga"— here a long pause attested the 
fulfilment of the pledge — " so sure"— and 
Father Jose turned the inverted glass on 
the table — " JMadonna Isidora has — has the 
elements of a Christian in her, however 
improbable it may seem to you — I swear 
it to you by the habit I wear ; — for the 

rest, a little penance — a 1 shall consider 

of it. And now, daughter, when your 
son Don Fernan has finished his siesta, — 
as there is no reason to suspect him of re- 
tiring to think, — please to inform him I 
am ready to continue the game of chess 
which we commenced four months ago. I 
have pushed my pawn to the last square 
but one, and the next step gives me a 
queen." — " Has the game continued so 
long?"^ said Donna Clara. " Long!" re- 
peated the priest, " Aye, and may con- 
tinue much longer — we have never played. 

L 2 



250 MELMOTH : 

more than three hours a-day on an ave- 
rage." 

'' He then retired to sleep, and the eve- 
ning was passed by the priest and Don 
Fernan, in profound silence at their chess 
— by Donna Clara, in silence equally pro- 
found, at her tapestry — and by Isidora at 
the casement, v^hich the intolerable heat 
had compelled them to leave open, in gazing 
at the lustre of the moon, and inhaling the 
odour of the tube-rose, and watching the 
expanding leaves of the night-blowing ce- 
reus. The physical luxuries of her former 
existence seemed renewed by these objects. 
The intense blue of the heavens, and the 
burning planet that stood in sole glory in 
their centre, might have vied with all that 
lavish and refulgent opulence of light in 
which nature arrays an Indian night. Be- 
low, too, there were flowers and fragrance; 
colours, like veiled beauty, mellowed, not 
hid ; and dews that hung on every leaf, 
trembling and sparkling like the tears of 
spirits, that wept to take leave of the 
flowers. 



A TALE. 251 

** The breeze, indeed, though redolent 
of the breath of the orange blossom, the 
jasmine, and the rose, had not the rich and 
balmy odour that scents the Indian air by- 
night. 

" Except this, what was not there that 

might not renew the delicious dream of 

her former existence, and make her believe 

herself again the queen of that fairy isle ? — 

One image was wanting — an image whose 

absence made that paradise of islands, and 

all the odorous and flowery luxury of a 

moonlight garden in Spain, alike deserts 

to her. In her heart alone could she hope 

to meet that image, — to herself alone did 

she dare to repeat his name, and those 

wild and sweet songs of his country * 

which he had taught her in his happier 

moods. And so strange was the contrast 

between her former and present existence, 

* Ireland. 



252 MELMOTH : 

— so subdued was she by constraint and 
coldness, — so often had she been told that 
every thing she did, said, or thought, was 
wrong, — that she began to yield up the 
evidences of her senses, to avoid the per- 
petual persecutions of teazing and impe- 
rious mediocrity, and considered the ap- 
pearance of the stranger as one of those vi- 
sions that formed the trouble and joy of 
her dreamv and illusive existence. 

" I am surprised, sister," said Fernan, 
whom Father Jose's gaining his queen had 
put in unusually bad humour — " I am 
surprised that you never busy yourself, as 
young maidens use, at your needle, or in 
some quaint niceties of your sex." — " Or 
in reading some devout book," said Donna 
Clara, raising her eyes one moment from 
her tapestry, and then dropping them 
again ; *• there is the legend of that * Polish 

* I have read the legend of this Polish saint, which 
is circulated in Dublin, and find recorded among the 
indisputable proofs of his vocation, that he infallibly 



A TALE. 253 

saint, born, like hei^ in a land of darkness, 

yet chosen to be a vessel 1 have forgot 

his name, reverend Father." — " Check to 
the king," said Father Jose in reply. 
" You regard nothing but watching a 
few flowers, or hanging over your lute, or 
gazing at the moon," continued Fernan, 
vexed alike at the success of his antagonist 
and the silence of Isidora. " She is emi- 
^ nent in alms-deeds and works of charity," 
said the good-natured priest. " I was 
summoned to a miserable hovel near your 
villa, Madonna Clara, to a dying sinner, a 
beggar rotting on rotten straw !" — " Jesu !" 
cried Donna Clara with involuntary hor- 
ror, " I washed the feet of thirteen beg- 
gars, on my knees in my father's hall, the 
week before my marriage with her honour- 
ed father, and I never could abide the 
sight of a beggar since." — " Associations 
are sometimes indelibly strong," said the 



swooned if an indecent expression was utt^ed in his 
presence— K-'Aew in his nurse's arms! 



254 MELMOTH : 

priest drily ; — then he added, " I went as 
was my duty, but your daughter was there 
before me. She had gone uncalled, and 
was uttering the sweetest words of conso- 
lation from a homily, which a certain poor 
priest, who shall be nameless, had lent her 
from his humble store." 

" Isidora blushed at this anonymous 
vanity, while she mildly smiled or wept at 
the harassings of Don Fernan, and the 
heartless austerity of her mother. " I heard 
her as I entered the hovel ; and, by the 
habit I wear, I paused on the threshold 

with delight. Her first words were 

Check-mate !" he exclaimed, forgetting 
his homily in his triumph, and pointing, 
with appealing eye, and emphatic finger, 
to the desperate state of his adversary's 
king. " That was a very extraordinary 
exclamation!" said the literal Donna Clara, 
who had never raised her eyes from her 
work. — " I did not think my daughter was 
so fond of chess as to burst into the house 
of a dying beggar with such a phrase in 



A TALE. 255 

her mouth." — " It was I said it, Madonna," 
said the priest, reverting to his game, on 
which he hung with soul and eye intent 
on his recent victory. " Holy saints!" said 
Donna Clara, still more and more perplex- 
ed, " I thought the usual phrase on such 
occasions was yax vobiscum, or" Be- 
fore Father Jose could reply, a shriek from 
Isidora pierced the ears of every one. All 
gathered round her in a moment, reinforc- 
ed by four female attendants and two pages, 
whom the unusual sound had summoned 
from the antichamber. Isidora had not 
fainted ; she still stood among them pale 
as death, speechless, her eye wandering 
round the groupe that encircled her, with- 
out seeming to distinguish them. But she 
retained that presence of mind which never 
deserts woman where a secret is to be 
guarded, and she neither pointed with fin- 
ger, or glanced with eye, towards the case- 
ment, where the cause of her alarm had 
presented itself. Pressed with a thousand 
questions, she appeared incapable of an- 



256 MELMOTH : 

svvering them, and, declining assistance, 
leaned against the casement for support. 

*' Donna Clara was now advancing with 
measured step to proffer a bottle of curious 
essences, which she drew from a pocket of 
a depth beyond calculation, when one of 
the female attendants, aware of her favour- 
ite habits, proposed reviving her by the 
scent of the flowers that clustered round 
the frame of the casement ; and collecting 
a handful of roses, offered them to Isidora. 
The sight and scent of these beautiful 
flowers, revived the former associations of 
Isidora ; and, waving away her attendant, 
she exclaimed, " There are no roses like 
those which surrounded me when he be- 
held me first !" — " He ! — who, daughter?'* 
said the alarmed Donna Clara. " Speak, 
I charge you, sister," said the irritable Fer- 
nan, " to whom do you allude ?" — " She 
raves," said the priest, whose habitual pe- 
netration discovered there was a secret, — 
and whose professional jealousy decided 
that no one, not mother or brother, should 



A TALE. 257 

share it with him ; " she raves — ye are to 
blame — forbear to hang round and to ques- 
tion her. Madonna, retire to rest, and the 
saints watch round your bed!" Isidora, 
bending thankfully for this permission, re- 
tired to her apartment; and father Jose 
for an hour appeared to contend with the 
suspicious fears of Donna Clara, and the 
sullen irritability of Fernan, merely that 
he might induce them, in the heat of con- 
troversy, to betray all they knew or dread- 
ed, that he might strengthen his own con 
jectures, and establish his own power by 
the discovery. 

" Scire volunt secreta domus, et inde timeri." 

And this desire is not only natural but 
necessary, in a being from whose heart his 
profession has torn every tie of nature and 
of passion ; and if it generates mahgnity, 
ambition, and the wish for mischief, it is 
the system, not the individual, we must 
blame. 



258 MELMOTH : 

" Madonna," said the Father, " you are • 
always urging your zeal for the Catholic 
church — and you, Senhor, are always re- 
minding me of the honour of your family 
— I am anxious for both — and how can the 
interests of both be better secured than by 
Donna Isidora taking the veil ?" — " The 
wish of my soul !'' cried Donna Clara, 
clasping her hands, and closing her eyes, 
as if she witnessed her daughter's apotheo- 
sis. " I will never hear of it. Father," 
said Fernan ; " my sister's beauty and 
wealth entitle me to claim alliance wij;h 
the first families in Spain — their baboon 
shapes and copper- coloured visages might 
be redeemed for a century by such a graft 
on the stock, and the blood of which they 
boast would not be impoverished by a 
transfusion of the aurum potabile of ours 
into it."—" You forget, son," said the 
priest, " the extraordinary circumstances 
attendant on the early part of your sister's 
life. There are many of our Catholic no- 
bility who would rather see the black blood 



A TALE. 259 

of the banished Moors, or the proscribed 
Jews, flow in the veins of their descend- 
ants, than that of one who" Here a 

mysterious whisper drew from Donna 
Clara a shudder of distress and consterna- 
tion, and from her son an impatient mo- 
tion of angry increduHty. " I do not credit 
a word of it," said the latter ; " you wish 
that my sister should take the veil, and 
therefore you credit and circulate the mon- 
strous invention." — " Take heed, son, I 
conjure you," said the trembhng Donna 
Clara. " Take you heed, Madam, that 
you do not sacrifice your daughter to an 
unfounded and incredible fiction." — " Fic- 
tion !" repeated Father Jose — " Senhor, I 
forgive your illiberal reflections on me, — 
but let me remind you, that the same im- 
munity will not be extended to the insult 
you offer to the Catholic faith." — " Reve- 
rend Father," said the terrified Fernan, 
" the Catholic church has not a more de- 
voted and unworthy professor on earth 
than myself" — " I do believe the latter," 



260 MELMOTH ; 

said the priest. " You admit all that the 
holy church teaches to be irrefragably 
true?"—" To be sure I do."—" Then you 
must admit that the islands in the Indian 
seas are particularly under the influence 
of the devil ?" — " I do, if the church re- 
quires me so to believe." — " And that he 
possessed a peculiar sway over that island 
where your sister was lost in her infancy?" 
— " I do not see how that follows," said 
Fernan, making a sudden stand at this 
premise of the Sorites. " Not see how that 
follows!" repeated Father Jose, crossing 
himself; 

" Excaecavit oculos eorum ne viderent." 

But why waste I my Latin and logic on 
thee, who art incapable of both ? INJark 
me, I will use but one unanswerable argu- 
ment, the which whoso gains jyeth is a — 
gainsayer — that's all. The Inquisition at 
Goa knows the truth of what I have as- 
serted, and who will dare deny it now ?" 



A TALE. 261 

— " Not 1 ! — not I !" exclaimed Donna 
Clara; "nor, I am sure, will this stub- 
born boy. Son, I adjure you, make 
haste to believe what the reverend Fa- 
ther has told you." — " I am believing as 
fast as 1 can," answered Don Fernan, in 
the tone of one who is reluctantly swal- 
lowing a distasteful mess; " but my 
faith will be choaked if you don't allow it 
time to swallow. As for digestion," he 
muttered, " let that come w^hen it pleases 
God." — " Daughter," said the priest, who 
w^ell knew the viollia tempora fundi, and 
saw that the sullen and angry Fernan 
could not well bear more at present ; 
" daughter, it is enough — we must lead 
with gentleness those whose steps find 
stumbling-blocks in the paths of grace. 
Pray with me, daughter, that your son's 
eyes may yet be opened to the glory and 
felicity of his sister's vocation to a state 
where the exhaustless copiousness of divine 
benignity places the happy inmates above 
all those mean and mundane anxieties, 
those petty and local wants, which 



262 MELMOTH : 

Ah! — hem — verily I feel some of those 
wants myself at this moment. I am hoarse 
with speaking; and the intense heat of 
this night hath so exhausted my strength, 
that methinks the wing of a partridge 
would be no unseasonable refreshment." 

" At a sign from Donna Clara, a salver 
with wine appeared, and a partridge that 
might have provoked the French prelate 
to renew his meal once more, spite of his 
horror of toujours perdrioo, " See, daugh- 
ter, see how much I am exhausted in this 
distressing controversy — well may I say, 
the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up." 
— " Then you and the zeal of the house 
will soon be quit^'"' muttered Fernan as 
he retired. And drawing the folds of his 
mantle over his shoulder, he threw a glance 
of wonder at the happy facility with which 
the priest discussed the wings and breast 
of his favourite bird, — whispering alter- 
nately words of admonition to Donna Clara, 
and muttering something about the omis- 
sion of pimento and lemon. 

" Father," said Don Fernan, stalking 



A TALE. 263 

back from the door, and fronting the priest 
— " Father, I have a favour to ask of you." 
— " Glad, were it in my power to comply 
with it," said Father Jose, turning over 
the skeleton of the fowl ; " but you see 
here is only the thigh, and that somewhat 
bare." — " It is not of that I speak or think, 
reverend Father," said Fernan, with a 
smile ; " I have but to request, that you 
will not renew the subject of my sister's vo- 
cation till the return of my father." — " Cer- 
tainly not, son, certainly not. Ah ! you 
know the time to ask a favour — you know 
I never could refuse you at a moment like 
this, when my heart is warmed, and sof- 
tened, and expanded, by — by — by the evi- 
dences of your contrition and humiliation, 
and all that your devout mother, and your 
zealous spiritual friend, could hope or wish 
for. In truth, it overcomes me — these 
tears — I do not often weep but on occa- 
sions like these, and then I weep abun-' 
dantly, and am compelled to recruit my 
lack of moisture thus." — " Fetch more 



264 MELMOTH : 

wine," said Donna Clara. — The order was 
obeyed. — " Good night, Father," said Don 
Fernan. — " The saints watch round you, 
my son ! Oh I am exhausted ! — I sink in 
this struggle ! The night is hot, and re- 
quires wine to slake my thirst — and wine 
is a provocative, and requires food to take 
away its deleterious and damnable quali- 
ties — and food, especially partridge, which 
is a hot and stimulative nutritive, requires 
drink again to absorb or neutralize its ex- 
citing qualities. Observe me, Donna Cla- 
ra — I speak as to the learned. There is 
stimulation, and there is absorption ; the'' 
causes of which are manifold, and the ef- 
fects such as 1 am not bound to tell 

you at present." — " Reverend Father," 
said the admiring Donna Clara, not guess- 
ing, in the least, from what source all this 
eloquence flowed, " I trespassed on your 
time merely to ask a favour also." — " Ask 
and 'tis granted," said Father Jose, with a 
protrusion of his foot as proud as that of 
Sixtus himself " It is merely to know. 



A TALE. 265 

will not all the inhabitants of those accurs- 
ed Indian isles be damned everlastingly?" 
— " Damned everlastingly, and without 
doubt," returned the priest. " Now my 
mind is easy," rejoined the lady, " and I 
shall sleep in peace to-night." 

" Sleep, however, did not visit her so 
soon as she expected, for an hour after she 
knocked at Father Jose's door, repeating, 
" Damned to all eternity. Father, did you 
not say ?" — " Be damned to all eternity !" 
said the priest, tossing on his feverish bed, 
and dreaming, in the intervals of his trou- 
bled sleep, of Don Fernan coming to con- 
fession with a drawn sword, and Donna 
Clara with a bottle of Xeres in her hand, 
which she swallowed at a draught, while 
his parched lips were gaping for a drop 
in vain, — and of the Inquisition being 
established in an island off the coast of 
Bengal, and a huge partridge seated wdth a 
cap on at the end of a table covered with 
black, as chief Inquisitor, — and various and 

VOL. IIL M 



266 MELMOTH : 

monstrous chimeras, the abortive births of 
repletion and indigestion. 

" Donna Clara, catching only the last 
words, returned to her apartment with light 
step and gladdened heart, and, full of pious 
consolation, renewed her devotions before 
the image of the virgin in her apartment, 
at each side of whose niche two wax ta- 
pers were burning, till the cool morning 
breeze made it possible for her to retire 
with some hope of rest. 

" Isidora, in her apartment, was equally 
sleepless ; and she, too, had prostrated her- 
self before the sacred image, but with dif- 
ferent thoughts. Her feverish and dreamy 
existence, composed of wild and irrecon- 
cileable contrasts between the forms of the 
present, and the visions of .the past, — the 
diiFerence between all that she felt within, 
and all that she saw around her, — between 
the impassioned life of recollection, and 
the monotonous one of realitv, — was be- 
coming too much for a heart bursting with 



A TALE. 267 

undirected sensibilities, and a head giddy 
from vicissitudes that would have deeply- 
tried much firmer faculties. 

" She remained for some time repeating 
the usual number of ave's, to which she 
added the litany of the Virgin, without 
any corresponding impulses of solace or 
illumination, till at length, feeling that 
her prayers were not the expressions of 
her heart, and dreading this heterodoxy 
of the heart more than the violation of the 
ritual, she ventured to address the image 
of the Virgin in language of her own. 

" Mild and beautiful Spirit !" she cried, 
prostrating herself before the figure — 
" you whose lips alone have smiled on 
me since I reached your Christian land, 
— you whose countenance I have some- 
times imagined to belong to those who 
dwelt in the stars of my own Indian sky, 
— hear me, and be not angry with me ! 
Let me lose all feeling of my present ex- 
istence, or all memory of the past ! Why 
do my former thoughts return? They 



268 MELMOTH : 

once made me happy, now they are thorns 
in my heart ! Why do they retain their 
power since their nature is altered? 
I cannot be what I was — Oh, let me 
then no longer remember it ! Let me, 
if possible, see, feel, and think as those a- 
round me do ! Alas ! I feel it is much 
easier to descend to their level than to raise 
them to mine. Time, constraint, and dull- 
ness, may do much for me, but what time 
could ever operate such a change on them ! 
It would be like looking for the pearls at 
the bottom of the stagnant ponds which 
art has dug in their gardens. No, mother 
of the Deity ! divine and mysterious wo- 
man, no! — they never shall see another throb 
of my burning heart. Let it consume in its 
own fires before a drop of their cold com- 
passion extinguishes them ! Mother divine ! 
are not burning hearts, then, worthiest of 
thee ? — and does not the love of nature as- 
similate itself to the love of God ! True, 
we may love without religion, but can we 
be religious without love ? Yet, mother 



A TALE. 269 

divine ! dry up my heart, since there is no 
longer a channel for its streams to flow 
through !-^or turn all those streams into 
the river, narrow and cold, that holds its 
course on to eternity ! Why should I 
think or feel, since life requires only du- 
ties that no feeling suggests, and apathy 
that no reflection disturbs ? Here let me 
rest ! — it is indeed the end of enjoyment, 
but it is also the end of suffering ; and a 
thousand tears are a price too dear for the 
single smile which is sold for them in the 
commerce of life. Alas ! it is better to 
wander in perpetual sterility than to be 
tortured with the remembrance of flowers 
that have withered, and odours that have 
died for ever." Then a gush of uncon- 
troulable emotion overwhelming her, she 
again bowed before the Virgin. " Yes, 
help me to banish every image from my 
soul but his — his alone ! Let my heart be 
like this lonely apartment, consecrated by 
the presence of one sole image, and illumi- 
nated only by that light which affection 



270 MELMOTH : 

kindles before the object of its adoration, 
and worships it by for ever !" 

" In an agony of enthusiasm she conti- 
nued to kneel before the image; and when 
she rose, the silence of her apartment, and 
the calm smile of the celestial figure, seem- 
ed at once a contrast and a reproach to 
this excess of morbid indulgence. That 
smile appeared to her like a frown. It is 
certain, that in agitation we can feel no so- 
lace from features that express only pro- 
found tranquillity. We would rather wish 
corresponding agitation, even hostility — 
any thing but a calm that neutralizes and 
absorbs us. It is the answer of the rock 
to the wave — ^we collect, foam, dash, and 
disperse ourselves against it, and retire 
broken, shattered, and murmuring to the 
echoes of our disappointment. 

" From the tranquil and hopeless aspect 
of the divinity, smiling on the misery it 
neither consoles or relieves, and intimating 
in that smile the profound and pulseless 
apathy of inaccessible elevation, coldly 



A TALE. 271 

hinting that humanity must cease to be, 
before it can cease to suffer — from this the 
sufferer rushed for consolation to nature, 
whose ceaseless agitation seems to corre- 
spond with the vicissitudes of human des- 
tiny and the emotions of the human heart — 
whose alternation of storms and calms, — of 
clouds and sun-light, — of terrors and de- 
lights — seems to keep a kind of myste- 
rious measure of ineffable harmony with 
that instrument whose chords are doomed 
alternately to the thrill of agony and rap- 
ture, till the hand of death sweeps over all 
the strings, and silences them for ever. — 
With such a feeling, Isidora leaned against 
her casement, gasped for a breath of air, 
which the burning night did not grant, and 
thought how, on such a night in her Indian 
isle, she could plunge into the stream shaded 
by her beloved tamarind, or even venture 
amid the still and silvery waves of the 
ocean, laughing at the broken beams of 
the moonlight, as her light form dimpled 
the waters — snatching with smiling de- 



272 MELMOTH : 

light the brilliant, tortuous, and enamelled 
shells that seemed to woo her white foot- 
steps as she turned to the shore. Now 
all was different. The duties of the 
bath had been performed, but with a 
parade of soaps, perfumes, and, above all, 
attendants, who, though of her own sex, 
gave Isidora an unspeakable degree of dis- 
gust at the operation. The sponges and 
odours sickened her unsophisticated senses, 
and the presence of another human being 
seemed to close up every pore. 

" She had felt no refreshment from the 
bath, or from her prayers — she sought it 
at her casement, but there also in vain. 
The moon was as bright as the sun of 
colder climates, and the heavens were all 
in a blaze with her light. She seemed 
like a gallant vessel ploughing the bright 
and trackless ocean alone, while a thousand 
stars burned in the wake of her quiet glo- 
ry, like attendant vessels pursuing their 
course to undiscovered worlds, and point- 
ing them out to the mortal eye that lin- 



A TALE. 273 

gered on their course, and loved their 
light. 

" Such was the scene above, but what 
a contrast to the scene below ! The glo- 
rious and unbounded light fell on an in- 
closure of stiff parterres, cropped myrtles 
and orange-trees in tubs, and quadrangular 
ponds, and bowers of trellis-work, and na- 
ture tortured a thousand ways, and indig- 
nant and repulsive under her tortures eve- 
ry way. 

" Isidora looked and wept. Tears had 
now become her language when alone — it 
was a language she dared not utter before 
her family. Suddenly she saw one of the 
moonlight alleys darkened by an approach- 
ing figure. It advanced — it uttered her 
name — the name she remembered and lov- 
ed — the name of Immalee ! " Ah !" she 
exclaimed, leaning from the casement, " is 
there then one who recognizes me by that 
name :" — " It is only by that name I can 
address you," answered the voice of the 
stranger — " I have not yet the honour of 

M 2 



274 3IELMOTH : 

being acquainted with the name your 
Christian friends have given you." — " They 
call me Isidora, but do you still call me 
Immalee. But how is it," she added in a 
trembling voice, — her fears for his safety 
overcoming all her sudden and innocent 
joy at his sight — " how is it that you are 
here? — here, where no human being is 
ever beheld but the inmates of the man- 
sion ?— how did you cross the garden wall? 
— how did you come from India ? Oh ! 
retire for your own safety ! I am among 
those whom 1 cannot trust or love. My 
mother is severe — my brother is violent. 
Oh ! how did you obtain entrance into the 
garden ? — How is it," she added in a bro* 
ken voice, " that you risk so much to see 
one whom you have forgotten so long ?" 
— " Fair Neophyte, beautiful Christian," 
answered the stranger, with a diaboli- 
cal sneer, " be it known to you that 
I regard bolts, and bars, and walls, as 
much as I did the breakers and rocks 
of your Indian isle — that I can go 



A TALE. ^ 275 

where, and retire when I please, with- 
out leave asked or taken of your bro- 
ther's mastiffs, or Toledos, or spring-guns, 
and in utter defiance of your mother's ad- 
vanced guard of duennas, armed in spec- 
tacles, and flanked with a double ammuni- 
tion of rosaries, with beads as large as " 

" Hush ! — hush ! — do not utter such im- 
pious sounds — I am taught to revere those 
holy things. But is it you ? — and did I 
indeed see you last night, or was it a 
thought such as visits me in dreams, and 
wraps me again in visions of that beauti- 
ful and blessed isle where first I-; — Oh 
that I never had seen you !" — " Lovely 
Christian ! be reconciled to your horrible 
destiny. You saw me last night — I cross- 
ed your path twice when you were spark- 
ling among the brightest and most beauti- 
ful of all Madrid. It was me you saw — I 
ri vetted your eye — I transfixed your slen- 
der frame as with a flash of lightning — 
you fell fainting and withered under my 
burning glance. It was me you saw — 



276 MELMOTH : 

me, the disturber of your angelical exis- 
tence in that isle of paradise — the hunter 
of your form and your steps, even amid the 
complicated and artificial tracks in which 
you have been concealed by the false forms 
of the existence you have embraced!" — 
" Embraced ! — Oh no ! they seized on me 
— they dragged me here — they made me 
a Christian. They told me all was for my 
salvation, for my happiness here and here- 
after — and I trust it will, for I have been 
so miserable ever since, that I ought to be 
happy somewhere." — " Happy," repeated 
the stranger wdth his withering sneer — 
" and are you not happy now ? The de- 
licacy of your exquisite frame is no longer 
exposed to the rage of the elements — the 
fine and feminine luxury of your taste is 
solicited and indulged by a thousand in- 
ventions of art — your bed is of down — your 
chamber hung with tapestry. Whether 
the moon be bright or dark, six w^ax ta- 
pers burn in your chamber all night. 
Whether the skies be bright or cloudy, — 



A TALE. 277 

whether the earth be clothed with flowers, 
or deformed with tempests,— the art of the 
limner has surrounded you with " a new 
heaven and a new earth ;" and you may 
bask in suns that never set, while the hea- 
vens are dark to other eyes, — and luxuriate 
amid landscapes and flowers, while half 
your fellow-creatures are perishing amid 
snows and tempests !" (Such was the over- 
flowing acrimony of this being, that he 
could not speak of the beneficence of na- 
ture, or the luxuries of art, without inter- 
weaving something that seemed like a sa- 
tire on, or a scorn of both.) " You also 
have intellectual beings to converse with 
instead of the chirpings of loxias, and the 
chatterings of monkeys." — " I have not 
found the conversation I encounter much 
more intelhgible or significant," murmured 
Isidora, but the stranger did not appear to 
hear her. " You are surrounded by every 
thhig that can flatter the senses, intoxicate 
the imagination, or expand the heart. All 
these indulgences must make you forget 



278 MELMOTH : 

the voluptuous but unrefined liberty of 
your former existence." — " The birds in 
my mother's cages," said Isidora, " are for 
ever pecking at their gilded bars, and 
trampling on the clear seeds and limpid 
water they are supplied with — would they 
not rather rest in the mossy trunk of a 
doddered oak, and drink of whatever 
stream they met, and be at liberty, at 
all the risk of poorer food and fouler drink 
— would they not rather do any thing than 
break their bills against gilded wires ?" 
— " Then you do not feel your new exis- 
tence in this Christian land so likely to 
surfeit you with delight as you once 
thought? For shame, Immalee — shame 
on your ingratitude and caprice ! Do you 
remember when from your Indian isle you 
caught a glimpse of the Christian worship, 
and were entranced at the sight?" — " I 
remember all that ever passed in that 
isle. My life formerly was all anticipa- 
tion, — now it is all retrospection. The life 
of the ha'ppy is all hopes, — that of the un- 



A TALE. 279 

fortunate all immory. Yes, I remember 
catching a glimpse of that religion so beau- 
tiful and pure; and when they brought 
me to a Christian land, I thought I should 
have found them all Christians." — " And 
what did you find them, then, Immalee ?" 
— " Only Catholics." — " Are you aware of 
the danger of the words you utter ? Do 
you know that in this country to hint a 
doubt of Catholicism and Christianity be- 
ing the same, would consign you to the 
flames as a heretic mcorrigible? Your 
mother, so lately known to you as a mo- 
ther, would bind your hands when the 
covered litter came for its victim ; and 
your father, though he has never yet be- 
held you, would buy with his last ducat 
the faggots that w^ere to consume you to 
ashes ; and all your relations in their gala 
robes would shout their hallelujahs to 
your dying screams of torture. Do you 
know that the Christianity of these coun- 
tries is diametrically opposite to the Chris- 
tianity of that world of which you caught 



280 MELMOTII : 

a gleam, and which you may see recorded 
in the pages of your Bible, if you are per- 
mitted to read it?" 

" Isidora wept, and confessed she had 
not found Christianity what she had at 
first believed it ; but with her wild and 
eccentric ingenuousness, she accused her- 
self the next moment of her confession, 
— and she added, " I am so ignorant in 
this new world, — I have so much to learn, 
— my senses so often deceive me, — and 
my habits and perceptions so different 
from what they ought to be — I mean from 
what those around me are — that I should 
not speak or think but as I am taught. 
Perhaps, after some years of instruction 
and suffering, I may be able to discover 
that happiness cannot exist in this new 
world, and Christianity is not so remote 
from Catholicism as it appears to me now." 
— " And have you not found yourself hap- 
py in this new world of intelligence and 
luxury ?" said Melmoth, in a tone of 
involuntary softness. " 1 have at times." 



A TALE. 281 

— " What times?" — " When the weary 
day was over, and my dreams bore me 
back to that island of enchantment. Sleep 
is to me like some bark rowed by vision- 
ary pilots, that wafts me to shores of beau- 
ty and blessedness, — and all night long I 
revel in my dreams with spirits^ Again 
I live among flowers and odours — a thou- 
sand voices sing to me from the brooks 
and the breezes — the air is all alive and 
eloquent with invisible melodists — I walk 
amid a breathing atmosphere, and living 
and loving inanimation — blossoms that 
shed themselves beneath my steps — and 
streams that tremble to kiss my feet, and 
then retire ; and then return again, wast- 
ing themselves in fondness before me, and 
touching me, as my lips press the holy 
images they have taught me to worship 
here !" — " Does no other image ever visit 
your dreams, Immalee ?" — " I need not 
tell you," said Isidora, with that singular 
mixture of natural firmness, and partial 
obscuration of intellect, — the combined re- 



282 MELMOTH : 

suit of her original and native character, 
and extraordinary circumstances of her 
early existence — " I need not tell you — 
you know you are with me every night !" 
— " Me ?" — " Yes, you ; you are for ever 
in that canoe that bears me to the Indian 
isle — you gaze on me, but your expres- 
sion is so changed, that I dare not speak 
to you— we fly over the seas in a moment, 
but you are for ever at the helm, though 
you never land — the moment the paradise 
isle appears, you disappear ; and as we re- 
turn, the ocean is all dark, and our course 
is as dark and swift as the storm that 
sweeps them — you look at me, but never 
speak — Oh yes! you are with me every 
night!" — " But, Immalee, these are all 
dreams — idle dreams. / row you over the 
Indian seas from Spain ! — this is all a vi- 
sion of your imagination." — " Is it a dream 
that I see you now ?" said Isidora— " is it 
a dream that I talk with you ? — Tell me, 
for my senses are bewildered ; and it ap- 
pears to me no less strange, that you should 



A TALE. 283 

be here in Spain, than that I should be in 
my native island. Alas ! in the hfe that 
I now lead, dreams have become realities, 
and realities seem only like dreams. How 
is it you are here, if indeed you are here ? 
— how is it that you have wandered so far 
to see me ? How many oceans you must 
have crossed, how many isles you must 
have seen, and none like that where I first 
beheld you ! But is it you indeed I be- 
hold.'' I thought I saw you last night, 
but I had rather trust even my dreams 
than my senses. I believed you only a 
visitor of that isle of visions, and a haunt- 
er of the visions that recall it — but are 
you in truth a living being, and one whom 
I may hope to behold in this land of cold 
realities and Christian horrors ?" — " Beauti- 
ful Immalee, or Isidora, or whatever other 
name your Indian worshippers, or Chris- 
tian god-fathers and god-mothers, have 
called you by, I pray you listen to me, 
while I expound a few mysteries to you." 
And Melmoth, as he spoke, flung himself 



284 MELMOTH : 

on a bed of hyacinths and tulips that dis- 
played their glowing flowers, and sent up 
their odorous breath right under Isidora's 
casement. " Oh you will destroy my 
flowers !" cried she, while a reminiscence 
of her former picturesque existence, when 
flowers were the companions alike of her 
imagination and her pure heart, awoke 
her exclamation. " It is my vocation — 
I pray you pardon me !" said Melmoth, as 
he basked on the crushed flowers, and 
darted his withering sneer and scowl- 
ing glance at Isidora. " I am com- 
missioned to trample on and bruise eve- 
ry flower in the natural and moral world 

hyacinths, hearts, and bagatelles of 

that kind, just as they occur. And now, 
Donna Isidora, with as long an et cetera 
as you or your sponsors could wish, and 
with no possible offence to the herald, here 
I am to-night — and where I shall be to- 
morrow night, depends on your choice. 
I would as soon be on the Indian seas, 
where your dreams send me rowing every 
night, or crashing through the ice near 



A TALE. 285 

the Poles, or ploughing mth my naked 
corse, (if corses have feeling), through 
the billows of that ocean where I must 
one day (a day that has neither sun or 
moon, neither commencement or termina- 
tion), plough forever, and reap despair !" — 
" Hush ! — hush !— Oh forbear such horrid 
sounds I Are you indeed he whom I saw in 
the isle ? Are you he, inwoven ever since 
that moment with my prayers, my hopes, 
my heart ? Are you that being upon whom 
hope subsisted, when life itself was failing? 
On my passsage to this Christian land, I 
suffered much. I was so ill you would 
have pitied me — the clothes they put on 
me— the language they made me speak — 
the religion they made me believe — the 
country they brought me to— Oh you ! — 
you alone! — the thought — the image of you, 
could alone have supported me ! I loved, 
and to love is to live. Amid the disrup- 
tion of every natural tie, — amid the loss of 
that delicious existence which seems a 
dream, and which still fills my dreams., 



^86 MELMOTH : 

and makes sleep a second existence, — I have 
thought of you — have dreamt of you — have 
loved you !" — " Loved me ? — no being yet 
loved me but pledged me in tears." — " And 
have I not wept ?" said Isidora — " believe 
these tears — theyarenotthe first I have shed, 
nor I fear will be the last, since I owe the 
first to you." And she wept as she spoke. 
" Well," said the wanderer, with a bitter 
and self- satirizing laugh, " I shall be per- 
suaded at last that I am ** a marvellous pro- 
per man." Well, if it must be so, happy 
man be his dole ! And when shall the au- 
spicious day, beautiful Immalee, still beau- 
tiful Isidora, in spite of your Christian 
name, (to which I have a most anti-catho- 
lic objection)— when shall that bright day 
dawn on your long slumbering eye-lashes, 
and waken them with kisses, and beams, 
and light, and love, and all the parapher- 
nalia with which folly arrays misery pre- 
vious to their union — that glittering and 
empoisoned drapery that well resembles 
what of old Dejanira sent to her husband 



A TALE. 287 

— when shall the day of bliss be ?" And 
he laughed with that horrible convulsion 
that mingles the expression of levity with 
that of despair, and leaves the listener no 
doubt w^hether there is more despair in 
laughter, or more laughter in despair. " I 
understand you not," said the pure and ti- 
mid Isidora ; ** and if you would not ter- 
rify me to madness, laugh no more — no 
more, at least, in that fearful way !"— " / 
cannot xiceep,'' said Melmoth, fixing on her 
his dr}^ and burning eyes, strikingly visi- 
ble in the moonlight ; " the fountain of 
tears has been long dried up within me, 
like that of every other human blessing." 
— " I can weep for both," said Isidora, " if 
that be all.^' And her tears flowed fast, as 
much from memory as from grief— and 
when those sources are united, God and 
the sufferer only know how fast and bit- 
terly they fall. " Reserve them for our 
nuptial hour, my lovely bride," said Mel- 
moth to himself; " you will have occasion 
for them then." 



288 MELMOTH : 

" There was a custom then, however 
indelicate and repulsive it may sound to 
modern ears, for ladies who were doubtful 
of the intentions of their lovers to demand 
of them the proof of their purity and ho- 
nour, by requiring an appeal to their fa- 
mily, and a solemn union under the sanc- 
tion of the church. Perhaps there was 
more genuine spirit of truth and chastity 
in this, than in all the ambiguous flirta- 
tion that is carried on with an ill- under- 
stood and mysterious dependence on prin- 
ciples that have never been defined, and 
fidelity that has never been removed. 
When the lady in the Italian tragedy * 
asks her lover, almost at their first inter- 
view, if his intentions are honourable, and 
requires, as the proof of their being so, 
that he shall espouse her immediately, 
does she not utter a language more unso- 
phisticated, more intelligible, more heart- 
edly pure, than all the romantic and in- 

* Alluding possibly to *' Romeo and Juliet." 



A TALE. 289 

credible reliance that other females are 
supposed to place in the volatility of im- 
pulse, — in that wild and extemporaneous 
feeling, — that " house on the sands," — 
which never has its foundation in the im- 
moveable depths of the heart. Yielding 
to this feeling, Isidora, in a voice that faul- 
tered at its own accents, murmured, " If 
you love me, seek me no more clandes- 
tinely. My mother is good, though she is 
austere — my brother is kind, though he 
is passionate — my father — I have never 
seen him ! I know not what to say, but 
if he be Qiiy father, he will love you. jNIeet 
me in their presence, and I will no longer 
feel pain and shame mingled with the de- 
light of seeing you. Invoke the sanction 

of the church, and then, perhaps," 

" Perhaps!" retorted Melmoth ; " You 
have learned the European ' perhaps !' — 
the art of suspending the meaning of an 
emphatic word — of affecting to draw the 
curtain of the heart at the moment you 
drop its folds closer and closer — of bidding 

VOIy. III. N 



290 MELMOTH : 

US despair at the moment you intend we 
should feel hope!" — " Oh no! — no!" an- 
swered the innocent being ; " I am truth. 
I am Immalee when I speak to you, — 
though to all others in this countrj'^, 
which they call Christian, 1 am Isidora. 
When I loved you first, 1 had only one 
heart to consult, — now there are many, 
and some who have not hearts like mine. 
Eut if you love me, you can bend to them 
as I have done — you can love their God, 
their home, their hopes, and their country. 
Even with you I could not be happy, un- 
less you adored the cross to which your 
hand first pointed my wandering sight, 
and the religion which you reluctantly 
confessed was the most beautiful and bene- 
ficent on earth." — *' Did I confess that?" 
echoed Melmoth ; "It must have been 
reluctantly indeed. Beautiful Immalee! 
I am a convert to you ;" and he stifled a 
Satanic laugh as he spoke ; " to your new 
religion, and your beauty, and your Spa* 
nish birth and nomenclature, and every 



• A TALE. 291 

thing that you would wish. I will incon- 
tinently wait on yoiu* pious mother, and 
angry brother, and all your relatives, testy, 
proud, and ridiculous as they may be. I 
will encounter the starched ruffs, and rust- 
ling manteaus, and whale-boned fardin- 
gales of the females, from your good mo- 
ther down to the oldest duenna who sits 
spectacled, and armed with bobbin, on her 
inaccessible and imtempted sopha; and the 
twirled whiskers, plumed hats, and shoul- 
dered capas of all your male relatives. 
And I will drink chocolate, and strut 
among them ; and when they refer me to 
your mustachoed man of law, with his 
thread-bare cloke of black velvet over his 
shoulder, his long quill in his hand, and 
his soul in three sheets of wide-spread 
parchment, I will dower you in the most- 
ample territory ever settled on a bride." — 
" Oh let it be, then, in that land of riiusic 
and sunshine where we first met! One 
spot where I might set my foot amid its 
flowers, is worth all the cultivated earth 



292 MELMOTH : 

of Europe!" said Isidora. — " T^o!— it sbafi 
be in a territory with which your bearded 
men of law are far better acquainted, and 
which even your pious mother and proud 
family must acknowledge my claim to, 
when they shall hear it asserted and ex- 
plained. Perchance they may be joint- 
tenants with me there ; and yet (strange 
to say !) they will never litigate my exclu- 
sive title to possession." — " I understand 
nothing of this," said Isidora ; " but 1 
feel I am transgressing the decorums of 
a Spanish female and a Christian, in hold- 
ing this conference with you any longer. Tf 
you think as you once thought, — if you 
feel as / must feel for ever, — there needs 
not this discussion, which only perplexes 
and terrifies. What have I to do with 
this territory of which you speak ? That 
you are its possessor, is its only va- 
lue in my eyes !" — " What have you 
to do with it ?" repeated Melmoth ; " Oh, 
you know not how much you may have 
to do with it and me yet! In other 



A TALE. 293 

cases, the possession of the territory is the 
security for the man, — but here the man 
is the security for the everlasting posses- 
sion of the territory. Mine heirs must in- 
herit it for ever and ever, if they hold by 
my tenure. Listen to me, beautiful Im- 
malee, or Christian, or whatever other 
name you choose to be called by ! Nature, 
your first sponsor, baptized you, with the 
dews of Indian roses — your Christian spon- 
sors, of course, spared not water, salt, or 
oil, to wash away the stain of nature from 
your regenerated frame — and your last 
sponsor, if you will submit to the rite, will 
anoint you with a new chrism. But of 
that hereafter. Listen to me while I an- 
nounce to you the wealth, the population, 
the magnificence of that region to which 
1 will endower you. The rulers of the 
earth are there — all of them. There be 
the heroes, and the sovereigns, and the ty- 
rants. There are their riches, and pomp, 
and power — Oh what a glorious accu- 
mulation ! — and they have thrones, and 



^94 ]MT£LMOTH : 

crowns, and pedestals, and trophies of 
fire, that burn for ever and ever, and 
the light of their glory blazes eternal- 
ly. There are all you read of in story, 
your Alexanders and Csesars, your Pto- 
lemies and Pharaohs. There be the prin- 
ces of the East, the Nimrods, the Belshaz- 
zars, and the Holoferneses of their day. 
There are the princes of the North, the 
Odins, the Attilas, (named by your church 
the scourge of God), the Alarics, and all 
those nameless and name-undeserving bar- 
barians, who, under various titles and 
claims, ravaged and ruined the earth they 
came to conquer. There be the sove- 
reigns of the South, and East, and West, 
the Mahommedans, the Caliphs, the Sara- 
cens, the Moors, with all their gorgeous 
pretensions and ornaments — the crescent, 
the Koran, and the horse-tail— the trump, 
the gong, and the atabal, (or to suit it to 
your Christianised ear, lovely Neophyte !) 
' the noise of the captains, and the shout- 
ings.' . There be also those triple-crowned 



A TALE. 295 

chieftains of the West, who hide their 
shorn heads under a diadem, and for every 
hair they shave, demand the Hfe of a sove- 
reign — who, pretending to humility, tram- 
ple on power — whose title is, Servant of ser- 
vants — and whose claim and recognizance 
is, Lord of lords. Oh ! you will not lack 
company in that bright region, for bright 
it will be ! — and what matter whether its 
light be borrowed from the gleam of sul- 
phur, or the trembling light of the moon, 
by which I see you look so pale?" — " I 
look pale!" said Isidora gasping; " \ feel 
pale! I know not the meaning of your 
words, but 1 know it must be horrible. 
Speak no more of that region, with its 
piide, its wickedness, and its splendour ! 
I am willing to follow you to deserts, to 
solitudes, which human step never trod 
but yours, and where mine shall trace, 
with sole fidelity, the print of yours. A- 
mid loneliness I was born ; amid loneli- 
ness I could die. Let me but, wherever 
I live, and whenever I die, be yours ! — 



296 MELMOTH : 

and for the place, it matters not, let it be 

even" and she shivered involuntarily 

as she spoke; " Let it be even" 
" Even — XfchereT' asked Melmoth, while 
a wild feeling of triumph in the devoted- 
ness of this unfortunate female, and of 
horror at the destination which she was 
unconsciously imprecating on herself, min- 
gled in the question. " Even where you 
are to be," answered the devoted Isidora, 
** let me be there ! and there I must be 
happy, as in the isle of flowers and sun- 
light, where I first beheld you. Oh ! there 
are no flowers so balmy and roseate as 
those that once blew there ! There are 
no waters so musical, or breezes so fra- 
grant, as those that I listened to and in- 
haled, when I thought that they repeated 
to me the echo of your steps, or the me- 
lody of your voice — that human music the 
first I ever heard, and which, when I cease 
to hear ' " You will hear much bet- 
ter !" interrupted Melmoth ; " the voices 
of ten thousand — ten millions of spirits— 



A TALE. 21)7 

beings whose tones are immortal, without 
cessation, without pause, without inter- 
val !" — ** Oh that will be glorious !" said 
Isidora, clasping her hands ; " the only 
lanfjuacre I have learned in this new w^orld 
worth speaking, is the language of music. 
I caught some imperfect sounds from birds 
in my first world, but in my second world 
they taught me music; and the misery 
they have taught me, hardly makes a ba- 
lance against that new and delicious lan- 
guage." — " But think," rejoined Melmoth, 
" if your taste for music be indeed so ex- 
quisite, how it will be indulged, how it 
will be enlarged, in hearing those voices 
accompanied and re-echoed by the thun- 
ders of ten thousand billows of fire, lashing 
against rocks which eternal despair has 
turned into adamant 1 They talk of the 
music of the spheres ! — Dream of the*mu- 
sic of those living orbs turning on their 
axis of fire for ever and ever, and ever 
singing as they shine, like your brethren 
the Christians, who had the honour to il- 

N 2 



<398 MELMOTH: 

luminate Nero's garden in Rome on a re- 
joicing night." — *' You make me tremble!" 
— " Tremble ! — a strange effect of fire. 
Fie ! what a coyness is this ! I have pro- 
mised, on your arrival at your new terri- 
tory, all that is mighty and magnificent, — 
all that is splendid and voluptuous — the 
sovereign and the sensualist — the inebri- 
ated monarch and the pampered slave — 
the bed of roses and the canopy of fire !" — 
" And is this the home to which you in- 
vite me ?" — " It is — it is. Come, and be 
mine ! — myriads of voices summon you — 
hear and obey them ! Their voices thun- 
der in the echoes of mine— their fires flash 
from my eyes, and blaze in my heart. 
Hear me, Isidora, my beloved, hear me ! 
I woo you in earnest, and for ever ! Oh 
how trivial are the ties by which mortal 
lovei^s are bound, compared to those in 
which you and I shall be bound to eter- 
nity ! Fear not the want of a numerous 
and splendid society. I have enumerated 
sovereigns, and pontiffs, and heroes, — and 



A TALE. 299 

if you should condescend to remember the 
trivial amusements of your present sejour, 
you will have enough to revive its associa- 
tions. You love music, and doubtless you 
will have most of the musicians who have 
chromatised since the first essays of Tubal 
Cain to Lully, who beat himself to death 
at one of his own oratorios, or operas, I 
don't know which. They will have a sin- 
gular accompaniment — the eternal roar of 
a sea of fire makes a profound bass to the 
chorus of millions of singers in torture !" — 
" Wliat is the meaning of this horrible de- 
scription ?" said the trembling Isidora ; 
" your words are riddles to me. Do you 
jest with me for the sake of tormenting, 
or of laughing at me ?" — " Laughing !" 
repeated her wild visitor; " that is an ex- 
quisite hint — vive la bagatelle! Let us 
laugh for ever ! — we shall have enough to 
keep us in countenance. There will be 
all that ever have dared to laugh on earth 
— the singers, the dancers, the gay, the 
voluptuous, the brilliant, the beloved — all 
who have ever dared to mistake their des- 



300 MELMOTH : 

tiny, so far as to imagine that enjoyment 
was not a crime, or that a smile was not 
an infringement of their duty as sufferers. 
All such must expiate their error under 
circumstances which will probably compel 
the most inveterate disciple of Democri- 
tus, the most inextinguishahle laugher 
among them, to allow that there^ at least, 
' laughter is madness.' " — " I do not un- 
derstand you," said Isidora, listening to 
him with that sinking of the heart which 
is produced by a combined and painful 
feeling of ignorance and terror. " Not 
understand me ?" repeated Melmoth, with 
that sarcastic frigidity of countenance 
which frightfully contrasted the burning 
intelligence of his eyes, that seemed like 
the fires of a volcano bursting out amid 
masses of snow heaped up to its very edge; 
" not understand me !— are you not, then, 
fond of music?"—" I am."—'-' Of dancing, 
too, my graceful, beautiful love?"—" I 
*ijcas.'' — " What is the meaning of the dif- 
ferent emphasis you give to those answers?'' 



A TALE. 301 

— " I love music — I must love it for 
ever — it is the language of recollection, 
A single strain of it wafts me back to 
the dreamy blessedness, the enchanted 
existence, of my own — own isle. Of 
dancing I cannot say so much. I have 
learnt dancing— but 1 felt music. I shall 
never forget the hour when I heard it for 
the first time, and imagined it w^as the 
language which Christians spoke to each 
other. I have heard them speak a diiFe- 
rent language since."—" Doubtless their 
language is not always melody, particu- 
larly when they address each other on 
controverted points in religion. Indeed, 
I can conceive nothing less a-kin to har- 
mony than the debate of a Dominican and 
Franciscan on the respective efficacy of the 
cowl of the order, to ascertain the salva- 
tion of him who happens to die in it. But 
have you no other reason for being fond of 
music, and for only having been fond of 
dancing ? Nay, let me have ' your most 
exquisite reason.' " 



302 MELMOTH : 

" It seemed as if this unhappy be- 
ing was impelled by his ineffable des- 
tiny to deride the misery he inflicted, 
in proportion to its bitterness. His sar- 
castic levity bore a direct and fearful pro- 
portion to his despair. Perhaps this is 
also the case in circumstances and charac- 
ters less atrocious. A mirth which is not 
gaiety is often the mask which hides the 
convulsed and distorted features of agony 
— and laughter, which never yet was the 
expression of rapture, has often been the 
only intelligible language of madness and 
misery. Extacy only smiles, — despair 
laughs. It seemed, too, as if no keen- 
ness of ironical insult, no menace of por- 
tentous darkness, had power to revolt the 
feelings, or alarm the apprehensions, of 
the devoted being to whom they were ad- 
dressed. Her " most exquisite reasons,'* 
demanded in a tone of ruthless irony, 
were given in one whose exquisite and 
tender melody seemed still to ratain the 
modulation on which its first sounds had 



A TALE. 303 

been formed,— that of the song of birds, 
minfjled with the murmur of waters. 

" I love music, because when I hear it 
I think of you. 1 have ceased to love 
dancing, though I was at first intoxicated 
with it, because, when dancing, I have 
sometimes forgot you. When I listen to 
music, your image floats on every note, — 
I hear you in every sound. The most in- 
articulate murmurs that I produce on my 
guitar (for I am very ignorant) are like a 
spell of melody that raises a form indescri- 
bable — not you, but my idea of you. In 
your presence, though that seems neces- 
sary to my existence, I have never felt 
that exquisite delight that I have expe- 
rienced in that of your image, when music 
has called it up from the recesses of my 
heart. Music seems to me like the voice 
of religion summoning to remember and 
worship the God of my heart. Dancing 
appears like a momentary apostasy, almost 
a profanation." — " That, indeed, is a sweet 
and subtle reason," answered Alelmoth, 



304 MELMOTH : 

" and one that, of course, has but one fail- 
ure, — that of not being sufficiently flatter- 
ing to the hearer. And so my image 
floats on the rich and tremulous waves of 
melody one moment, like a god of the 
overflowing billows of music, triumphing 
in their swells, and graceful even in their 
falls, — and the next moment appears, like 
the dancing demon of your operas, grin- 
ning at you between the brilliant move- 
ment of your fandangoes, and flinging the 
withering foam of his black and convulsed 
lips into the cup where you pledge at your 
banquetting. Well — dancing — music — 
let them go together ! It seems that my 
image is equally mischievous in both — in 
one you are tortured by reminiscence, and 
in the other by remorse. Suppose that 
image is withdrawn from you for ever, — 
suppose that it were possible to break the 
tie that unites us, and whose vision has 
entered into the soul of both." — " You 
may suppose it," said Isidora, with maiden 
pride and tender grief blended in her 



A TALE. 305 

voice ; " and if you do, believe that I will 
try to suppose it too ; the effort will not 
cost much, — nothing but — my life !" 

'* As Melmoth beheld this blessed and 
beautiful being, once so refined amid na- 
ture, and now so natural amid refinement, 
still possessing all the soft luxuriance of 
her first angelic nature, amid the artificial 
atmosphere where her sweets were unin- 
haled, and her brilliant tints doomed to 
wither unappreciated, — where her pure 
and sublime devotedness of heart was 
doomed to beat like a wave against a 
rock, — exhaust its murmurs, and ex- 
pire ; — As he felt this, and gazed on her, 
he cursed himself; and then, with the 
selfishness of hopeless misery, he felt that 
the curse might, by dividing it, be dimi- 
nished. 

" Isidora !" he whispered in the softest 
tones he could assume, approaching the 
casement, at which his pale and beautiful 
victim stood; " Isidora! v. ill you then be 
mine?"—" What shall 1 say?" suid Isido. 



306 :melmoth : 

ra ; " if love requires the answer, I have 
said enough ; if only vanity, I have said 
too much."—" V^anity ! beautiful trifier, 
you know not what you say ; the accusing 
angel himself might blot out that article 
from the catalogue of my sins. It is one 
of my prohibited and impossible offences ; 
it is an earthly feeling, and therefore one 
which I can neither participate or enjoy. 
Certain it is that I feel some share of hu- 
man pride at this moment." — " Pride ! at 
what? Since I have known you, I have 
felt no pride but that of supreme devoted- 
ness, — that self-annihilating pride which 
renders the victim prouder of its wreath, 
than the sacrificer of his office." — " But I 
feel another pride," answered Melmoth, 
and in a proud tone he spoke it, — " a 
pride, which, like that of the storm that 
visited the ancient cities, whose destruc- 
tion you may have read of, while it 
blasts, withers, and encrusts paintings, 
gems, music, and festivity, grasping them 
in its talons of annihilation, exclaims. 



A TALE. 307 

Perish to all the world, perhaps beyond 
the period of its existence, but live to me 
in darkness and in corruption ! Preserve 
all the exquisite modulation of your forms ! 
all the indestructible brilliancy of your co- 
louring ! — but preserve it for me alone ! — 
me, the single, pulseless, eyeless, heartless 
embracer of an unfertile bride, — the brood- 
er over the dark and unproductive nest of 
eternal sterihty, — the mountain whose la- 
va of internal fire has stifled, and indurat- 
ed, and inclosed for ever, all that was the 
joy of earth, the felicity of life, and the 
hope of futurity!" 

" As he spoke, his expression was at 
once so convulsed and so derisive, so indi- 
cative of malignity and levity, so thrilling 
to the heart, while it ^^-ithered every fibre 
it touched and wrung, that Isidora, with 
all her innocent and helpless drvotedness, 
could not avoid shuddering betbre this 
fearful being, while, in trembhng and 
unappeaseable solicitude, she demanded, 
'•' Will you then be n)ine? Or what am 



308 melmoih: 

I to understand from your terrible words ? 
Alas ! my heart has never enveloped itself 
in mysteries — never has the light of its 
truth burst forth amid the thunderings 
and burnings in which you have issued 
the law of my destiny." — " Will you then 
be mine, Isidora ?" — " Consult my parents. 
Wed me by the rites, and in the face pf 
the church, of which I. am an unworthy 
member, and I will be yours for ever." — 
'* For ever /" repeated Melmoth ; " well- 
spoken, my bride. You will then be mine 
for ever f — will you, Isidora ?" — " Yes ! — 
yes !— I have said so. But the svm is a- 
bout to rise, I feel the increasing perfume 
of the orange blossoms, and the coolness 
of the morning air. Begone — I have staid 
too long here — the domestics may be about, 
and observe you — begone, I implore you." 
— " I go — ^but one word — for to me the 
rising of the sun, and the appearance of 
your domestics, and every thing in 
heaven above, and earth beneath, is 
equally unimportant. Let the sun stay 



A TALE. 309 

below the horizon and wait for me. 
You are miner — " Yes, I am yours; 
but you must solicit my family." — " Oh, 
doubtless ! — solicitation is so congenial 

to my habits."—*-' And" " Well, 

what ? — you hesitate." — ** I hesitate," said 
the ingenuous and timid Isidora, " be- 
cause" " Well?"—" Because," she 

added, bursting into tears, " those with 
whom you speak will not utter to God 
language like mine. They will speak to 
you of wealth and dower ; they will in- 
quire about that region where you have 
told me your rich and wide possessions are 
held; and should they ask me of them, 
how shall I answer ?" 

" At these words, Melmoth approached 
as close as possible to the casement, and 
uttered a certain word which Isidora did 
not at first appear to hear, or understand 
— trembling she repeated her request. In 
a still lower tone the answer was returned. 
Incredulous, and hoping that the answer 
had deceived her, she again repeated her 



310 MELMOTH : 

petition. A withering monosyllable, not 
to be told, tFiundered in her ears, — Jind she 
shrieked as she closed the casement. A- 
las ! the casement only shut out the form 
of the stranger — not his image. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

He saw the eternal fire that keeps. 

In the unfathomable deeps. 

Its power for ever, and made a sign 

To the morning prince divine ; 

Who came across the sulphurous flood. 

Obedient to the master-call. 

And in angel-beauty stood. 

High on his star-lit pedestal. 

XN this part of the manuscript, which 
I read in the vault of Adonijah the Jew," 
said ]Mon9ada, continuing his narrative, 
" there were several pages destroyed, and 
the contents of many following wholly 
obliterated — nor could Adonijah supply 



312 MELMOTH : 

the deficiency. From the next pages that 
were legible, it appeared that Isidora im- 
prudently continued to permit her myste- 
rious visitor to frequent the garden at 
night, and to converse with him from the 
casement, though unable to prevail on liim 
to declare himself to her family, and per- 
haps conscious that his declaration would 
not be too favourably received. Such, at 
least, appeared to be the meaning of the 
next lines I could decypher. 

" She had renewed, in these nightly con- 
ferences, her former visionary existence. 
Her whole day was but a long thought of 
the hour at which she expected to see him. 
In the day-time she was silent, pensive, 
abstracted, feeding on thought — with the 
evening her spirits perceptibly though 
softly rose, like those of one who has a se- 
cret and incommunicable store of delight ; 
and her mind became like that flower that 
unfolds its leaves, and diffuses its odours, 
only on the approach of night. 

" The season favoured this fatal delu- 



A TALE. 31S 

sion. It was that rage of summer when 
we begin to respire only towards evening, 
and the balmy and brilliant night is our 
day. The day itself is passed in a lan- 
guid and feverish doze. At night alone 
she existed, — at her moon-lit casement 
alone she breathed freely ; and never did 
the moonlight fall on a lovelier form, or 
gild a more angelic brow, or gleam on eyes 
that returned more pure and congenial 
rays. The mutual and friendly light seem- 
ed like the correspondence of spirits who 
glided on the alternate beams, and, passing 
from the glow of the planet to the glory 
of a mortal eye, felt that to reside in either 
was heaven. * * * 

***** 

" She lingered at that casement till she 
imagined tliat the clipped and artificially 
straitened treillage of the garden was the 
luxuriant and undulating foliage of the 
trees of her paradise isle — that the flowers 
had the same odour as that of the untrained 
and spontaneous roses that once showered 

TOL. III. o 



314 ^ >!ELMOTH : 

their leaves under her naked feet — that 
the birds sung to her as they had once 
done when the vesper-hymn of her pure 
heart ascended along with their closing 
notes, and formed the holiest and most ac- 
ceptable anthem that perhaps ever wooed 
the evening-breeze to waft it to heaven. 

" This delusion would soon cease. The 
stiff and stern monotony of the parterre, 
where even the productions of nature held 
their place as if under the constraint of 
duty, forced the conviction of its unnatu- 
ral regularity on her eye and soul, and she 
turned to heaven for relief Who does^ 
not, even in the first sweet agony of pas- 
sion ? Then we tell that tale to heaven 
which we would not trust to the ear of 
mortal — and in the withering hour that 
must come to all whose love is only mortal, 
we again call on that heaven which we have 
intrusted with our secret, to send us back 
one bright messenger of consolation ou 
those thousand rays that its bright, and 
eold, and passionless orbs, are for ever 



A TALE. 315 

pouring on the earth as if in mockery. We 
ask, but is the petition heard or answered? 
We weep, but do not we feel that those 
tears are like rain falling on the sea? 
Mare infructuosum, Xo matter. Reve- 
lation assures us there is a period coming, 
when all petitions suited to our state shall 
be granted, and when '* tears shall be 
wiped from all eyes." In revelation, then, 
let us trust — in any thing but our own 
hearts. But Isidora had not yet learned 
that theology of the skies, w^hose text is, 
" Let us go into the house of mourning." 
To her still the night was day, and her 
sun was the " moon walking in its bright- 
ness." When she beheld it, the recollec- 
tions of the isle rushed on her heart like a 
flood ; and a figure soon appeared to recal 
and to realize them. 

" That figure appeared to her every 
night without disturbance or interruption; 
and though her knowledge of the severe 
restraint and regularity of the household 
caused her some surprise at the facility 



316 MELMOTH : 

witli which Mel moth apparently defied 
both, and visited the garden every night, 
vet such was the influence of her former 
dream-like and romantic existence, that 
his continued presence, under circumstan- 
ces so extraordinary, never drev/ from her 
a question with regard to the means by 
which he was enabled to surmount diffi- 
culties insurmountable to all others. 

" There were, indeed, tw^o extraordinary 
circumstances attendant on these meetings 
Though seeing each other again in Spain, 
after an interval of three years elapsing- 
since they had parted on the shores of an 
isle in the Indian sea, neither had ever in- 
quired what circumstances could have led 
to a meeting so unexpected and extraor- 
dinary. On Isidora's part this incurious 
feeling -was easily accounted for. Her for- 
mer existence had been one of such a fa- 
bulous and fantastic character, that the im- 
probable had become familiar to her, — and 
the familiar only, improbable. Wonders 
were her natural element; and she felt^ 



A TALE. oil 

perhaps, less surprised at seeing Melmoth 
in Spain, than when she first beheld bini 
treading the sands of her lonely island. 
With ^lelmoth the cause was different, 
though the effect was the same. His des- 
tiny forbid alike curiosity or surprise. 
The world could show him no greater 
marvel than his own existence ; and the 
facility with which he himself passed from 
region to region, mingling with, yet dis- 
tinct from all his species, like a wearied and 
uninterested spectator rambling through 
the various seats of some vast theatre, 
where he knows none of the audience, 
would have prevented his feeling astonish- 
ment, had he encountered Isidora on the 
summit of the Andes. 

" During a month, through the course 
of which she had tacitly permitted these 
nightly visits beneath her casement — (at 
a distance which indeed might have defied 
Spanish jealousy itself to devise matter of 
suspicion out of, — the balcony of her win- 
dow being nearly fourteen feet above the 



318 MELMOTH: 

level of the garden, where Melmoth stood) 
— during this month, Isidora rapidly, but 
imperceptibly, graduated through those 
stages of feeling which all who love have 
alike experienced, whether the stream of 
passion be smooth or obstructed. In the 
first, she was full of anxiety to speak and 
to listen, to hear and to be heard. She 
had all the wonders of her new existence 
to relate ; and perhaps that indefinite and 
unselfish hope of magnifying herself in the 
eyes of him she loved, which induces us 
in our first encounter to display all the 
eloquence, all the powers, all the attrac- 
tions we possess, not with the pride of a 
competitor, but with the humiliation of a 
victim. The conquered city displays all 
its wealth in hopes of propitiating the con- 
queror. It decorates him with all its spoils, 
and feels prouder to behold him arrayed 
in them, than when she wore them in tri- 
umph herself That is the first bright 
hour of excitement, of trembling, but 
hopeful and felicitous anxiety. Then we 



A TALE, olj) 

think we never can display enough of ta- 
lent, of imagination, of all that can inter- 
est, of all that can dazzle. We pride our- 
selves in the homage we receive from so- 
ciety, from the hope of sacrificing that ho- 
mage to our beloved — we feel a pure and 
almost spiritualized delight in our own 
praises, from imagining they render us 
more worthy of meriting Im, from whom 
we have received the grace of love to de- 
serve them — we glorify ourselves, that we 
may be enabled to render back the glory 
to him from whom we received it, and for 
whom we have kept it in trust, only to 
tender it back with that rich and accumu- 
lated interest of the heart, of which we would 
pay the uttermost farthing, if the payment 
exacted the last vibration of its fibres, — the 
last drop of its blood. No saint who ever 
viewed a miracle performed by himself 
with a holy and self-annihilating abstrac- 
tion from seity, has perhaps felt a purer 
sentiment of perfect devotedness, than the 
female who, in her first hours of love, 



r 



320 MELMOTH : 

offers, at the feet of her worshipped one, 
the brilHant wreath of music, painting, 
and eloquence, — and only hopes, with an 
unuttered sigh, that the rose of love will 
not be unnoticed in the garland. 

" Oh ! how delicious it is to such a be- 
ing (and such was Isidora) to touch her 
harp amid crowds, and watch, when the 
noisy and tasteless bravoes have ceased, for 
the heart- drawn sigh of the one, to whom 
alone her soul, not her fingers, have play- 
ed, — and whose single sigh is heard;, and 
heard alone, amid the plaudits of thou- 
sands [ Yet how delicious to her to whis- 
per to herself, '' I heard his sigh, but he 
has heard the applause !" 

" And when she glides through the 
dance, and in touching, with easy and ac- 
customed grace, the hands of many, she 
feels there is but one hand whose touch 
she can recognize; and, waiting for its 
thrilling and life-like vibration, moves on 
like a statue, cold and graceful, till the 
Pygmalion-touch warms Jier into woman. 



A TALE. 321 

»nd the marble melts into flesh under tiie 
hands of the resistless moulder. And her 
movements betray, at that moment, the 
unwonted and half-unconscious impulses 
of that fair image to which love had given 
life, and who luxuriated in the vivid and 
newly- tried enjoyment of that animation 
which the passion of her lover had breath- 
ed into her frame. And when the splen- 
did portfolio is displayed, or the richly- 
wrought tapestry expanded by outstretch- 
ed arms, and cavaliers gaze, and ladies en- 
vy, and every eye is busy in examination, 
and every tongue loud in praise, just in 
the inverted proportion of the ability of 
ihe one to scrutinize with accuracy, and 
the other to applaud with taste — then to 
throw round the secret silent glance, that 
searches for that eye whose light alone, to 
her intoxicated gaze, contains all judg- 
ment, all taste, all feeling — for that lip 
whose very censure would be dearer than 
the applause of a world ! — To hear, with 
soft and submissive tranquillity, censure 

o 2 



322 MELMOTH : 

and remark, praise and comment, but to 
turn for ever the appealing look to one 
who alone can understand, and whose 
swiftly-answering glance can alone reward 
it !— This — this had been Isidora's hope. 
Even in the isle where he first saw her in 
the infancy of her intellect, she had felt 
the consciousness of superior powers, which 
were then her solace, not her pride. Her 
value for herself rose ^vith her devotion to 
him. Her passion became her pride ; and 
the enlarged resources of her mind, (for 
Christianity under its most corrupt form 
enlarges every mind), made her at first be- 
lieve, that to behold her admired as she 
was for her loveliness, her talents, and her 
wealth, would compel this proudest and 
most eccentric of beings to prostrate him- 
self before her, or at least to acknowledge 
the power of those acquirements which 
she had so painfully been arrived at the 
knowledge of, since her involuntary intro- 
duction into European society. 

" This had been her hope during the 



A TALE. 323 

earlier period of his visits ; but innocent 
and flattering to its object as it was, she 
was disappointed. To Mel moth " no- 
thing was new under the sun." Talent 
was to him a burden. He knew more 
than man could tell him, or woman either. 
Accomplishments were a bauble — the rat- 
tle teazed his ear, and he flung it away. 
Beauty was a flower he looked on only 
to scorn, and touched only to wither. 
Wealth and distinction he appreciated 
as they deserved, but not with the placid 
disdain of the philosopher, or the holy 
abstraction of the saint, but with that 
" fearful looking for of judgment and 
flery indignation," to which he believed 
their possessors irreversibly devoted, and 
to the infliction of which he looked for- 
ward with perhaps a feeling like that of 
those executioners who, at the command 
of Mithridates, poured the melted ore of 
his golden chains down the throat of the 
Roman ambassador. 

" With such feelings, and others that 



324 MELMOTH : 

cannot be told, Melmoth experienced 
an indescribable relief from the eternal fire 
that was already kindled within him, in 
the perfect and unsullied freshness of 
what may be called the untrodden ver- 
dure of ImiToalee's heart, — for she was Im- 
malee still to him. She was the Oasis of 
his desert — the fountain at which he drank, 
and forgot his passage over the burning 
sands — and the hunting sands to which 
his passage must conduct him. He sat 
under the shade of the gourd, and forgot 
the worm was working at its root ; — per- 
haps the undying worm that gnawed, and 
coiled, and festered in his own heart, might 
have made him forget the corrosions of 
that he himself had sown in hers. 

" Isidora, before the second week of 
their interview, had lowered her preten- 
sions. She had given up the hope to in- 
terest or to dazzle — that hope which is 
twin-born with love in the purest female 
heart. She now had concentrated all her 
hopes, and all her heart, no longer in the 



A TALE. 35i5 

ambition to he beloved, but in the sole 
wish to love. She no longer alluded to 
the enlargement of her faculties, the ac- 
quisition of new powers, and the expansion 
and cultivation of her taste. She ceased 
to speak — she sought only to listen — then 
her wish subsided into that quiet listening 
for his form alone, which seemed to trans- 
fer the office of hearing into the eyes, or 
ratiier, to identify both. She saw him 
long before he appeared, — and heard him 
though he did not speak. They have 
been in each other's presence for the short 
hours of a Spanish summer's night, — Isi- 
dora's eyes alternately fixed on the sun- 
like moon, and on her mysterious lover, — 
while he, without uttering a word, leaned 
against the pillars of her balcony, or the 
trunk of the giant myrtle-tree, which cast 
the shade he loved, even by night, over 
liis portentous expression, — and they never 
uttered a word to each otlier, till the wav- 
ing of Isidora's hand, as the dawn appear- 
ed, was the tacit signal for their parting. 



326 MELMOTH : 

" This is the marked graduation of 
profound feeling. Language is no longer 
necessary to those whose beating hearts 
converse audibly — whose eyes, even by 
moonlight, are more intelligible to each 
other's stolen and shadowed glances, than 
the broad converse of face to face in the 
brightest sunshine — to whom, in the ex- 
quisite inversion of earthly feeling and 
habit, darkness is light, and silence elo- 
quence. 

" At their last interviews, Isidora some- 
times spoke, — but it was only to remind 
her lover, in a soft and chastened tone, of 
a promise which it seems he had at one 
time made of disclosing himself to her pa- 
rents, and demanding her at their hands. 
Something she murmured also of her de- 
clining health — her exhausted spirits — her 
breaking heart — the long delay — the hope 
deferred — the mysterious meeting; and 
while she spoke she wept, but hid her 
tears from him. 

'* It is thus, Oh God ! we are doomed 



A TALE. 327 

(and justly doomed when we fix our hearts 
on any thing below thee) to feel those 
hearts repelled like the dove who hovered 
over the shoreless ocean, and found not a 
spot where her foot might rest, — not a green 
leaf to bring back in her beak. Oh that the 
ark of mercy may open to such souls, and 
receive them from that stormy world of 
deluge and of wrath, with which they are 
unable to contend, and where they can 
find no resting-place! 

" Isidora now had arrived at the last 
stage of that painful pilgrimage through 
which she had been led by a stern and re- 
luctant guide. 

" In its first, with the innocent and ve- 
nial art of woman, she had tried to inte- 
rest him by the display of her new ac- 
quirements, without the consciousness that 
they were not new to him. The har- 
mony of civilized society, of which she 
was at once weary and proud, was dis- 
cord to his ear. He had examined all the 
strings that formed this curious but ill- 



35^8 MELMOTH : 

constructed instrument, and found them 
all false. 

" In the second, she was satisfied with 
merely beholding him. His presence 
formed the atmosphere of her existence — 
in it alone she breathed. She said to her- 
self, as evening approached, " I shall see 
him !" — and the burden of life rolled from 
her heart as she internally uttered the 
words. The constraint, the gloom, the 
monotony of her existence, vanished like 
clouds at the sun, or rather like those 
clouds assuming such gorgeous and re- 
splendent colours, that they seemed to 
have been painted by the finger of happi- 
ness itself The brilliant hue diffused it- 
self over every object of her eye and heart. 
Her mother appeared no longer a cold and 
gloomy bigot, and eVei? her brother seem- 
ed kind. There was not a tree in the gar- 
den whose foliage was not illumined as by 
the light of a settincr sun ; and the breeze 
spoke to her in a voice whose melody was 
borrowed from her own heart. 



A TALE. 3^9 

" When at length she saw him,— when 
she said to herself, He is there, — she felt as 
if all the felicity of earth was comprised in 
that single sensation, — at least she felt that 
all her own was. She no longer indulged 
the wish to attract or to subdue him — ab- 
sorbed in his existence, she forgot her own 
— immersed in the consciousness of her 
own felicity, she lost the wish, or rather 
the pride, of bestowing it. In the impas- 
sioned revelry of the heart, she flung the 
pearl of existence into the draught in 
which she pledged her lover, and saw it 
melt away without a sigh. But now she 
was beginning to feel, that for this inten- 
sity of feeling, this profound devotedness, 
she was entitled at least to an honourable 
acknowledgement on the part of her lover; 
and that the mysterious delay in which 
her existence was wasted, might make that 
acknowledgement come perhaps too late. 
She expressed this to him ; but to these 
appeals, (not the least affecting of which had 
no language but that of looks), he replied 



330 MELMOTH : 

only by a profound but uneasy silence, or 
by a levity whose wild and frightful sal- 
lies had something in them still more 
alarming. 

" At times he appeared even to insult 
the heart over which he had triumphed, 
and to affect to doubt his conquest with 
the air of one who is revelling in its cer- 
tainty, and w^ho mocks the captive by ask- 
ing " if it is really in chains ?" 
^ " You do not love ?" he would say ; — 
" you cannot love me at least. Love, in 
your happy Christian country, must be 
the result of cultivated taste, — of harmo- 
nized habits, — of a felicitous congeniality 
of pursviits, — of thought, and hopes, and 
feelings, that, in the sublime language of 
the Jewish poet, (prophet I meant), * tell 
and certify to each other ; and though they 
have neither speech or language, a voice is 
heard among them.' You cannot love a 
being repulsive in his appearance, — eccen- 
tric in his habits, — wild and unsearchable 
in his feelings, — and inaccessible in the 
settled purpose of his fearful and fearless 



A TALE. 331 

existence. No," he added in a melancholy 
and decided tone of voice, " you cannot 
love me under the circumstances of your 

new existence. Once but that is past. — 

You are now a baptized daughter of the 
Catholic church, — the member of a civi- 
lized community, — the child of a family 
that knows not the stranger. What, then, 
is there between me and thee, Isidora, or, 
as your Fra Jose would phrase it, (if he 
knows so much Greek), 7/ if^oi kch ro*." — «« I 
loved you," answered the Spanish maiden, 
speaking in the same pure, firm, and ten- 
der voice in which she had spoken when 
she first was the sole goddess of her fairy 
and flowery isle ; " I loved you before I 
was a Christian. They have changed my 
creed — but they never can change my 
heart. I love you still — I will be yours 
for ever ! On the shore of the desolate 
isle, — from the grated window of my 
Christian prison, — 1 utter the same sounds. 
What can woman, what can man, in all 
the boasted superiority of his character and 



333 MELMOTH : 

feeling, (which I have learned only since 1 
became a Christian, or an European), do 
more ? You but insult me when you ap- 
pear to doubt that feeling, ^vhich you may 
wish to have analysed, because you do 
not experience or cannot comprehend it. 
Tell me, then, what it is to love f I defy 
all your eloquence, all your sophistry, to 
answer the question as truly as I can. If 
you would wish to know what is love, in- 
quire not at the tongue of man, but at the 
heart of woman." — " What is love ?" said 
Melmoth; "is that the question?" — " You 
doubt that I love," said Isidora — " tell me, 
then, what is love?" — " You have imposed 
on me a task," said Melmoth smiHng, but 
not in mirth, " so congenial to my feel- 
ings and habits of thought, that the exe- 
cution will doubtless be inimitable. To 
love, beautiful Isidora, is to live in a world 
of the heart's own creation — all whose 
forms and colours are as brilliant as they 
are deceptive and unreal. To those who 
)ove there is neither day or night, summer 



A TALE. 3,1$ 

or winter, society or solitude. They have 
but two eras in their delicious but vision- 
ary existence, — and those are thus marked 
in the heart's calendar — pixsencc — absence. 
These are the substitutes for all the dis- 
tinctions of nature and society. The 
world to them contains but one indivi- 
dual, — and that individual is to them the 
world as well as its single inmate. The 
atmosphere of his presence is the only air 
they can breathe in, — and the light of his 
eye the only sun of their creation, in whose 
rays they bask and live." — ** Then I love," 
said Isidora internally. " To love," pur- 
sued Melmoth, "is to live in an existence 
of perpetual contradictions — to feel that 
absence is insupportable, and yet be doom- 
ed to experience the presence of the ob- 
ject as almost equally so — to be full of ten 
thousand thoughts while he is absent, the 
confession of which we dream will render 
our next meeting delicious, yet when the 
hour of meeting arrives, to feel ourselves, 
by a timidity alike oppressive and unac- 



334 MELMOTH : 

countable, robbed of the power of expres- 
sing one — to be eloquent in his absence, 
and dumb in his presence — to watch for 
the hour of his return as for the dawn of a 
new existence, yet when it arrives, to feel 
all those powers suspended which we ima- 
gined it would restore to energy — to be 
the statue tliat meets the sun, hut without 
the music his presence s/wuld draw from 
it — to watch for the light of his looks, 
as a traveller in the deserts looks for the 
rising of the sun ; and when it bursts on 
our awakened world, to sink fainting un- 
der its overwhelming and intolerable glo- 
ry, and almost wish it were night again — 
this is love !" — " Then I believe I love," said 
Isidora half audibly. " To feel," added Mel- 
moth with increasing energy, " that our 
existence is so absorbed in his, that we have 
lost all consciousness but of his presence — 
all sympathy but of his enjoyments — all 
sense of suffering but when he suffers — to 
he only because he is — and to have no 
other use of being but to devote it to hira. 



A TALE, 335 

while our humiliation increases in pro- 
portion to our devotedness ; and the lower 
you bow before your idol, the prostrations 
seem less and less worthy of being the 
expression of your devotion, — till you are 
only his, when you are not yourself — To 
feel that to the sacrifice of yourself, all 
other sacrifices are inferior ; and in it, 
therefore, all other sacrifices must be in- 
cluded. That she who loves, must re- 
member no longer her individual exis- 
tence, her natural existence — that she 
must consider parents, country, nature, 
society, religion itself — (you tremble, Im- 
malee — Isidora I would say) — only as 
grains of incense flung on the altar of the 
heart, to burn and exhale their sacrificed 
odours there." — " Then I do love," said 
Isidora; and she wept and trembled in- 
deed at this terrible confession — " for I 
have forgot the ties they told me were 
natural, — the country of which they said 
I was a native. I will renounce, if it 
njust be so, parents, — country, — the habits 



536 MELMOTH : 

which I hav^e acquired, — the thoughts 
which I have learnt, — the rehgion which 

I Oh no! my God! my Saviour!" she 

exclaimed, darting from the casement, and 
clinging to the crucifix — " No ! I will 
never renounce you ! — I will never re- 
nounce you ! — you will not forsake me in 
the hour of death ! — you will not desert 
me in the moment of trial ! — you will not 
forsake me at this moment !" 

'* By the wax-lights that burned in her 
apartment, Melmoth could see her pros- 
trate before the sacred image. He could 
see that devotion of the heart which made 
it throb almost visibly in the white and 
palpitating bosom — the clasped hands that 
seemed imploring aid against that rebel- 
lious heart, whose beatings they vainly 
struggled to repress ; and then, locked and 
upraised, asked forgiveness from heaven 
for their fruitless opposition. He could 
see the wild but profound devotion with 
which she clung to the crucifix,— and he 
shuddered to behold it. He never gazed 



A TALE. 337 

Oil that symbol, — his eyes were imme- 
diately averted ; — yet now he looked long 
and intently at her as she knelt before it. 
He seemed to suspend the diabolical in- 
stinct that governed his existence, and to 
view her for the pure pleasure of sight. Her 
prostrate figure, — her rich robes that float- 
ed round her like drapery round an invio- 
late shrine, — her locks of light streaming 
over her naked shoulders, — her small white 
hands locked in agony of prayer, — the pu- 
rity of expression that seemed to identify 
the agent w^ith the employment, and made 
one believe they saw not a suppliant, but 
the embodied spirit of supphcation, and 
feel, that lips like those had never held 
communion with aught below heaven. — 
All this Mel moth beheld ; and feeling that 
in this he could never participate, he turned 
away his head in stern and bitter agony, 
— and the moon-beam that met his burn- 
ing eye saw no tear there. 

" Had he looked a moment longer, he 
might have beheld a change in the expres- 

VOL. III. P 



338 MELMOTH : 

sion of Isidora too flattering to his pride^ 
if not to his heart. He might have mark- 
ed all that profound and perilous absorp- 
tion of the soul, when it is determined to 
penetrate the mysteries of love or of reli- 
gion, and chuse " whom it will serve" — 
that pause on the brink of an abyss, in 
which all its energies, its passions, and its 
powers, are to be immersed— that pause, 
w^hile the balance is trembling (and we 
tremble with it) between God and man. 

" In a few moments, Isidora arose from 
before the cross. There was more com- 
posure, more elevation in her air. There 
was also that air of decision which an un- 
reserved appeal to the Searcher of hearts 
never fails to communicate even to the 
w^eakest of those he has made. 

" Melmoth, returning to his station be- 
neath the casement, looked on her for some 
time with a mixture of compassion and 
w^onder — feelings that he hasted to repel, 
as he eagerly demanded, *•' What proof 
are you ready to give of that love I have 



A TALE. 339 

described — of that which alone deserves 
the name?" — " Every proof," answered 
Isidora firmly, " that the most devoted of 
the daughters of man can give — my heart 
and hand, — my resolution to be yours a- 
mid mystery and grief, — to follow you in 
exile and lonehness (if it must be) through 
the world !" 

" As she spoke, there was a light in her 
eye, — a glow on her brow, — an expansive 
and irradiated sublimity around her figure, 
— that made it appear like the rare and 
glorious vision of the personified union of 
passion and purity, — as if those eternal ri- 
vals had agreed to reconcile their claims, 
to meet on the confines of their respective 
dominions, and had selected the form of 
Isidora as the temple in which their league 
might be hallowed, and their union con- 
summated — and never were the opposite 
divinities so deliciously lodged. They 
forgot their ancient feuds, and agreed to 
dwell there for ever. 

" There was a grandeur, too, about her 



340 MELMOTH : 

slender form, that seemed to announce that 
pride of purity, — that confidence in exter- 
nal weakness, and internal energy, — that 
conquest without armour, — that victory 
over the victor, which makes the latter blush 
at his triumph, and compels him to bow 
to the standard of the besieged fortress at 
the moment of its surrender. She stood 
like a woman devoted, but not humiliated 
by her devotion — uniting tenderness with 
magnanimity — willing to sacrifice ever}' 
thing to her lover, but that which must 
lessen the value of the sacrifice in his eyes 
— willing to be the victim, but feeling 
worthy to be the priestess. 

*• Melmoth gazed on her as she stood. 
One generous, one human feeling, throb- 
bed in his veins, and thrilled in his heart. 
He saw her in her beauty, — her devoted- 
iiess, — her pure and perfect innocence, — 
her sole feeling for one who could not, by 
the fearful power of his unnatural exis- 
tence, feel for mortal being. He turned 
aside, and did not weep; or if he did. 



A TALE. 3U 

wiped away his tears, as a fiend might do, 
with his burning talons, when he sees a 
new victim arrive for torture ; and, i^e- 
penting of his i^epentance, rends away the 
blot of compunction, and arms himself for 
his task of renewed infliction. 

" Well, then, Isidora, you will give me 
no proof of your love ? Is that what I 
must understand?" — " Demand," answer- 
ed the innocent and high-souled Isidora, 
" any proof that woman ought to give — 
more is not in human power — less would 
render the proof of no value !" 

" Such was the impression that these 
words made on Melmoth, whose heart, 
however, plunged in unutterable crimes, 
had never been polluted by sensuality, 
that he started from the spot where he 
stood, — gazed on her for a moment, — and 
then exclaimed, " Well ! you have given 
nie proofs of love unquestionable ! It 
remains for me to give you a proof of 
that love which I have described — - 
of that love which only you could in- 



342 MELMOTH : 

spire — of that love which, under happier 
circumstances, I might But no mat- 
ter — it is not my business to analyse the 
feeling, but to give the proof." He ex- 
tended his arm toward the casement at 
which she stood " Would you then con- 
sent to unite your destiny with mine? 
Would you indeed be mine amid mys- 
tery and sorrow ? Would you follow me 
from land to sea, and from sea to land, — a 
restless, homeless, devoted being, — with 
the brand on your brow, and the curse on 
your name? Would you indeed be minef 
— my own — my only Immalee?" — " I 
would — I will !"— " Then," answered Mel- 
moth, ** on this spot receive the proof of 
my eternal gratitude. On this spot 1 re- 
nounce your sight ! — I disannul your en- 
gagement ! — I fly from you for ever !" 
And as he spoke, he disappeared. 



CHAPTER XX. 



I'll not wed Paris, — Romeo is my husband. 

Shakespeare. 



AsiDORA was SO accustomed to the wild 
exclamations and (to her) unintelligible al- 
lusions of her mysterious lover, that she 
felt no unwonted alarm at his singular 
language, and abrupt departure. There 
was nothing in either more menacing or 
formidable than she had often witnessed ; 
and she recollected, that after these pa- 
roxysms, he often re-appeared in a mood 
comparatively tranquil. She felt sustain- 



344 MELMOTH : 

ed, therefore, by this reflection,— and per- 
haps by that mysterious conviction impres- 
sed on the hearts of those who love pro- 
foundly—that passion must always be unit- 
ed with suffering ; and she seemed to hear, 
with a kind of melancholy submission to 
the fatality of love, that her lot was to 
suffer from lips that were sure to verify the 
oracle. The disappearance, therefore, of 
Melmoth, gave her less surprise than a sum- 
mons from her mother a few hours after, 
which was delivered in these words : 
" Madonna I sidora, your lady-mother de- 
sires your presence in the tapestried cham- 
ber—having received intelligence by a cer- 
tain express, which she deems fitting you 
should be acquainted withal." 

" Isidora had been in some degree pre- 
pared for extraordinary intelligence by an 
extraordinary bustle in this grave and 
quiet household. She had heard steps 
passing, and voices resounding, but 

'' She wist not what they were/* 



A TALE. 345 

and thought not of what they meant. She 
imagined that her mother might have 
some communication to make about some 
intricate point of conscience which Fra Jose 
had not discussed to her satisfaction, from 
which she would make an instant transi- 
tion to the levity visible in the mode in 
which one attendant damsel arranged her 
hair, and the suspected sound of a ghitarra 
under the window of another, and then 
fly off at a tangent to inquire how the ca- 
pons were fed, and why the eggs and Mus- 
cadine had not been duly prepared for Fra 
Jose's supper. Then would she fret about 
the family clock not chiming synchroni- 
cally wuth the bells of the neighbouring 
church where she performed her devotions. 
And finally, she fretted about every thing, 
from the fattening of the " pullen," and 
the preparation for the olio, up to the in- 
creasing feuds between the Molinists and 
Jausenists, which had already visited Spain, 
and the deadly dispute between the Do- 

p 2 



S46 MELMOTH : 

mini can and Franciscan orders, relative to 
the habit in which it was most effective to 
salvation for the dying body of the sinner 
to be wrapped. So between her kitchen 
and her oratory, — her prayers to the saints, 
and her scoldings to her servants, — her de- 
votion and her anger, — Donna Clara con- 
tinued to keep herself and domestics in a 
perpetual state of interesting occupation 
and gentle excitement. 

" Something of this Isidora expected 
on the summons, and she was, therefore, 
surprised to see Donna Clara seated at 
her writing desk, — a large and fairly writ- 
ten manuscript of a letter extended before 
her, — and to hear words thereafter uttered 
thus : " Daughter, I have sent for you, 
that you might with me partake of the 
pleasure these lines should afford both; 
and that you may do so, I desire you to 
sit and hear while they are read to you." 

" Donna Clara, as she uttered these 
words, was seated in a monstrous high- 
backed chair, of which she actually seem- 



A TAI.E. 347 

ed a part, so wooden was her figure, so 
moveless her features, so lack-lustre her 
eyes. 

" Isidora curtsied low, and sat on one 
of the cushions with which the room was 
heaped, — while a spectacled duenna, en- 
throned on another cushion at the right 
hand of Donna Clara, read, with sundry 
pauses and some difficulty, the following 
letter, which Donna Clara had just receiv- 
ed from her husband, who had landed, not 
at Ossuna *, but at a real sea-port town 
in Spain, and was now on his way to join 
his family. 

" Donna Clara, 

" It is about a year since I received 
your letter advising me of the recovery of 
our daughter, whom we believed lost with 
her nurse on her voyage to India when an 
infant, to which I would sooner have re- 

* Vide Don Quixote, Vol. II. Smollet's Translation. 



348 MELMOTH . 

plied, were I not otherwise hindered by 
concerns of business. 

" I would have you understand, that 
I rejoice not so much that I have re- 
covered a daughter, as that heaven hath 
regained a soul and a subject, as it were, 
e faucihus Draconis — e 'projundis Bar- 
athri — the which terms Fra Jose will 
make plain to your weaker comprehen- 
sion. 

" I trust that, through the ministry of 
that devout servant of God and the church, 
she is now become as complete a Catholic 
in all points necessary, absolute, doubtful, 
or incomprehensible, — formal, essential, 
venial, and indispensible, as becomes the 
daughter of an old Christian such as I 
(though unworthy of that honour) boast 
myself to be. Moreover, I expect to find 
her, as a Spanish maiden should be, equip- 
ped and accomplished with all the virtues 
pertaining to that character, especially 
those of discretion and reserve. The 
which qualities, as I have always perceived 



A TALE. 349 

to reside in you, so I hope you have la- 
boured to transfer to her, — a transfer by 
which the receiver is enriched, and the 
giver not impoverished. 

" Finally, as maidens should be rewarded 
for their chastity and reserve by being 
joined in wedlock with a worthy husband, 
so it is the duty of a careful father to pro- 
vide such a one for his daughter, that she 
do not pass her marriageable age, and sit in 
discontent and squalidness at home, as one 
overlooked of the other sex. My fatherly 
care, therefore, moving me, I shall bring 
with me one who is to be her husband, 
Don Gregorio Montilla, of whose qualifi- 
cations I have not now leisure to speak, 
but whom I expect she will receive as be- 
comes the dutiful daughter, and you as the 
obedient wife, of 

Francisco di Aliaga." 

" You have heard your father's letter, 
daughter," said Donna Clara, placing her- 
self as in ace to speak, " and doubtless sit 



350 MELMOTH : 

silent in expectation of hearing from me a 
rehearsal of the duties pertaining to the 
state on which you are so soon to enter, 
and which, I take it, are three ; that is to 
say, obedience, silence, and thriftiness. 
And first of the first, which, as I conceive, 

divides itself into thirteen heads," 

" Holy saints !" said the duenna under her 
breath, " how pale Madonna Isidora grows !'* 
— " First of the first," continued Donna 
Clara, clearing her throat, elevating her 
spectacles with one hand, and fixing three 
demonstrative fingers of the other on a 
huge clasped volume, containing the life 
of St Francis Xavier, that lay on the desk 
before her, — " as touching the thirteen 
heads into which the first divides itself, 
the eleven first, I take it, are the most 
profitable — the two last I shall leave you 
to be instructed in by your husband. 
First, then," Here she was inter- 
rupted by a slight noise, which did not, 
however, draw her attention, till she was 
startled by a scream from the duenna. 



A TALE. 351 

who exclaimed, " The Virgin be my pro- 
tection ! Madonna Isidora has fainted !" 

" Donna Clara lowered her spectacles, 
glanced at the figure of her daughter, who 
had fallen from her cushion, and lay breath- 
less on the floor, and, after a short pause, 
replied, " She has fainted. Raise her. — 
Call for assistance, and apply some cold 
water, or bear her into the open air. I 
fear I have lost the mark in the life of this 
holy saint," muttered Donna Clara when 
alone ; " this comes of this foolish business 
of love and marriage. I never loved in 
my life, thank the saints !—and as to mar- 
riage, that is according to the will of God 
and of our parents." 

" The unfortunate Isidora was lifted 
from the floor, conveyed into the open air, 
whose breath had the same effect on her 
still elementary existence, that water was 
said to have on that of the omhre pez, 
(man-fish), of whom the popular traditions 
of Barcelona were at that time, and still 
have been, rife. 



352 MELMOTH : 

*' She recovered ; and sending an apolo- 
gy to Donna Clara for her sudden indispo- 
sition, intreated her attendants to leave 
her, as she wished to be alone. Alone ! — 
that is a word to w^hich those who love 
annex but one idea, — that of being in so- 
ciety with one who is their all. She wish- 
ed in this (to her) terrible emergency, to 
ask counsel of him whose image was ever 
present to her, and whose voice she heard 
with the mind's ear distinctly even in ab- 
sence. 

" The crisis was indeed one calculated 
to try a female heart ; and Isidora's, with 
its potency of feeling, opposed to utter 
destitution of judgment and of experience, 
— its native habits of resolution and self- 
direction, and its acquired ones of ti- 
midity and diffidence almost to despon- 
dency 5-^became the victim of emotions, 
whose struggle seemed at first to threaten 
her reason. 

" Her former independent and instinc*. 
tive existence revived in her heart at some 



A TALE. 353 

moments, and suggested to her resolutions 
^vild and desperate, but such as the most 
timid females have been known, under the 
pressure of a fearful exigency, to purpose, 
and even to execute. Then the constraint 
of her new habits, — the severity of her fac- 
titious existence, — and the solemn power 
of her newly-learned but deeply-felt reli- 
gion, — made her renounce all thoughts of 
resistance or opposition, as offences against 
heaven. 

" Her former feelings, her new duties, 
beat in terrible conflict against her heart ; 
and, trembling at the isthmus on which 
she stood, she felt it, under the influence 
of opposing tides, narrowing every mo- 
ment under her feet. 

" This was a dreadful day to her. She 
had sufficient time for reflection, but she 
had within her the conviction that reflec- 
tion could be of no use, — that the circum- 
stances in which she was placed, not her 
own thoughts, must decide for her,— and 



354 MELMOTH : 

that, situated as she was, mental power was 
no match for physical. 

" There is not, perhaps, a more painful 
exercise of the mind than that of treading, 
with weary and impatient pace, the entire 
round of thought, and arriving at the same 
conclusion for ever; then setting out a- 
gain with increased speed and diminished 
strength, and again returning to the very 
same spot — of sending out all our faculties 
on a voyage of discovery, and seeing them 
all return empty, and watch the wrecks as 
they drift helplessly along, and sink before 
the eye that hailed their outward expe- 
dition with joy and confidence. 

" All that day she thought how it was 
possible to liberate herself from her situa- 
tion, while the feeling that liberation was 
impossible clung to the bottom of her 
heart ; and this sensation of the energies 
of the soul in all their strength, being in 
vain opposed to imbecillity and mediocri- 
ty, when aided by circumstances, is one 



A TALE. 355 

productive alike of melancholy and of irri- 
tation. We feel, like prisoners in romance, 
bound by threads to which the power of 
magic has given the force of adamant. 

" To those whose minds incline them ra- 
ther to observe, than to sympathize with the 
varieties of human feeling, it would have 
been interesting to watch the restless ago- 
ny of Isidora, contrasted with the cold and 
serene satisfaction of her mother, who em- 
ployed the whole of the day in composing, 
with the assistance of Fra Jose, what Ju- 
venal calls " verhosa et grandis eputola^'" 
in answer to that of her husband ; and to 
conceive how two human beings, appa- 
rently of similarly-constructed organs, and 
destined apparently to sympathize with 
each other, could draw from the same 
fountain waters sweet and bitter. 

" On her plea of continued indisposi- 
tion, Isidora was excused from appearing 
before her mother during the remainder 
of the day. The night came on, — the 
night, which, by concealing the artificial 



356 MELMOTH : 

objects and manners which surrounded 
her, restored to her, in some degree, the 
consciousness of her former existence, and 
gave her a sense ^ of independence she 
never felt by day. The absence of Mel- 
moth increased her anxiety. She began 
to apprehend that his departure was in- 
tended to be final, and her heart sunk at 
the thought. 

" To the mere reader of romance, it 
may seem incredible that a female of Isi- 
dora's energy and devotedness should feel 
anxietv or terror in a situation so common 
to a heroine. She has only to stand proof 
against all the importunities and authority 
of her family, and announce her desperate 
resolution to share the destiny of a mys- 
terious and unacknowledged lover. All 
this sounds very plausible and interesting. 
Romances have been written and read, 
whose interest arose from the noble and 
impossible defiance of the heroine to all 
powers human and superhuman alike. 
But neither the writers or readers seem 



A TALE. S57 

ever to have taken into account the thou- 
sand petty external causes that operate on 
human agency with a force, if not more 
powerful, far more effective than the grand 
internal motive which makes so grand a 
figure in romance, and so rare and trivial 
a one in common life. 

" Isidora would have died for him she 
loved. At the stake or the scaffold she 
would have avowed her passion, and tri- 
umphed in perishing as its victim. The 
mind can collect itself for one great effort, 
but it is exhausted by the eternally-re- 
curring necessity of domestic conflicts, — 
victories by which she must lose, and de- 
feats by which she might gain the praise 
of perseverance, and feel such gain was 
loss. The last single and terrible effort of 
the Jewish champion, in which he and his 
enemies perished together, must have been 
a luxury compared to his blind drudgery 
in his mill. 

" Before Isidora lay that painful and 
perpetual struggle of fettered strength 



358 MELMOTH : 

with persecuting weakness, which, if the 
truth were told, would divest half the he- 
roines of romance of the power or wish to 
contend against the difficulties that beset 
them. Her mansion was a prison — she had 
no power (and if she possessed the power, 
would never have exercised it) of obtain- 
ing an unpermitted or unobserved egress 
from the doors of the house for one mo- 
ment. Thus her escape was completely 
barred ; and had every door in the house 
been thrown open, she would have felt 
like a bird on its first flight from the cage, 
without a spray that she dared to rest on. 
Such was her prospect, even if she could 
ejfifect her escape — at home it was worse. 

'* The stern and cold tone of authority 
in which her father's letter was written, 
gave her but little hope that in her father 
she would find a friend. Then the fee- 
ble and yet imperious mediocrity of her 
mother — the selfish and arrogant temper 
of Fernan — the powerful influence and in- 
cessant documentising of Fra Jose, whose 



A TALE. 859 

good-nature was no match for his love of 
authority — the daily domestic persecution 
— that vinegar that would wear out any 
rock — the being compelled to listen day 
after day to the same exhausting repeti- 
tion of exhortation, chiding, reproach, and 
menace, or seek refuge in her chamber, to 
waste the weary hours in loneliness and 
tears — this strife maintained by one strong 
indeed in purpose, but feeble in power, a- 
gainst so many all sworn to work their 
will, and have their way — this perpetual 
conflict ^vith evils so trivial in the items, 
but so heavy in the amount, to those w^ho 
have the debt to pay daily and hourly, — 
was too much for the resolution of Isidora, 
and she wept in hopeless despondency, as 
she felt that already her courage shrunk 
from the encounter, and knew not what 
concessions might be extorted from her 
increasing inability of resistance. 

" Oh !" she cried, clasping her hands in 
the extremity of her distress, " Oh that 
he were but here to direct, to counsel me ! 



360 MJELMOTH : 

— that he were here even no longer as my 
lover, but only as my adviser !" 

" It is said that a certain power is al- 
ways at hand to facilitate the wishes that 
the individual forms for his own injury; 
and so it should seem in the present in- 
stance, — for she had scarce uttered these 
words, when the shadow of Melmoth was 
seen darkening the garden walk, — and the 
next moment he was beneath the case- 
ment. As she saw him approach, she ut-^ 
tered a cry of mingled joy and fear, which 
he hushed by making a signal of silence 
with his hand, and then whispered, " I 
know it all !" 

" Isidora was silent. She had nothing 
but her recent distress to communicate, — 
and of that, it appeared, he was already 
apprized. She waited, therefore, in mute 
anxiety for some words of counsel or 
of comfort. " I know all !" continued 
Melmoth ; " your father has landed in 
Spain — he brings with him your destined 
husband. The fixed purpose of your 



A TALE. 361 

whole family, as obstinate as they are 
weak, it will be bootless in you to resist ; 
and this day fortnight will see you the 
bride of Montilla."— " I will first be the 
bride of the grave," said Isidora, with per- 
fect and fearful calmness. 

"At these words, Mel moth advanced 
and gazed on her more closely. Any 
thing of intense and terrible resolution, — 
of feeling or action in extremity, — made 
harmony with the powerful but disordered 
chords of his soul. He required her to 
repeat the words — she did so, with quiver- 
ing lip, but unfaultering voice. He advan- 
ced still nearer to gaze on her as she 
spoke. It was a beautiful and fearful sight 
to see her as she stood ; — her marble face 
— her moveless features — her eyes in which 
burned the fixed and livid light of despair, 
like a lamp in a sepulchral vault— the 
lips that half opened, and remaining un- 
closed, appeared as if the speaker was un- 
conscious of the words that had escaped 

VOL. in. Q 



362 MELMOTH : 

them, or rather, as if they had burst 
forth by involuntary and incontroulable 
impulse; — so she stood, like a statue, at 
her casement, the moonlight giving her 
white drapery the appearance of stone, 
and her wrought-up and determined 
mind lending the same rigidity to her 
expression. Melmoth himself felt con- 
founded — appalled he could not feel. He 
retreated, and then returning, demand- 
ed, " Is this your resolution, Isidora?— 

and have you indeed resolution to" 

'' To die !" answ^ered Isidora, with the 
same unaltered accent, — the same calm 
expression, — and seeming, as she spake, 
capable of all she expressed; and this union, 
in the same slight and tender form, of those 
eternal competitors, energy and fragility, 
beauty and death, made every human pulse 
in Melmoth's frame beat with a throb- 
bing unknown before. " Can you, then," 
he said, with averted head, and in a tone 
.that seemed ashamed of its own softness — 
*' Can you, then, die for him you will not 



A TALE. 363 

live for?" — " I have said I will die sooner 
than be the bride of Montilla," answered 
Isidora. " Of death I know nothing, nor 
do I know much of life — but I would ra- 
ther perish, than be the perjured wife of 
the man I cannot love." — " And why can 
you not love him ?" said Melmoth, toying 
with the heart he held in his hand, like a 
mischievous boy with a bird, around whose 
leg he has fastened a string. — " Because I 
can love but one. You were the first hu- 
man being I ever saw who could teach 
me language, and w^ho taught me feeling. 
Your image is for ever before me, present 
or absent, sleeping or waking. I have 
seen fairer forms, — I have listened to soft- 
er voices,— I might have met gentler 
hearts,— but the first, the indelible image, 
is written on mine, and its characters will 
never be effaced till that heart is a clod of 
the valley. I loved you not for comeliness, 
— I loved you not for gay deportment, or 
fond language, or all that is said to, be 
lovely in the eye of woman, — I loved you 



564 MKLMOTH : 

because you were my first, — the sole con^ 
necting link between the human world and 
my heart,-^the being who brought me ac- 
quainted with that wondrous instrument 
that lay unknown and untouched within 
^nd me, whose chords, as long as they vi- 
brate, will disdain to obey any touch but that 
of their first mover — because your image is 
mixed in my imagination with all the glo- 
ries of nature — because your voice, when 
I heard it first, was something in accord- 
ance with the murmur of the ocean, and 
the music of the stars. And still its tones 
recal the unimaginable blessedness of those 
scenes where first I heard it, — and still I 
listen to it like an exile who hears the 
music of his native country in a land that 
is very far off,— because nature and passion^ 
memory and hope, alike cling round your 
image ; and amid the light of my former 
existence, and the gloom of my present, 
there is but one form that retains its reali- 
ty and its power through light and shade. 
1 am like one who has traversed maiiv 



A TALE. 30*5 

climates, and looks but to one sun as the 
light of all, whether bright or obscure. 1 
have loved once — and tor ever!" Then, 
trembhng at the words she uttered, she 
added, with that sweet mixture of maiden 
pride and purity that redeems while it 
pledges the hostage of the heart, *' The 
feelings I have entrusted you with may 
be abused, but never alienated." — " And 
these are your i^eal feelings?" said Mel- 
moth, pausing long, and moving his frame 
like one agitated by deep and uneasy 
thoughts. " Real !" repeated Isidora, with 
some transient glow on her cheek — " real ! 
Can 1 utter any thing but w hat is real ? 
Can I so soon forget my existence?" Mel- 
moth looked up once more as she spoke — 
" If such is your resolution, — if such be 

your feelings indeed," *' And they 

are ! — they are !" exclaimed Isidora, her 
tears bursting through the slender fingers, 
which, after extending towards him, she 
clasped over her burning eyes. " Then 
look to the alternative that awaits you !'" 



S66 ' MELMOTH : 

said JMelmoth slowly, bringing out the 
words with difficulty, and, as it appeared, 
with some feeling for his victim; " a 
union wdth the man you cannot love,— -or 
the perpetual hostility, the wearying, wast- 
ing, almost annihilating persecution of your 

family ! Think of days that" " Oh 

let me not think !" cried Isidora, wringing 
her white and slender hands ; " tell me — 
tell me what may be done to escape them !" 
— " Now, in good troth," answered Mel- 
moth, knitting his brows wdth a most co- 
gitative wrinkle, while it was impossible 
to discover whether his predominant ex- 
pression was that of irony or profound and 
sincere feeling — " I know not what re- 
source you have unless you wed me." — 
" Wed you !" cried Isidora, retreating 
from the window — " Wed you !" and she 
clasped her hands over her pale forehead ; 
— and at this moment, when the hope 
of her heart, the thread on which her ex- 
istence was suspended, was within her 
reach, she trem.bled to touch it. " Wed 



A TALE. 367 

you ! — but how is that possible ?" — " All 
things are possible to those who love," 
said JNIelmoth, with his sardonic smile, 
which was hid by the shades of the night. 
" And you will wed me, then, by the 
rites of the church of which 1 am a mem- 
ber ?"— " Aye ! or of any other !"— " Oh 
speak not so wildly ! — say not aye in that 
horrible voice! Will you wed me as a 
Christian maiden should be wed? — Will 
you love me as a Christian wife should be 
loved ? My former existence was like a 
dream, — but now I am awake. If I unite 
my destiny to yours, — if I abandon my 

family, my country, my" " If you 

do, how will you be the loser ? — your fa- 
mily harasses and confines you — your 
country would shout to see you at the 
stake, for you have some heretical feelings 

about you, Isidora. And for the rest" 

" God !" said the poor victim, clasping her 
hands, and looking upwards, " God, aid 
me in this extremity !" — " If I am to wait 
here only as a witness to your devotions," 



t 

368 MELMOTH : 

said Melmoth with sullen asperity, " my 
stay will not be long." — " You cannot 
leave me, then, to struggle with fear and 
perplexity alone ! How is it possible for 
me to escape, even if" " By what- 
ever means I possess of entering this place 
and retiring unobserved, — by the same 
you may effect your escape. If you have 
resolution, the effort will cost you little, — 
if love, — nothing. Speak, shall I be here 
at this hour to-morrow night, to conduct 

you to liberty and" Safety he would 

have added, but his voice faultered. " To- 
morrow night,'' said Isidora, after a long 
pause, and in accents almost inarticulate. 
She closed the casement as she spoke, and 
Melmoth slowly departed. 



END OF THIRD VOLUME. 



