7 



FLORENCE MACARTHY: 



LADY MORGAN, 

AUTHOR OF M FRANCE," U O'DONNEL," &«. 



Know thus far forth : 
By accident most strange, bountiful fortune, 
Now, my dear lady, haih mine enemies 
Brought to this shore; and by m\' prescience, 
I find my zenith doth depend upon 
A most auspicious star, whose influence, 
If now I court not but omit, my fortunes 
"Will ever after droop. Shakespeare. 

Les femmes ne sont pas trop d'humeur a pardonner da 
eertaine9 injures, et quand elles se promettent le plaisir de la 
vengeance elles n'y vont pas de main-morte. 

De Gram mo nt. 



IN FOUR VOLUMES. 
VOL. III. 



iFourt'h Coition* 



LONDON : 
PRINTED FOR HENRY COLBURN, 

PUBLIC LIBRARY, CONDUIT ST a GET, HANOVER SQUARE. 



1819. 



fete.' ch>\<j- 



Or 

^3 



B. Clarks, Printer, Well Street, London. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



CHAFfER I. 

u The council shall hear it — It is a riot." 

11 Sir Hugh, persuade me not — I will make 

a star-chamber matter of it." 

u To vouch this is no proof! 
Without more certain and more overt test 
Than these thin habits, and poor likelihoods of 
modern seeming, do prefer against him." 

Shakespeare. 



Lady Dunore, who, like sister Anne 
in Bluebeard, was stationed on the top 
of one of the castle turrets, alternately 
watched the approach of the expected 
prisoners in one direction, and that of 
their accusers and judges, Mr. Crawley 
and son, in another. 

VOL. III. b 



2 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

She was now summoned on the ar- 
rival of Baron Boulter and Judge Au- 
brey to the breakfast parlour. Already 
from her watch-tower she had seen a 
crowd of persons wandering among the 
hills, and the glitter of arms flashing in 
the sun-shine. Her ardent imagination 
magnified the New-Town cavalry corps, 
and half a dozen peasants, into a pro- 
digious military force, and a formida- 
ble band of rebels ; and she rushed into 
the apartment where the two judges 
were quietly taking a bouillon after 
their long morning's ride; and with 
eyes flashing, and cheeks suffused, wel- 
comed them in evident agitation to the 
castle. She expressed her gratitude to ^ 
Baron Boulter in exaggerated terms for 
a visit so kindly volunteered ; and ut- 
tered a fervent hope that their presence 
would give importance to an event in 
which many lives were concerned. 
She then abruptly ended with the 
question of — 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 3 

u But which of you, my lords, is the 
hanging judge?" 

This question, which startled the 
judges, confused Mr. Daly, and threw 
Lord Frederick into agonies (lest in 
her delirious ravings she should cite 
him as authority for this judicial so- 
briquet), produced a short silence, until 
Mr. Daly coming to the relief of the 
party, observed, 

" My dear lords, I must account for 
this agitation of my niece, Lady Du- 
nore, by informing you that her mind 
and feelings have been worked on by 
some representations of the state of this 
province not perfectly correct. Her 
agent and confidential person, Mr. 
Crawley, is a timid man ; and it is but 
fair to say, that I believe he is frequent- 
ly the dupe of his own fears. But he 
also belongs to a certain party, who, 
under the guise of inordinate and exclu- 
sive loyalty, act in defiance of the law 
u 2 



4 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

of the land, are lawless by the concur- 
rence, or at least the countenance of 
those in authority, and may be said, in 
the language of a celebrated orator, to 
be " opposed to rule by act of parlia- 
ment." Among such persons, it is a 
favourite system of tactics to create 
false alarms, and then to engraft strong 
measures upon the fears they have 
awakened. I have some reason to 
think my niece is at this moment the 
victim of this wretched and hacknied 
poticy, and that the attack on her castle, 
and the smothered insurrection with 
which she has been anonymously threat- 
ened, are the phantoms, I will not say 
the creations, of Mr. Crawley's brain." 

Lady Dunore, mortified and disap- 
pointed by a speech that threw her out 
of a sphere of action, to which all her 
fancies and feelings were made up, was 
beginning an expostulation with her 
uncle, when Baron Boulter interrupted 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



5 



her by observing that " the Irish were 
a very fine people, and a very handsome 
people. But that it was most certain a 
little occasional hanging, just now and 
then, did them no harm: and though 
they might not, in the present instance, 
be so deeply implicated in rebellious 
practices, as the loyal and vigilant pru- 
dence of his worthy friend, Darby Craw- 
ley, suggested, yet a little timely cau- 
tion, and wholesome severity, rarely 
came amiss; that he would willingly 
lend his aid in examining into the cir- 
cumstances of the case, and endeavour 
to dissipate her ladyship's fears by ex- 
ploring their cause." 

" The people of Ireland," said Judge 
Aubrey, in a tone between sullenness and 
indignation, " are like the people of 
other nations, pretty much what their 
government has made them. They are 
factious, because they are wretched; 
and it is the fashion of the day to give to 
b 3 



6 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

their local disturbances, to their resist, 
ance to the collections of the tithes, they 
are unable to pay, to their murmurs 
against the taxes, which have reduced 
the country to ruin^ and even to their 
personal and often barbarous conflicts 
among each other, the names of insur- 
rection and rebellion. Mr. Crawley, 
Madam, is an old alarmist, and your 
ladyship is, I perceive, new to the 
modes by which affairs in this country 
are carried on." 

"But when an armed force is at our 
gates," said Lady Dunore, in a tone of 
irritation and impatience, " when let- 
ters reach my hands, Judge Aubrey, 
which inform us that * 

5* The charge is prepared, the lawyers are met, 
The judges arrayed, a terrible sight," 

interrupted Lord Rosbrin, as he burst 
into the room, with a billiard cue in his 
hand for a wand. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 7 

" Every thing is ready/' he observed : 
" the court waits, the prisoners are 
arrived, and the counsel will be here in 
a few moments." 

" We have endeavoured to make 
things comfortable for yon, Baron," 
said Lady Dunore, putting her arm 
through Baron Boulter s, and hurrying 
him towards the hall, where she was 
followed by Judge Aubrey, Mr. Daly, 
Lord Frederick, Mr. Heneage, Mr. 
Pottinger, and Lady Georgina. 

" There," said Lord Rosbrin, pre- 
senting two arm chairs to the judges, 
placed at the head of the hall, before 
a table covered with heavy volumes, 
" there, my lords, that is the awful 
seat of judgment. Here, Lady Geor- 
gina, this is your place, and yours, 
Eversham and Heneage : you are the 
special jury. You see we have a fine 
gallery, a charming audience/ 1 and he 
pointed to the corridore, which ran 

B 4 



8 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

round the hall, and which was filled 
with valets-de-chambre, ladies' maids, 
with the inferior branches of the Dunore 
household ; " and/' he added, fixing 
some chairs and a table to the left, " this 
is the place for the counsel for the crown, 
the learned Crawleys, ' very Daniels 
and the prisoners, you see my lords, 
occupy the lower part of the hall, the 
back-ground or portion filled up with 
guards, officers, mutes, and others : and 
the solitary female prisoner, the Queen 
Catherine of the trial, though in a rug 
cloak, is placed, in delicacy to her sex, 
in the shade of this recess and painted 
window." 

Every thing was, indeed, in the order 
which Lord Rosbrin had described. 

The prisoners occupied the foot of 
the hall. The New-Town Mount Craw- 
ley corps filled the portico. A woman, 
in a coarse grey cloak, and straw bonnet, 
drawn over her face, was seated in the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 9 

recess of the Gothic window ; and the 
rest of the party were disposed of ac- 
cording to Lord Rosbrin's idea of the 
stage business of the trial in the Mer- 
chant of Venice. 

On the countenance of Baron Boul- 
ter was painted an expression of great 
humour, as of one ready to be amused, . 
as to amuse. Judge Aubrey was, on 
the contrary, sullenly looking over a 
volume of Hogarth, which lay before 
him on the table ; and evidently out of 
patience and out of temper with the 
absurdity of the passing scene. Lady 
Dunore was fluttering about from place 
to place, and from person to person, in 
hysterical emotion, tears in her eyes, 
and smiles upon her lips ; and Lord 
Rosbrin was beginning a speech from 
the trial of Queen Catherine, and had, 
in the legal phrase, got on his legs, 
when Mr. Crawley, his son, and sister, 
followed by his clerk, Jemmy Bryan. 
b 5 



10 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

carrying a green bag, appeared pushing 
through the crowd, which filled the 
bottom of the spacious hall. 

" Oh ! I am glad you are come," 
said Lady Dunore, speaking to them 
from her jury-box. " Are you not en- 
chanted at the turn things have taken ? 
Only conceive, what luck ! Baron Boul- 
ter and Judge Aubrey so kindly con- 
senting to be present at our little spe- 
cial commission. Rosbrin, pray shew 
the Mr. Crawleys their place. Miss 
Crawley, I'll make room for you here : 
we must put you on the jury." 

The Crawleys for a moment remained 
motionless. To their utter amazement, 
the whimsicality and extravagance of 
Lady Dunore had overturned all their 
long and ingeniously concerted plans. 
Instead of their snug star-chamber trial, 
they now stood confronted before the 
judges of the land, in the presence of a 
large assembly; while the examinations 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 11 

of the prisoners, which they meant to 
turn to the account of terror, would 
now be taken out of their hand, and be 
made a jest of by the Baron, or be con- 
ducted in such a way by Judge Aubrey 
as would betray the inadequacy of the 
charges upon which their wild-looking 
prisoners were to be committed. 

There was, also, 'in the scene before 
them, a melange of the ludicrous and 
the serious, which at once struck upon 
the sensitive apprehension of young 
Crawley; but armed in that mail of 
brass and heart of adamant, which were 
to form the bases of his future fortunes, 
he came almost instantly to his father s 
relief ; and whispering him a few words, 
which included reliance on their kind 
friend, Baron Boulter, and the neces- 
sity of courage and presence of mind, 
he suffered himself to be led by Lord 
Rosbrin to the place assigned him. 

Meantime, the clerk spread the table 



12 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

with depositions against the prisoners. 
Old Crawley seated himself before it, 
and Lord Rosbrin, flourishing about, 
with theatrical solemnity, exclaimed : 

" Now then proceed in justice, which shall 
have due course. 
Produce the prisoners. Silence. 
Read the indictments." 

The clerk put on his spectacles, and 
cleared his voice ; while Baron Boul- 
ter, endowed with a pliancy of mind 
which permits the pursuit of many ob- 
jects at the same moment, and who was 
in the habit of despatching an epigram, 
and a warrant, of giving judgment and 
an invitation to dinner in the same 
breath, now called for pen, ink, and 
paper, that he might answer a few 
letters, and listen to the examinations 
" without loss of time or hindrance of' 
business" 

Judge Aubrey, throwing aside his 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 13 



book, observed, " Since I take my seat 
here in the quality of a magistrate, at 
the desire of the Marchioness of Dunore, 
I beg that if there are any depositions 
to be made against these men, who 
appear to be under a double guard, civil 
and military, they may be gone through 
forthwith. 

" My lord/' said Conway Crawley, 
getting on his legs, with the air of a 
counsel opening some important cause, 
" my lord, before we proceed to read 
the depositions against these unfortu- 
nate men, I shall beg leave to state 
the case as it appears to me,%nd to give 
a slight sketch of the actual situation 
of this barony/' 

"Sir," interrupted the judge, "I won't 
hear you. You can tell me nothing of 
this country that I do not already know. 
I have neither time nor health to 
listen to idle declamation, and ten times 
♦< told tales." 



14 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



" My lord, I must observe," con- 
tinued young Crawley, petulantly, 
"that among the virtues of a judge, 
patience is the most necessary; and 
Lord Mansfield, my lord, obtained 
more credit for that virtue, than for all 
his other judicial merits combined." 

" Then, Sir, my Lord Mansfield ne- 
ver was obliged to listen to you," re- 
plied the judge, coldly. 

A universal smile followed this obser- 
vation, which was made with a sort 
of sullen naivete, that gave it great 
effect: while old Crawley, trembling 
at the audacity of his son, whispered 
him, 

" Aisy now ! aisy, Con, dear : troth 
you'll put your foot in it, if you let 
your janius get the better of you this 
way." 

The clerk now read the depositions 
in a nasal tone, and drawling brogue, 
which gave infinite amusement to the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 15 



fashionable part of the audience ; and 
at last got through the sundry charges 
against Padreen Gar, Dennis Tully, 
Shamus Joy, Dan Brogan, Teague 
Mac Mahon, Owny Sullivan, and 
others, who came under the denomi- 
nation of "Padreen Gar's boys." 

They stood accused of feloniously 
assembling for purposes of rebellion, 
and breach of the king's peace, at Saint 
Gobnate's well, under the pretence of 
celebrating the feast of that saint ; and 
of acting under the influence of Terence 
Oge O'Leary (who had absconded, and 
whose papers, being seized), betrayed a 
regular plan of insurrection, aided by 
several catholic gentlemen of the coun- 
try, in correspondence with Spain and 
France. 

Baron Boulter now folding his letter, 
called for a lighted candle and sealing- 
wax, and addressing the prisoners, 
said, 



\6 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



"My honest friends, it appears to 
me, from the depositions which have 
been just set forth, that you all have 
incurred the chance of being hanged ; 
an event that must, in all probability, 
have taken place at one time or other 
of your lives : and I dare say you will 
agree with me, my honest friends, that 
whether" a little sooner, or a little later, 
is a matter of but trifling importance. 
(I'll trouble you, Sir, to snuff the can- 
dle.) You see, my friends, I wish to 
do nothing in the dark, and am endea- 
vouring to throw every possible Light 
upon your case. There now, is my 
young and clever friend, Mr. Conway 
Townsend Crawley, smiling at me ; 
and my old friend Mr. Crawley, his 
venerable father, smiling also. The 
Crawleys, gentlemen, are good-humour- 
ed men, and cheerful men. I am, my- 
self, a good-humoured man ; and in 
that point, at least, I resemble Lord 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 17 

Mansfield. And now, my friends, 
with such active magistrates and loyal 
men as the Mister Crawley s among 
you, the one an high sheriff, the other 
an hwh treasurer : the one a sitting 
barrister, and another a serjeant, (not, 
however, I trust a permanent serjeant); 
with such enlightened guardians of the 
law, to keep you quiet, and put you 
up, and put you down, it is singular 
that you should meet at Saint Gob- 
nate's well, for the purposes of sedition 
and rebellion. For Mr. Crawley, Sen. 
may be justly styled the grand con- 
servator of the peace of Ballydab ; 
and with his worthy sons, I must say, 
forms an aula regis, (a term, by-the- 
bye, borrowed from the Norman law, 
as you well know, my honest friends, 
none better). (I'll trouble you, Sir, for 
a little black wax.) As for Counsellor 
Conway Crawley, I look upon him as 
the very repertorium of the laws ; one 



18 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

who has read every thing ; Burn's Jus- 
tice, Blackstone's Commentaries, the 
Registrum Brevium, and Paley s Evi- 
dences ; deep read in the Saxon law, 
the Norman law, the Brehon law, and 
the game law — apropos to game laws I 
Would you, Mr. Footman, step out to 
my servant, and tell him to take the 
grouse out of the gun case, and present 
them to the cook, with Baron Boulter's 
very best compliments ? But, my ho- 
nest friends, the point to establish is 
this — were you de facto at Saint Gob- 
nate's well for the purposes of sedition ? 
Can you prove that you were not ? 
I address myself in particular to you, 
Mr. Padreen Gar, as chief of this con- 
spiracy : were you at Saint Gobnate's 
well this morning ? and for what pur- 
pose ? • 

" Is it for what purpose, my lord ?" 
said Padreen Gar, advancing intrepidly 
into the centre of the hall, and display- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 19 

ing a bold and careless countenance, 
u Is it, what brought me there, Sir ? 
Sure your lordship knows right well, 
what would be bringing a poor man to 
the holy well, plaze your lordship's 
honor, Sir ; isn't it his dewotion, my 
lord ? what else, Sir. And has been 
going to the well an hundred years, 
and more, my lord — troth we have." 

" Will you make affidavit of that, 
Mr. Padreen Gar V* 

" I will, plaze your lordship/' 
"Then, Mr. Padreen, I can only 
say, that a pitcher that goes so often 
to the ivell is liable to come home 
broken at last, which I think I shall 
be able to prove to you before I have 
done. But who is that in the red 
shanavest ? (I believe that is good Irish 
for a waistcoat, as some of you know, 
my friends, to your cost ;) he who is 
seeking my attention, as I judge by 
his expressive countenance." 



20 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



" Its Barney Tully, as sould your 
honor a harse, my lord, last sizes; long 
life to your lordship/' said a slight, 
meagre, but alert person, stepping be- 
fore Padreen Gar, and displaying a 
countenance of sly and intelligent ex- 
pression. 

" So, Mr. Tully, how do you do, my 
equestrian friend? Now, Mr. Barney 
Tully, though I have too much respect 
for your name and calling to wish to 
pry into Tully s offices, I must never- 
theless institute an enquiry into the 
cause of your appearing at St. Gobnatc's 
well?" ' 

"Och! plaze your honor, I'll prove 
an alibi, my lord; for upon oath this 
day, 'boye all days of the year, I was 
working on Mr. Crawley's new road, 
when I was seen and taken at St. Gob- 
nate's well, Sir." 

"Then, Tullus Aufidius, it is very 
plain you are of that class in Irish zoo- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



21 



logy, so puzzling to other naturalists, 
called the bird that can he in two 
places at once.* 9 

" I am, Sir," replied Barney, smiling 
archly ; " sure enough an Irish bird, 
egg and feather; and so was my father 
before me, my lord." 

" We have nothing to do with your 
father, my honest friend Tully, because 
we do not want in this instance to hill 
two birds with one stone ; and prefer in 
all instances a bird in the hand to 
two in the bush. Now, my friend in the 
carawat, what is your name?" address- 
ing a foolish-looking person with a red 
handkerchief tightened round his neck, 
almost to strangling. 

" I'm called Teague Mac Mahon, 
plaze your lordship." 

" You could not be called by a better 
name, Mr. Mac Mahon, if your father 
was as anxious as Tristram Shandy's to 
give you a lucky one" 



22 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



" Long life to your lordship, and 
God bless you, Sir." 

u But, Mr. Mac Mahon, with such a 
name, I cannot well understand how 
you should be guilty of such disloyal 
practices, as to join Padreen Gar's 
rebellious band, at that site of all insub- 
ordination, St. Gobnate's well." 

" Why then, see here, plaze your 
lordship," said Teague Mac Mahon, 
waving his hand, and speaking with 
great emphasis, " I should never gone 
near the well, and had no occasion, 
only in regard to my taste of bacon, 
which was stolen dishonestly from me, 
plaze your honor." 

" Then you are one of those impro- 
vident persons, Mr. Mac Mahon, who 
have not the art of saving your bacon." 

" Sure, I did save it,* plaze your ho- 
nor, and saved it well, and hung it up in 



* i. e. Cure it, salt it.— -An Ilibernicism. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 2* 



the chimbley, and quartered it in three 
halves, my lord ; and was to give a small 
half to Darby Hoolegan, in lieu of two 
pecks of male, (meal) and an hundred of 
nails for my brogues: and while I was 
at mass, what should he do, but comes 
in, and skelps off with the biggest half, 
and leaves me only a donny taste ; and 
so I went after him to St. Gobnate's, 
where I was taken up, Sir, only for 
looking after the remains of my ba- 
con." 

" The truth then is out, Mr. Mac 
Mahon; you went in search of a man, 
who had the boldness to make an 
abridgement of Bacon." 

"Oeh Musha! that's it; long life to 
your lordship," said Teague, trium- 
phantly. 

" I hope, however, Mr. Mac Mahon, 
that your friend had the taste to pre- 
serve all the attic salt'' 

u Och ! plazeyour honor, it was well 



24 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

salted and smoked too before he took 
a taste of it." 

" Then, Mr. Mac Mahon, I must say, 
that had you but smoked your friend 
as you have smoked your bacon, you 
would not now be the victim of your 
credulity, nor brought before me on 
suspicion of high treason." 

" My lord, my lord," interrupted 
Judge Aubrey, with an air of irrepres- 
sible impatience, " I beg your pardon, 
but though I believe this mockery of 
justice is got up simply for the amuse- 
ment of this distinguished circle, yet I 
cannot witness or assist in carrying on a 
farce, which may in the end be preg- 
nant with evil to the persons who stand 
in custody before us. The depositions 
are a tissue of absurdity and nonsense : 
and though magistrates can in this coun- 
try deprive persons of their liberty upon 
grounds quite as slight, yet I am not 
quite certain that the warrant upon 



FLORENCE MCCARTHY. 



25 



which they have been arrested, is a 
legal instrument. Show me your war- 
rant, constable. — Yes, it is, as I sus- 
pected, a vague mittimus ; a con- 
trivance of certain active magistrates, 
to get obnoxious persons into their 
„ power, and by which they baffle the 
protection of the laws, omitting to state 
any name, day, or place, or particular 
of the offences. Nothing, therefore, re- 
mains but to discharge these poor men, 
and send them to their work." 

" My learned brother,'* said the 
baron, with much pleasantry of man- 
ner, " 'tis not for you or me to bring 
in the verdict: we must refer it to the 
jury ; and I believe a fairer jury never 
sat. What say you, ladies ! guilty or 
not guilty 

" Not guilty upon my honor," cried 
Lady Georgina, joined by all the pa- 
trician voices present ; while Lady Du- 
nore, as much amused by the turn the 

VOL. III. c 



26* FLORENCE MACARTliY. 



mock trial was taking, as she had been 
agitated by its probable issue, cried 
out louder than them all, " Oh not 
guilty, not guilty." 

The judges now arose; and Judge 
Aubrey was about to address the pri 
soners, and to dismiss them with an ad- 
monition, when young Crawley starting 
forward, exclaimed with vehemence — 

" Stay, my lord, before you again 
turn these lawless men loose upon this 
unfortunate district, whom your lord- 
ship must be aware have had no exa- 
mination whatever, I beg to be heard 
for a few minutes. Your lordship has 
called the depositions made by sundry 
respectable persons a tissue of non- 
sense and absurdity ; but we know 
how easy it is to despise the dawnings 
of all insurrections ; we have learned 
also how dangerous it is to do so. 
The ravings of the first few followers 
of Cromwell at Huntingdon, a scuffle 



FLORENCE MACAHXH Y. 2J 

for apples by Massaniello at Naples, 
and the dissensions of the Poissards at 
Paris, however contemptible in their 
origin, were yet the commencement 
and causes of the mighty and terrific 
revolutions which followed. But, my 
lords, I will, I think, convince you that 
the seeds of rebellion have taken a 
deeper root in this province than in 
the breasts of a few barbarous peasant? ; 
that foreign incendiaries arc at work 
to undermine the good will that sub- 
sists between Ireland and the parent 
country ; and that intrigues are now 
carried on between France, Spain, and 
some of the Catholic gentlemen of this 
country, through the medium of an old 
offender, who was deeply implicated 
in the rebellion, a sort of pedagogue, 
named Terence Oge O'Leary." 

" Good God!" exclaimed Lady Du- 
nore, plunged into a new series of emo- 
C 2 



28 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



tions, " how extraordinary ! only con- 
ceive ! French agents in this remote 
spot! Go on, Mr. Conway, pray go 
on." 

" Last night," continued young Craw- 
ley, with renewed spirit, ec a search 
warrant was procured for examining 
O'Leary's papers ; and as he was not at 
home, his desk was opened, and some 
curious plans of the intended rebellion 
came to light, which were forwarded by 
a military express to the castle after I 
had taken copies of them. Here," con- 
tinued young Crawley, triumphantly 
taking up paper after paper out of his 
father s green bag, t€ here is first a list 
of the ancient families of this province, 
whose descendants, labourers in my fa- 
ther's grounds and her ladyship's, will 
be doubtlessly proved one of these days 
to be lords of the soil. Here is a frag- 
ment relative to the late Florence Ma- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 2<J 

earthy, a drunken old dotard, who lived 
in this neighbourhood, and was called 
the titular Earl of Clancare, which is 
curious, for it proves that he has long 
been considered as the true lord of this 
district, and was secretly acknowledged 
such by his own party, which includes 
all the disloyal people in the country ; 
for this paper states the following fact, 
in the quaint old language, still used by 
the Catholic gentry, and particularly af- 
fected by Terence Oge O'Leary : — that 
6 Florence Macarthy, by consent of all 
the popish bishops, deacons, jesuits, 
friars, and all the Irish nobilities assem- 
bled, was created Macarthy More, using 
in creation all the rites and ceremonies 
customary to the ancient Irish, being 
joined by all the nobility and noblesse of 
the province : — viz. the Na Donnells- 
Fcrrars, the Offaleys, O'Sulivans-Beare, 
and Mori arty M'Teague/ (names, my 
c 3 



30 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

lord, better known in the flourishing 
eity of Ballydab than in the Red Book 
or Debrett's Peerage). It is with regret, 
also, I add — that among these provincial 
noblesse are inscribed the names of the 
knights of Kerry and Glynn, the white 
knight, and the knight of the valley, 
and, in short, many members of the 
Fitzgerald family. But what is most 
curious of all is the following letter 
from a Spanish priest, on whom it seems 
the archbishoprick of Dublin has al- 
ready been bestowed. This letter, with- 
out date, is addressed to the late Flo- 
rence Macarthy, of Ballydab, by the 
style and title of the Most Excellent e 
Earl Florence Macarthy, of Clancare } 
and is well worth attending to." 

" Oh ! let us have the archbishop's 
letter by all means," said LadyDunore. 
u Only think, Georgy, love, of giving 
away an archbishoprick : it is quite 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 31 

too amusing. Pray go on, Mr. Con- 
way." 

Mr. Conway cleared his voice, and 
read as follows : 

" My good Earl, 

" God is my witness, that after my 
arrival in Ireland, having knowledge of 
your lordship's valour and learning (his 
valour, Lady Dunore, was leading theBal- 
lydab boys some thirty years back in a 
contest with the Glannacrimes), I had 
an extreme desire to see and to commu- 
nicate, and to confer with so principal a 
personage ; but the length of the way 
would not permit me. I am now de- 
parting into Spain, with grief that I had 
not visited those parts; but I hope 
shortly to return to this kingdom, and to 
give you entire satisfaction : and be as- 
sured that I will perform with his ma- 
jesty what a brother ought to do, that 
he should send from Spain ; because by 
C 4 



32 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

letter I cannot speak any more ; I leave 
the rest till sight. The Lord have your 
lordship in his keeping, according to 
my desire. 

Yo Mateo, 
Arxobispo de Dublin"* 

" Now, my lords and Lady Dunore, 
whether his majesty, here alluded to, be 
Bonaparte or King Joseph, it is evident 
that the late Mr. Macarthy kept up a 
secret correspondence with the enemies 
of the country ; and it is also pretty 
certain that this " yo Mateo" has ful- 
filled his promise of returning to com- 
municate viva voce, what he dared not 
write. He has been for more than a 
week back lurking in this neighbour- 
hood, and even had the audacity to 
present himself in my father's house on 
false pretences. He is now under escort 



* I, Matthew, Archbishop of Dublin. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 33 

on his way to Dublin ; and his coadjutor 
and host, the successor of Mr. Macarthy 
in treason, has absconded. But there 
is no doubt, the vigilant police of the 
country will ferret him out of his 
hiding den." 

The detail thus given by Conway 
Crawley, with an impressive earnest- 
ness of manner, the documents he pro- 
duced, the singular circumstances he 
developed, excited a very striking emo- 
tion in the English part of his auditory. 
A pause of a moment ensued. 

Old Crawley pulled down his wig, 
and stole a sly glance of satisfaction at 
Judge Aubrey. Miss Crawley, who for 
the first time learned that her saintly 
hero was a French or Spanish spy, 
grew pale. Baron Boulter left an 
epigram unfinished, and began to lend 
a serious attention ; while Lady Dunore 
exhausted herself in reiterated exclama- 
tions of amazement and consternation, 
c 5 



34 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

(e Only conceive, Georgy, love, a real 
Spanish monk, an incendiary too ; good 
heavens ! how extraordinary ! Do you 
know I would not for the world miss 
seeing yo Mateo. But pray go on." 

" I believe there is little more to be 
added, Madam. The principal facts are 
before your ladyship and the judges; 
and your lordship," added young Craw- 
ley, insolently turning to Judge Aubrey, 
H may now conceive the propriety of 
our not dismissing these men, at least 
till we are in possession of the principals 
and leaders." 

" I see no more reason than ever for 
detaining them," returned Judge Aubrey. 
" But I hope, Mr. Crawley, the docu- 
ments, whose copies you have had the 
trouble to make and to read, have not 
actually been sent off to the chief secre- 
tary's office by military express." 

" They are, I hope, by this time 
nearly in his possession," returned 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 35 

Conway Crawley, in a tone of great 
elation. 

w I am sorry for it," said Judge 
Aubrey, coolly, " very sorry, Mr. Craw- 
ley ; for as far as my black-letter Irish 
studies go, and if my memory does not 
wholly fail ine, you have copied ver- 
batim some extracts from the Pacata 
Hibernia of Robin Carew ; and you 
have transmitted to government a faith- 
ful account of the insurrection, of the 
celebrated Florence Macarthy, in the 
reign of Queen Elizabeth." 

A burst of laughter, in which all 
joined, save the Crawleys, followed this 
observation, while a voice in the distance 
cried out — 

" To be sure he has, sorrow lie there 
is in that." 

The next moment, O'Leary, bustling 
through the crowd, his cotamore slung 
over his shoulder, his wig awry, and 
his ferule in his hand, presented himself 



36 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

in the centre of the hall. His ap- 
pearance excited considerable amuse- 
ment, for having bowed formally to 
Lady Dunore, with a tone of uncon- 
trolable irritation, he turned upon young 
Crawley, exclaiming — 

" I'll trouble you for my documents, 
Counsellor Con; my heads, and tails, 
and perorations ; my notes, and mi- 
nutes, and memories, for my genea- 
logical history of the great Macarthy 
family, written in the Phoenician lan- 
guage, vulgo-vocato Irish. What call 
had you to them at all ? Dioul ! What 
right had you to break open my box, 
and I not in it, and to purloin my 
codices ? And what dirty lucre did you 
expect by it, Counsellor ? If it wasn't 
out of fear that I'd tell to the world 
that your ould grandfather, Paddy 
Crawley, took some of the property of 
the late Earl of Clancare, in trust for 
him during the painals, (penals) Sir, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 3/ 

and refused to restore it after the repail; 
which was the first step he got in the 
world : and troth, a dirty step it 
was. Now answer me that, Counsellor 
Con, before the English noblesse here 
present." 

" I believe, Mr. Conway Crawley," 
said Judge Aubrey, significantly, ** we 
may dismiss all these persons now." 

Every body arose and came forward, 
good-naturedly amused with the con- 
sternation of him whose pretension and 
insolence had been equally entertaining 
and imposing a few minutes before. 
Old Crawley almost buried his head in 
his green bag; but Conway, though 
confused, still unsubdued, came forward, 
and addressing Lady Dunore, who was 
now laughing with Lord Frederick and 
Lady Georgina, he said, " I must re- 
quest your lordship's attention and pa- 
tience one minute more." 

" Oh! by all means," said Lady 



38 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



Dunorc, fluttering back to her place. 
" I don't care in the least if this trial 
goes on for ever. I never was so agi- 
tated and so amused in all my life ; 
now, pray all sit down. My dear Judge 
Aubrey, pray resume your seat.'' 

" All that your ladyship has heard," 
continued Conway, " is mere inven- 
tion, mere subterfuge. — Baron Boulter, 
better than any other, must be aware 
that it is so ; since his lordship, as se- 
nior circuit judge, has granted a bench 
warrant to my father to take up the 
incognito Spanish priest, upon such in- 
formation as his lordship certainly 
deemed sufficient." 

" I certainly granted a warrant a few 
days back," said Baron Boulter, with 
a look of mortification, " on informa- 
tions sworn by one Mr. James Bryan, 
who holds some place in Mr. Crawley's 
office, for the purpose of apprehending 
a very suspicious character ; who, with- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 39 

out any visible business, or means of 
livelihood,, has for some time been lurk- 
ing about this neighbourhood.'* 

This confession produced a visible 
change in the opinion of all present ; 
while an expression of half- suppressed 
emotion distorted the countenance of 
old Crawley ; and he muttered, in acri- 
monious tone, to his son — 

" You have made a pretty kettle of 
fish of it, now. What the devil busi- 
ness had you to mention that stranger at 
all at all. Couldn't you let him go 
quietly on to jail. Troth, your janius 
will get you muzzled yet, great a seho- 4 
lar as you are, Counsellor Con." 

The silence which Baron Boulter's 
confession had produced was now sud- 
denly inteiTupted by a noise in the por- 
tico. The crowd which still lingered 
there gave way, with a spontaneous 
and respectful motion ; and a person of 
singular and splendid appearance ad- 



40 



FLORENCE MACAKTHY. 



vanced boldly up the hall, followed by 
two officers of justice. He approached 
the table where the judges sat, remov- 
ing his hat with one hand, and leaning 
the other on a pile of boo 1 , s, with an 
air disengaged and imposing ; and in a 
voice full, clear, and rapid, he said — 

" I beg to present myself to Baron 
Boulter.' ' 

Mute astonishment trembled upon 
every lip. Wonder and admiration 
animated every eye. All was breath- 
less eager suspense ; but O'Leary alone 
moved, and placed himself near the 
object of attraction, with a look, in 
which wildness and triumph disputed 
pre-eminence. 

Baron Boulter was the first to re- 
cover presence of mind, and he replied, 
" My name, Sir, is Boulter, and I have 
the honour to hold his majesty's com- 
mission, as Baron of the Exchequer. 
I can only add, Sir, that I shall be 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 41 

happy to make the acquaintance of so 
handsome a man, and so fine a gentle- 
man: pray be seated." 

The stranger put back the chair pre- 
sented to him. 

"My lord/' he said, "1 am a pri- 
soner. On my arrival in this district 
this morning, and in my way to my 
lodging, at the dwelling of this person, 
Terence Oge O'Leary, I was arrested 
on a bench warrant of your lordship's, 
on informations sworn by a notorious 
informer, who was condemned for per- 
jury some years back, and was saved 
under an indemnity act procured by his 
employer, Mr. Crawley. I shall obey 
your warrant, my lord, if you acknow- 
ledge your signature. But in the pre- 
sence of this assembly, I deny that you 
have any authority to order the arrest 
of any man, either of your own free 
motion, or on such information as that 
upon which I am now a prisoner. It 



42 



FLORENCE MA( ARTIIV. 



is to you, therefore, my lord, I shall 
look for responsibility." 

w You will do what you please, Sir," 
said Baron Boulter, firmly and coldly. 
w The law lies open to all men." 

" And we, my lord," interrupted 
young Crawley, trembling with rage 
a/id mortification, while his father, pale 
and silent, sat with his eyes bent upon 
the stranger, " and wc, my lord, shall 
find precedents enough in this country 
to defend us." 

" In this country /" interrupted the 
stranger in a loud and indignant voice. 
u Has this country, then, a set of 
bye-laws of its own, to answer the pur- 
poses of particular individuals ? Are 
not the laws of' England the laics of 
Ireland P" 

" Officers, do your duty," said young 
Crawley, authoritatively, and almost 
incoherent with stifled rage. 

" I shall accompany your officers" 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 43 

returned the stranger, coolly ; " and I 
have to thank them for their indulgence, 
which has confronted me with Baron 
Boulter. His lordship, I doubt not, 
has been imposed upon ; but for the 
rest, I am aware that no man shall be 
imprisoned but upon the lawful judg- 
ment of his equal s, or by the law of 
the land. This is the charter ; by this 
I shall abide." Then dropping his ex- 
tended arm, his countenance lost all 
the sternness by which it had been 
energized ; and bowing gracefully and 
low to the ladies, he added, " I trust, 
in a moment of exigency like this, I 
shall be forgiven, if I have violated the 
laws of ceremony, in asserting those of 
justice: and I offer a thousand apolo- 
gies to the Marchioness of Dunore, and 
her distinguished circle, for this un- 
seasonable intrusion." 

He then bowed slightly round, to 
the judges respectfully, and dropped 



4i FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

back between the officers of justice; 
while Lady Dunore, in a fever of ad- 
miration, and O'Leary in the delirium 
of strong emotion, both approached 
him as he retired; but the deep BtetiD 
voice of Judge Aubrey arrested his 
steps. 

" Stay, Sir, you are I apprehend a 
stranger in this country ?" 

" I am, my lord, an utter stranger." 

" You have then, Sir, a prescriptive 
right to courtesy and protection, in a 
land where the name of stranger is still 
held sacred. I have no doubt my 
learned brother has been imposed on. 
His confidence in Mr. Crawley's zealous 
loyalty, and the hurry of business, may 
have urged him to give a warrant which 
I pronounce to be illegal, a3 given 
upon the testimony of a convicted per- 
jurer." 

" You cannot prove it, Judge Au- 
brey," exclaimed young Crawley, vehe- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



4j 



mently. " You would set aside all 
judicial privilege, all propter digni- 
tatem, of the bench.' ' 

u Sir/' said the judge, " these ebul- 
litions of a mind, fraught by self-in- 
terest with arbitrary notions, are not 
worthy of reply. The dignity of the 
judicial station can only be degraded 
by him who holds it. I beg your 
pardon, Sir," he added hastily, and 
turning to the stranger, u I fear I have 
detained you; but I would impress 
upon your mind, that the judges of the 
land are the natural guardians of the 
oppressed ; and I would suggest to you, 
that by giving bail, you will be spared 
the annoyance and inconvenience of a 
temporary imprisonment." 

u My lord," said the prisoner, " I 
thank you for this mark of consider- 
ation. But I have already said that I 
am an utter stranger here ; where then 



46 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



should I seek for bail ? Who is there 
that would hold himself responsible for 
a stranger ?" 

" I will," exclaimed a voice from a 
distance ; and the next moment the 
hand of a young and very noble look- 
ing person was clasped in that of the 
stranger. 

" And pray, who are you, Sir?*' de- 
manded young Crawley, stepping for- 
ward with a tone and demeanour of the 
pertest effrontery. 

" I am," said the party interrogated, 
throwing his eyes haughtily over his 
questionist, " I am Lord Adelm Fitz- 
adelm : pray who are you ?" 

The elder stranger started back with 
astonishment, while among the general 
bursts of exclamation, which rang 
through the hall, the shrieks of Lady 
Dunore were predominantly audible. 
She threw herself into her son's arms, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 4/ 

as much transported by the theatrical 
scene of his unexpected appearance, as 
if she had not, for months, intrigued 
his absence. She wept and laughed 
with hysterical alternation ; presenting 
him to those he already knew, and to 
those he had never seen before. Then 
turning to the stranger, she addressed 
him as Don Yo Mateo, Archbishop of 
Dublin, asked a thousand pardons, 
welcomed him to Dunore, and went on 
repeating, " was there ever any thing 
so charming ! any thing so delight- 
ful ! This is Ireland par exemple ! 
Delightful Ireland, where one is never 
safe and never ennuyee for a single mo- 
ment !" 

Meantime the hall was cleared : the 
company at the castle, Lord Adelm, 
his friend, the officers of justice, and 
O'Leary, were nearly all that remained. 
The latter stood in the back-ground 
transfixed and pale, a monument of con- 



48 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

sternation, and motionless as death, 
save that his quick glancing eyes turned 
alternately from Lord Adelm to his 
guest, and from his guest to Lord 
Adelm. 

"But who is your friend?" asked 
Lady Dunore eagerly, and interrupting 
Lord Adelm' s details of his journey, 
and pointing to the stranger, who stood 
talking to Judge Aubrey. " Is he a 
real Spanish monk? Sure you are 
not implicated in this rebellion, which 
is found out to be no rebellion at 
all." 

These questions were repeated by 
every eye, if not by every tongue. 

" Allow me to present my mother to 
you/' said Lord Adelm, taking the 
strangers hand, " the Marchioness of 
Dunore. General Fitzwalter, of South 
America, that brave Guerilla chief, 
whose life and fortune have been de- 
voted to South American independence. 



FLORENCE MAC ARTHV. 4^ 

He is doubtless already known to you 
by fame, as he is in the Terra Firma, 
by the glorious sobriquet of the La- 
brador." 

Something like amazement was de- 
picted in the countenance of the stran- 
ger, while he went through the forms 
of presentation, and listened to this 
detail of himself. 

Lord Adelm continued uninterrupt- 
ed: "I do not believe, however, that my 
friend aspires to the double influence 
of the crosier and the sword. If, at 
least, he ambitions the Archbishoprick 
of Dublin, in the course of our tra- 
velling companionship (for we came to 
this country together), he has not made 
me his confidant." 

* c Travelling companionship !" mut- 
tered old Crawley, with a look of alarm, 
while Lady Dunore reiterated welcomes 
and exclamations of delight, surprise, 
and wonder. 

VOL. III. D 



50 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

The question of bail was then re- 
sumed ; and a form being prepared, 
Lord Fitzadelm signed the paper : but 
this was not sufficient, as the instru- 
ment required two securities. 

" Oh I" cried Lady Dunore, gaily, 
•* I'll be bail for the archbishop, that is, 
for the general : give me the pen — only 
think how odd ! and you, Georgy, shall 
be ano trier. 1 ' 

Young Crawley, however, gravely 
demonstrated the illegality of her tender, 
and stated that female bail was not 
usual. 

u Well, well, Mr. Conway Crawley, 
you happen to be monstrously unac- 
commodating to-day, and very tiresome/* 
interrupted Lady Dunore, " but I sup- 
pose it must be so. Then do you, Mr. 
Crawley, if you please, sign for me. I 
imagine that will do as well.— I mean 
Crawley pere." 

The tone and manner in which this 



FLORENCE MACAItTHY. 51 

request was given were too peremptory 
to be resisted ; and old Crawley, to his 
own amazement and consternation, be- 
came bail for the person whose arrest 
had taken place at his own instance, 
while he mentally observed, " Well, this 
bates Banacher any how."* 

Young Crawley in the meantime 
had left the table, and was engaged in 
earnest conversation with his aunt 
apart 

Baron Boulter was profuse in his 
apologies, spoke with some harshness of 
the two Crawleys for being led away by 
over loyalty, offered to discharge the 
warrant altogether, and asked the gene- 
ral on a visit to his house whenever he 
should come to Dublin. 

To the discharge of the warrant, Ge- 
neral Fitz waiter firmly objected: the 



* A common Irish expression,- applied to the 
-Icing of an extraordinary thing. 



52 



FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 



transaction, he observed, must be fol- 
lowed to its consequences. To the prof- 
fered hospitality he returned a polite 
answer, as general in its terms as the 
proposition to which it replied. 

Judge Aubrey sat still, in silent 
triumph; the ladies' eyes were all turn- 
ed on the Guerilla chief ; and Lord Ros- 
brin, seeing every thing in a dramatic 
point of view, talked of situations, in- 
cidents, and clap-traps. 

Lord Fitzadelm now came forward, 
and, seconded by his mother, pressed 
General Fitz waiter, with earnest solicita- 
tion, to make Dunore castle his resi- 
dence while he remained in the country; 
but before he could reply, the attention 
of all was suddenly attracted to the re- 
cess of the painted window, by one of 
the bailiffs observing to Mr. Crawley, 

" Now, what am I to do with that 
faymale prisoner in the hall window, 
plaze your honor, that we took up ac- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 53 



cording to order, Mr. Crawley, going 
into Terence Oge's a little bit ago, and 
wouldn't tell her name, Sir, nor shew 
her face, only just axed lave, Sir, to 
send a bit of a message to Castle Macar- 
thy, Sir, to the Bhan Tierna, by a bit 
of a gassoon, Sir, and is cooped up there 
forenent you, Mr. Crawley ?*' 

" You may do with her what you 
plaze, Larry CosteRo," replied Mr. 
Crawley, in a dejected and absent tone, 
and still under the influence of pro- 
found chagrin, amazement, and alarm, 
which were all depicted in his counte- 
nance. 

Larry Costello plazed to let out the 
prisoner from the dock where Lord 
Rosbrin had placed her, and to give her 
her liberty ; when Lord Frederick, in- 
terfering, said, " By Jupiter, this lady 
rebel has as good a right to a fair trial 
by jury as the rest ; and I vote that we 
take our seats, and impannel forthwith 
d 3 



54 . FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



for the cause of this Pucelle de Bally- 
dab." 

" Oh! by all means in the world/' 
said Lady Dunore, unsatiated by scenes, 
sensations, and surprises : " we must 
hear the Pucelle de Ball t/ dab + * and 
she took her son's arm, who seemed sa- 
tisfactorily to have accounted for his ar- 
rival ; for to whatever he had said, she 
replied — " You are quite right — exactly 
— certainly. I am delighted to see 
you here." 

The party now drew up in a circle, 
without resuming their seats, while the 
poor woman, apparently intimidated, 
and wishing to conceal herself, was led 
forward for examination by Larry Cos- 
tello, who endeavoured to encourage 
her, by repeating " Hold up your 
head now, honey. Sure there's money 
bid for you. If the Bhan Tierna wil 
stand up for you, sorrow thing you have 
to fear ma'am. I'll engage she'll carry 



FLORENCE MAlARTHY* 5§ 



you through, and well. Only jus*, 
sure, if you don't shew your face, their 
lordship's will not see it agrah." 

Larry Costello, who was as easy in 
the presence of his superiors as the lower 
Irish usually are, with very little cere- 
mony now pulled back her grey hood, 
and the straw bonnet it covered fell to 
the ground, discovering, not the coarse 
features of an Irish peasant, but such a 
head and such a countenance as might 
have belonged to that 

11 Rare Egyptian, the serpent of old Nile." 

The immediate expression, however, 
of this singular countenance was confu- 
sion ; but though the eyes were rivetted 
to the earth, and a colour, changeful as 
thought, indicated the excess of bashful 
womanly embarrassment, yet the acute 
smile, that for a moment gleamed and 
vanished, and a certain air of mockery 
and shrewdness, which seemed the na- 

D 4 



•6 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



tural involuntary expression of the irre- 
gular but pretty features, combined to 
present a model for one of those happy 
pictures of gypsy beauty, where u fancy 
outworks nature," and which minglea 
with the admiration, its equivocal charms 
attract from the spectator something of 
fear, if not of distrust. Amazement 
universally, and almost audibly express- 
ed, followed the sudden apparition of 
this unexpected vision. 

" The Bh an Tierna ! by the powers," 
exclaimed Larry Costello, in consterna- 
tion, and respectfully withdrawing from 
the prisoner's side." 

" Lambh Laidar Aboo!" shouted 
O'Leary, throwing up his wig instead of 
his hat in an ecstasy of triumph. 

" Lady Clancare!" cried Judge Au- 
brey, coming forward, and taking her 
hand with an air of kindness and protec- 
tion. 

" Lady who ?" said the marchioness. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 5 J 

"Lady Clancare did you say? Good 
heavens! it cannot— it is— My dear 
charming, odd, out of the way Lady ^ 
Clancare, I have no words to express 
my delight. To meet you here, of all 
places in the world ! a prisoner too ! a 
rebel chieftainess perhaps ! Oh ! it's 
quite too good ! Isn't it Georgy, love ? 
One never meets with such things in 
London. But where are you come from ? 
How fat you are grown ! Why did you 
disappear so suddenly, when you had 
obtained such a grand succes in Lon- 
don ? Do you know, people said all 
sorts of odd things of you? No one could 
make you out in the least; and your 
pretty, pretty tales, and stories, and 
things. — How tanned you are !— how 
well you look ! — Georgy, love, don t you 
know Lady Clancare, who made the 
frais of my two last assemblies ? And 
my forgetting you too, dear Lady Can- 
care, so completely, when you were 
out of sight, its so very odd, arn't it 
d 5 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



Georgy ; but one forgets every thing 
in London, except what one sees every 
day." 

To this Georgy assented, at the same 
time renewing a very slight acquaint- 
ance with Lady Clancare, formed at 
Lady Dunores parties in Town. 

While the ceremonies of recognition, 
and the multiplicity of Lady Dunore'is 
questions, afforded to the young Irish 
peeress a moment of self-collection, 
her spirits rallied ; but still, as she 
threw round her eyes, there was 
an air of 4 tongue-tied simplicity* in 
her eloquent silence, which, contrast- 
ing with the expressive character of 
her countenance, produced, what Lord 
Rosbrin called, u a jine dramatic efr 
fectr For 

(i Having lost her breath, 9he spoke and panted, 
That she did make defect perfection, 
And breathless, power breathed forth." 

Her emotion seemed something be- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 5£ 

yond the natural confusion incidental 
to her actual position, and she turned 
her eyes with a glance of supplication 
on Lady Dunore, as if soliciting her 
interposition, to withdraw her from 
a situation where every look was turned 
on her; where she formed the centre 
of a circle evidently animated by idle 
curiosity and amused amazement. Lady 
Dunore, flattered by the claim made 
on her protection, and understanding 
it, drew her a little on one side, listened, 
smiled, laughed aloud at some detail 
which Lady Clancare related in a low 
murmuring voice, and with a coun- 
tenance varying, animated, and hu- 
mourous ; while to the conclusion of 
her relation, whatever it had been, 
Lady Dunore, gently leading her back 
to the group, replied, 

" Don't make the least apology. 
Oh ! no, its better as it is, a thousand^ 
times. This impromptu is worth an huiai* 



6o 



FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 



dred formal premeditated visits^ be- 
sides, all this never could happen but 
in Ireland. It was so kind in you, 
to suffer yourself to be taken prisoner 
too— you are always so amusing. But 
who are you, my dear creature, for I 
forgot to ask you when in London? 
You know Georgy, love, one doesn't 
want to know who people are in Lon- 
don, especially Lions. But are you 
really Irish, my dear Lady Clancare P 

" Irish P exclaimed CVLeary, with a 
burst of emotion beyond all power of 
control; and darting forward, " aye, 
troth is she Irish, body and soul. 
Irish, by birth, by blood, and by de- 
scent. Irish every inch of her, heart 
and hand, life and land ! and though 
the mother that bore her was Iberian 
born, Bachal Essu ! she was Milesian, 
like herself, descended from the Tyrian 
Hercules : and there she stands, the 
darling of the world, with the best blood 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 6l 

of Spain and Ireland flowing through 
her veins. A true Irish woman, that 
loves her country, and lives in it, long 
life to her ! and an ancient ould coun- 
tess to boot, in her own right, Anno 
1565, Elizabeth, Reginse6; the lineal 
heir of Florence Macarthy More, the 
fogh na galla, and King of the Des- 
mondi, to this blessed hour." 

A smile played over the countenance 
of Lady Clancare, who retreated a few 
steps, as this address again brought 
every eye on her, and again covered her 
with confusion. 

" And who are you ? you delightful 
creature," cried Lady Dunore, walking 
round O'Leary with her glass to her 
eye, and more than sharing in the 
general surprise and amusement oc- 
casioned by his sudden appearance and 
speech. 

" Who am I, Madam, is it ?" said 
O'Leary, firmly, but respectfully: " I 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



am Terence Oge O'Leary, plaze you£ 
ladyship, of the Pobble O'Learys, of 
Clancare, county Kerry, anciently Cair- 
Reight, from Ciar-na-Luochra-Macar- 
thy, who was King of Munstcr, Anno 
Mundi, 1525, Noah Rex. and am tri- 
butary and seneaehy, or genealogist 
to the Macarthys, before the English 
was heard of, Anno Domini, 11 66, 
Hen. secundus Rex j and defies Jo- 
hannes Major Scotus, and Measter Cam- 
den, Dr. Ledvvitch, and JSir Richard 
Musgrave, to deny that, any how, the 
thieves of the world! with ould Saxo 
Grammaticus to back them ; and am, 
at the present speaking, a poor Irish 
schoolmaster, Ludi 3/ugister, of Mo- 
naster-ny-Oriel ; and lastly, plaze your 
ladyship, Madam, I am a servitor in 
the great Norman family of the Fitz- 
adelms, being fosterer, (his voice falter- 
ed) — fosterer, Madam, of him, who, 
though he now lies low in the ocean, 



FLORENCE MACARTIIY. So* 



with none but myself, and the winds 
of heaven to moan over him, yet, if 
he had his right, would now be reign- 
ing here in this very castle ; I mean 
the-" 

Here General Frtzwalter advanced 
in front of O'Leary, leaning on Lord 
Fitzadelm's arm. O'Leary started back : 
his voice dropped, his colour changed, 
and he paused abruptly. The general 
took his place, from which he had in. 
voluntarily retreated ; and some low 
whispered words from Lady Clancare 
to the marchioness, who had, during 
O'Leary's speech, drawn the arm of the 
Irish peeress through her own, now 
wholly diverted her attention from the 
last of those dramatis personce, which 
the happy events of this eventful day 
had brought upon the stage. 

Withdrawing from the circle, the 
two ladies, in earnest conversation^ 
moved towards ttie portico, followed by, 



64 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



every eye. The appearance of Lady 
Clancare produced an instantaneous 
effect upon the crowd assembled at the 
gates. 

The report had gone abroad, that the 
idol of popular feeling had been taken 
prisoner by Mr. Crawley, and brought 
to Dunore castle. Hundreds of wild, 
but strong affectioned persons, had 
gathered for her protection and rescue. 
Thousands were at her service ; but her* 
appearance, leaning on Lady Dunore's 
arm, lulled every fear for her safety. 
Cries of Bhan Tierna go Brach! rent 
the air ; and when both ladies sprung 
into a little cabriolet, drawn by mules, 
(the carriage of Lady Clancare, w hich 
had just arrived,) the name of the Mar- 
chioness of Dunore, mingled with these 
more national sounds, and " long lives" 
and " long reigns," were liberally dis- 
tributed to both ladies. 

The guests of the castle had now ad- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 65 



vaiiced into the portico to witness this 
singular scene. Lady Clancare had 
taken the reins ; and while Lady Dunore 
drew her cashmir over her head and 
round her shoulders, her new friend 
turned her extraordinary countenance 
on the group in the portico ; and with 
a mingled expression of extreme slyness 
and humour, she threw round her dark 
eyes. They met alternately the looks 
of all present ; till at last fixing their 
glances, charged with a malicious 
gaiety, something between triumph and 
derision, on old Crawley, she kissed 
her little whip in salutation to all, and 
drove off with the lady of the castle, 
both laughing loud and violently. 

There was in all this little transac- 
tion a something that gave a poetical 
image of an enchantress, whose strug- 
gles with a rival Ogre finally prevail 
and Lady Clancare looked as the Tita- 



66 FLORENCE MACARTHT. 



nia might be supposed to look, when, 
on Oberon's begging from her the 

<c Little changeling boy to be his Henchman, n 

she replies in the triumph of conscious 
possession, " not for thy fairy king- 
dom!" The possession of Lady Du- 
nore seemed to her desirable as the 
changeling boy to the fairy king. 

With the departure of the two chief- 
taincsses, English and Irish, the rest of 
the company, somewhat fatigued, and 
infinitely amused by the events of the 
morning, withdrew and dispersed, except 
the members of the Crawley family, 
who still remained in the hall,, congre- 
gated in close conference. 

" The game's up/' said old Crawley, 
with his eyes fixed on the spot where 
the phantom of Lady Clancare still 
floated before him, bearing off the mar- 
chioness : <e she has got her now," he 



FLORENCE MACARTHY* 6? 

continued. w That's the way she took 
my lunatic from me, whom I'd have 
had to this day, only for her, and the 
management of his estate. That's 
the way too she let loose the Rabragh 
on the world, with the help of J udge 
Aubrey, just the ditto of herself. Well, 
the devil is not able for her, Christ 
pardon me ; and believe after all she is 
the devil ingarnet, if the truth was 
known." 

" This is no place for idle talking^' 
said young Crawley, at last himself 
overpowered by the contentions of the 
day. " Follow me to my aunt's room 
you see Lord Rosbrin is still in the 
portico — your discomfiture may be ob- 
served." He then left the hall, with 
his silence-stricken aunt on one arm, 
and his green bag under the other. 
Old Crawley, after a moment's pause > 
was preparing, with a deep sigh, to obey 
the authoritative commands of his son y 



68 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



when Lord Rosbrin, entering the hall, 
arrested his steps, with a solemn beck- 
Oiling of his finger, and cxelaiming 
with a significant air — 

"My gentle Puck, come hither." 

Crawley involuntarily obeyed the 
summons, though by no means liking 
the twin de car esse which accom- 
panied it. 

" Say, my fat lad of the castle*' 
continued Lord Rosbrin, " remember- 
est thou ought in scenic effect more 
striking than that last dramatic inci- 
dent ; I mean the old woman trans- 
formed suddenly into a Roxalana, or 
an Urganda in the burletta of Cymon ? 
Dots it not beat the skreen scene in the 
School for Scandal, hollow T* 

" Hollow,'" replied old Crawley, en-, 
deavouring to extricate his button from 
Lord Rosbrin s grasp. 

" Rememberest thou," proceeded 
Lord Rosbrin, emphatically, " re mem* 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 6<J 

berest thou, since once I sat upon a 
promontory, and heard a mermaid, on 
a dolphin's back, uttering such dulcet 
and harmonious breath, that the rude 
sea grew civil at her song?" 

" Why, then, upon my credit, I can't 
say I do, v returned Crawley, with ano- 
ther impatient effort at release. 

" That very time/' continued the 
peer, " I saw — thou could 'st not— fly- 
ing between the cold moon and the 
earth " 

At the word moon, a sudden con- 
viction of the young lord's lunacy 
struck on Crawley's mind ; and burst- 
ing away, and leaving his button in 
Lord Rosbrin's grasp, he muttered, as 
he went along, "Devil a bit; but I be- 
lieve it is full moon with you all, 
men, women, and children, the Lord 
save us!" 

Lord Rosbrin, looking after him, ut- 
tered a stage laugh, and crying, "A 



70 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

fool, a fool, a motley fool !" retired to 
his dressing-room, to clean some silver 
spangles, and cut out foil for his coro- 
nation dress in Lady Macbeth. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 71 



CHAPTER II. 



" Lovers and madmen have such seething brains, 
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend 
More than cool reason comprehends." 

Shakespeare. 

"What! shall quips and sentences, and these 
paper bullets of the brain, drive a man from 
the career of his humours?" 

Idem. 



While the guests of the castle dis- 
persed in different directions, Lord 
Adelm and General Fitzwalter pro- 
ceeded arm in arm together across the 
castle court to a sort of terrace, once a 
rampart, which gave on the sea. 

This rampart opened by a door upon 
the strand ; and Lord Adelm, proposing 



?2 FLORENCE MAC A liTUV. 

that they should direct their steps bo- 
yond the reach of intrusion or observa- 
tion, was endeavouring to draw hack 
the rusty bolt, and obtain egress, when 
O'Leary, with his hat squeezed between 
iiis hands, and his countenance distorted 
by agitation, caught the general's eve, 
as he followed him at a short dis- 
tance. 

"What is the matter?" asked the 
general, turning back on his steps, and 
meeting the approach of his host. 

"The matter, my lord! that's your 
honor, I mane now gineral, Sir, any 
how. Nothing is the matter, gineral, 
only great times, and great luck, Sir! 
and the young lord, the very moral of 
the honourable Gerald, his father: and 
the Crawley pirates foiled, Sir, for 
oncet: and I'd only crave a word with 
your honor, gineral, since it's a great 
gineral you are, Sir, and was a great 
gineral in the family an hundred years 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



73 



back and more— that's the ould Bri- 
gadier, anno 169S, in armour this day 
at Court Fitzadelm, only no frame— but 
stopping a chimbley. And it's what I'd 
just make bould to ax your honor, and 
never will trouble you more, Sir, plaze 
Jasus! if you arn't the young lord 
that's laning over the battlement, wait- 
ing for you, gineral? that is Lord Fitz- 
adelm, Sir?" 

" O'Leary," said General Fitzwaltcr, 
in a soothing voice, " O'Leary, put on 
your hat, and go home. My good 
O'Leary, I shall shortly follow you to 
the Friary to dress, and you may be- 
speak me a chaise to bring me here to 
dinner. And, above all, OLeary" (and 
he patted his hand on his shoulder as 
he spoke, his voice softening into a tone 
of great affection), " take care of the 
health and life of a person who is very 
dear — that is very necessary to me, 
O'Leary." 

VOL. III. E 



74 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

"And who is that?" said O'Leary, 
eagerly. w Is it th' aigle, gineral? 
Sure he's dead, Sir. Poor Cumhal's 
dead at last, your honor;" and the tears 
dropped large and fast from his eyes, 
but they fell not all for Cumhal. 

The tone of the general's voice, and 
the pressure of his hand, had been too 
much for the state of exaltation in 
which the. events of the morning had 
left him;, and the death of his old com- 
panion furnished him with an excuse 
for weeping, which relieved his heart, 
weighed down with oppression. 

" Dead !" repeated the general: 
u poor old Cumhal!" — he sighed and 
added, absently, " it was much such an 
evening as this, and such a coast too : 
poor Cumhal — dead!" 

" Och ! you need not moan him, 
gineral," said O'Leary, reproachfully ; 
" he's better provided for nor them he's 
left behind him, Sir. For shure, he 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 75 

wasn't shook offlike a withered leaf from 
a young green tree, and rejected by him, 
that was reared on his milk, that's my 
wife's milk, Sir. And thought, troth, 
we'd break our hearts the day he was 
weaned; and we sent back to St. Cro- 
han's; and wasn't long till he followed 
us there, Nolens V ilens, and " 

" You are much altered since we met, 
since we first met in the mountains, 
O'Leary," interrupted the general, as 
he fixed his eyes on a countenance, 
where the perpetual conflict of revived 
feelings, vague doubts, and uncertain 
hopes, had made great ravages: "you 
are not well, my dear O'Leary." 

" That's it, plaze your honor, I am 
not well, surely, Sir," said O'Leary, 
eagerly, u and thinks betimes that it's 
the lycanthropia I have got, which 
Maister Camden saith was common to 
the ancient Irish,* and afrirmeth that 

* The disease of the wolf — a malady attri- 
buted to the ancient Irish. 

E 2 



76 FLORENCE MACART H Y . 

melancholie persons of this sort have 
pale faces, soaked and hollow eyes, 
with a weak sight, and never shedding 
one tear to the view of the world — only 
now, Sir, for Cumhal, the poor bird." 

" We will talk this matter over to 
night, O'Leary," said the general, an- 
swering the impatient beckon of Lord 
Adehn's hand; " or to-morrow, or at no 
distant period : and you shall be well 
again, O'Leary, and be gay and con- 
tented as I first found you in the midst 
of your learned disciples; and you shall 
change your scene too : you shall travel 
with me to other countries ; and then 
you will return to Ireland, and finish 
your genealogical history of the Macar- 
thies, and dedicate it to that very 6 an- 
cient old Countess of Claneare,' in 
whose favour you were so eloquent to 
day ; and by all means get her picture 
if you can, for your title page: I pro- 
mise you it will sell your book." 

With these words, gaily pronounced, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 77 

he left him whom they had cheered, be- 
fore he had time to reply; and joining 
the impatient Lord Adelm, they pro- 
ceeded along the shore together. 

There was a magic in the name of 
the Macarthies that operated like a spell 
upon the ideas and feelings of O'Leary, 
and drew him from the remembrance of 
his own griefs. General Fitzwalter had 
probably discovered this, for he often 
had recourse to it in moments when the 
wandering mind of the schoolmaster be 
came immersed in recollections which 
were the sources of his hallucination. It 
now had its wonted effect; and O'Leary, 
as he left the castle gates, with his usual 
short heavy step, and his hands clasped 
behind his back, murmured to him- 
self:— 

" My genealogical history of the Ma- 
carthies, in troth ; and never tould me 
a word since he came of the Ogygia of 
the great O'Flaherty, nor the Histoir© 
£ 3 



78 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

d'Irelande, by Abbe O'Gaghehan : how 
could he, and he in jeopardy of the 
Crawleys ? And my codices sent to the 
Lord-Deputy, that's the Lord-Lieute- 
nant ; and troth, I think they'll astonish 
him. And the Bhan Tierna, after all, 
at the castle of them Dunores, after 
keeping out of their way, and then cir- 
cumventing the Crawleys : aye, ' still on 
the nechs of the Butlers? Dioul ! and 
carrying off the great lady to herself, 
when it's what she couldn't help appear- 
ing before her; and letting herself be 
taken, and turning bad to good, always 
after her ould fashion. A Macarthy in 
the halls of the Fitzadelms: Bachal 
Essu ! Wonders will never cease! 

* Turne quod optanti divum promittere nemo 
Auderet, Tolvenda dies en attulit ultro.' 

And to see her standing in the midst of 
them Boddie Sassoni, just like a young 
scion of an old oak ©n the Boggras, flou- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. fO, 

rishing lonely and green among the 
scraws and briars that have sprung up 
in a night saison, like mushrooms.' ' 

While O'Leary was thus soliloquizing 
his way to the Dunore Arms, where a 
crowd was assembled, relating and listen- 
ing to the extraordinary events that had 
taken place at the castle, the two adven- 
turous fellow travellers were pursuing 
their walk up and down the sea-shore. 
Lord Adelm Fitzadelm, occupied with 
himself and his own views, as those 
usually are who have long engrossed the 
world's attention, and have become the 
spoiled children of society, was eager to 
pour the confidences of his self-love into 
his companions patient ear ; and taking 
his arm, as they passed through the 
postern gate, he entered at once upon 
the history of his feelings and of his life 
since they had parted at Court Fitz- 
adelm. 

" I am ordinarily but little influenced," 



80 FLORENCE MACAHTHY. 

he observed, " by the ebb and flow of joy 
or sadness, which govern the capricious 
tide of human affections in the every- 
day children of the world : yet / am 
glad, sincerely glad to see you here ; 
glad that it may be in my power to re- 
turn some part of the hospitable rites 
which, as a stranger, I received at your 
hands ; and happy that my timely pre- 
sence has been the means of saving you 
from at least a temporary inconvenience, 
and rescuing you from some intrigue of 
my mother's friends, the Crawleys, 
which might have involved you in 
transient vexations, though eventually 
they must have fallen of themselves into 
insignificance. 

<c I am not quite so certain of that/* 
returned General Fitzwalter : " had they 
succeeded in shutting me up at the pre- 
sent moment, they might have crossed 
me in pursuits, to myself, at least, big 
with importance. They might have 



FLORENCE MA CAR THY. 



81 



succeeded in throwing suspicion on my 
character, which, at a future moment, 
might have invalidated my testimony, 
when all but honour will be at stake. 
Their motives of action are, however, 
still a mystery." 

To me it seems impossible," replied 
Lord Adelm, " that you could come 
into the sphere of intrigue of these rep- 
tiles. There is a sort of poetical ele- 
vation in your character, your profes- 
sion, or rather your vocation, that 
places you so far out of the reach of the 
meddling little faction of an Irish dis- 
trict. The admiral of the gallant fleet 
of Martingaria, the general in chief of 
the guerrilla troops of the mighty Cor- 
dilleras, a warrior, a patriot, in a word, 
you in the power of the Crawley s ! 
This is a solecism not easily understood ! 
and 

* Comes not within the prospect of belief." 

f ? You measure my character by the 
B 5 



82 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



elevation of the great regions in which 
it was developed ; and associate me 
personally with the glorious cause in 
which I was involved. But how came 
you by these facts ? Where did you 
learn that the Commodore of the Li- 
brador had once commanded the little 
fleet of Martingaria, or had been dis- 
tinguished by an higher command among 
the cloud-embosomed Cordilleras?" 

" Where?" repeated Lord Adelm, 
with animation, " and how ? Why may 
not I have my Egeria or my daemon, as 
well as another ? for if I obtained not 
my information through super-human 
agency, faith, I know not how I got it, 
or came by it." 

" You speak enigmas." 

" I have lived in them of late." 

" And the sphinx who has presided 
over them is still, I suppose, Mrs. Ma- 
gillicuddy," said Fitzwalter, ironically. 

" Not exactly," replied Lord Adelm, 
dryly, " except Mrs. Magillicuddy be 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 83 

a sort of petite maitresse-siphmx, fan- 
ciful and elegant as she is mysterious 
and powerful : one, for example, who 
traces 6 thoughts that breathe, and words 
that burn,' upon paper, that blushes 
roses and smells of them; one who 
takes for her device, love depriving 
Jiowers of their thorns, and for her 
motto, ( Sou utile ainda queBriccando" 

The general started ; and Lord Adelm, 
producing a small embroidered letter- 
case, took from it three billets, written 
on rose-coloured paper, and literally 
breathing odours. The seal and motto, 
to which he pointed, were no strangers 
to the general's eyes. 

" I might," he continued, " shew 
you the contents of these billets ; for 
with the exception of a few detailed 
facts, they are vague and mysterious 
as Delphic oracles, but that I hold 
them sacred to the very mysticism 
they profess. In style they are almost 



84 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



too fanciful, light, and delicate, even 
for a woman's dictation, though at the 
same time in substance obscure as di- 
plomatic cyphering. In short, I am 
lost in wild conjecture." 

" Oh ! I see Queen Mab hath been 
with you/' observed the general, laugh- 
ing, and amused by the visionary cre- 
dulity of the noble idealist, which seemed 
to have lost nothing of its eccentricity 
since they had parted. — " Are you, 
then, become a devotee to a more phi- 
losophical sect than the school of fairy, 
one of the illuminati, the invisible bro- 
thers, the fratres ror'is cocti, whose 
communion is confined to sprites, sylphs, 
and gnomes, and whose secret of all 
human good lies in the essences of con- 
cocted dew 9" 

" Nay, you may laugh as you will; but 
I hold the principles of the Rosicrucian 
philosophy in high respect. Whatever 
elevates the imagination, whatever raise* 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 85 



us above the groveling lot of earthly 
existence, unites us to a spiritual world, 
shakes oft' the dross of mere humanity, 
and purifies and refines our nature, are 
at least glorious illusions. I have always 
loved the poetical and religious grandeur 
of the Rosicrucian doctrines, tfteir 
* divine energy,' or soul, diffused 
throughout the frame of the universe; 
their ' Archceus,' or universal spirit ; 
the influence of their bright starry 
Providence; the government of light 
and harmony; their brilliant daemons 
and delicious sylphs. I do not," he 
continued, as his imagination heated 
with its own workings, " I do not, I 
confess, blush to own myself the dupe 
of those high-wrought dreams of phy- 
sical possibility which inspired Numa 
in his grotto, or Socrates in his cell ; 
and I wish not, at this moment, to dis- 
sipate the impression that there may, 
that their does exist for me, some crea- 



86 FLORENCE MACARTH Y. 



ture of aether and light, some legitimate 
child of the spheres, which, always 
invisibly nigh, watches over my sunless 
life-path, throwing a ray over the heart's 
dark desolation, and shining upon the 
ruins of memory, like the gleam that 
now falls upon that tottering pile be- 
fore us/' 

" It talks well ; but one real lovely 
woman is worth it all," said the ge- 
neral, reddening as he spoke, from the 
energy of his feeling — " But your in- 
visible sylph, if sylph you will have her, 
seems to me a malicious little imp, and 
more like the ' shrewd and knavish 
sprite called Robin GoodfellowJ than 
a delicate aeriel ; for she has led you a 
dance 

c Over hill, over dale, 
Through bush, through briar, 
Over park, over pale, 
Through flood, through fire,' 

without any apparent object in her 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 8/ 

agency, if it be not to amuse her own 
splenetic gaiety, or to work upon your 
imagination." 

" Of you, at least," said Lord Fitz- 
adelm, " whether gnome or sylph, or 
woman, she merits well, for you are 
the object of her special protection/' 

" I !" said the general, starting — " in- 
deed !' 

" Judge for yourself. Of three bil- 
lets received from my lovely invisible 
(for lovely she must be, whether mortal 
or sprite), one led me from Portugal to 
Ireland, by informing me of my 
mother s intrigue to smuggle me into 
the borough of Glannacrime, bon gre y 
malgrif another fixed my residence in 
the neighbourhood of Kilcolman, by 
announcing it the native region of my 
guardian spirit, (where, by the bye, I 
vainly waited her brilliant apparition), 
and the third urged my instant depar- 
ture for Dunore, by intimating that my 



88 FLORENCE MAC ART II V. 



travelling companion, General Don Fitz- 
waiter, the illustrious South-American 
chief, was about to become the victim 
of the loyal suspicions of the petty 
despots of the place. I was not sur- 
prised to find that you belonged to 
history, and immediately hastened to 
your assistance ; too late, indeed, to 
warn you of your danger ; but, I truat, 
in time to avert its consequences. " 

" This looks like magic indeed," said 
the general, after a moment's pause. 
if I had no reason to suppose I was 
known to any human being in this 
rountry : for wishing to avoid the in- 
conveniences which follow the eclat of 
a public character, I have concealed 
my name, profession, and title, which 
might have reached even this remote 
spot, through the medium of the news- 
papers, now that the eyes of all Europe 
are directed on the glorious struggles of 
South-America. But I can only be a& 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 8£) 

object of interest to this powerful spirit, 
in as much as she supposes me your 
friend. It is you whom she has led 
from Portugal to Ireland through the 
solitudes of the Galties, amidst the shades 
of Court Fitzadelm : it is for you that 
she has called spirits from the vasty 
deep in the questionable shapes of Mrs. 
Magillicuddy and Mr. Owny. She had 
provided you a lodging too in the neigh- 
bourhood of Dunore, in case she found 
it necessary to preserve your incognito; 
and by this arrangement I have pro- 
fitted ; for my host O'Leary, till he saw 
us together, insisted on my being Lord 
Adeim Fitzadelm, and as such received 
me for his tenant, which he would not 
otherwise have done." 

The general, as he spoke, was occu- 
pied in searching among some papers 
for the mysterious letter which had pre- 
ceded his arrival at the priory : " Here/ 9 
he said, " is a letter from your sylph, 



90 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

not, however, breathing and blushing 
roses, but written in human characters, 
on a material substance, and respiring 
turf smoke. O'Leary, who is a Rosicru- 
cian in his way, insists that it came 
from the good people, the designation of 
Irish faery." 

Lord Adelm took the letter in sur- 
prise, and read it with emotion. " It 
is," he said, " the writing and the seal. 
May I keep this letter?" he asked after a 
pause. 

" Oh, certainly," replied the general, 
carelessly : " it does not concern me ; 
you of course will find out who this in- 
visible agent is ; and then " 

" That is not so certain," interrupted 
Lord Fitzadelm : " she wraps herself 
in impenetrable seclusion, throws a 
veil of mystery over her motions, as 
over her person, and in her fanciful 
epistles, though there is much to excite 
wonder, there is nothing to feed hope 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 91 

? further than the interest she takes in 
me. 

" Interest indeed ! but you cannot 
for a moment consider this adventure 
in any other light than as a mere bonne 
fortune, however singularly it has been 
conducted." 

" O ! there is satiety in that thought, 
in that term at least; and to confess the 
truth, I do not wish to dull the delight 
of this mystic union by exploring its 
causes, or assigning it a motive or ob- 
ject. I love to think that in the pauses 
snatched from the tedium of society, I 
may inhale the sigh, and listen to the 
song of this nymph of the air, as I 
caught the one on the ruins of Holy- 
cross, and hung upon the other, amidst 
the desolation of Court Fitzadelm, for 
I am convinced of her presence on both 
occasions, and to believe that our com- 
munion is divine, and that our alliance 
will become immortal." 



,93 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" And I/' said the general, with 
warmth, " I would not give up the idea 
of this invisible correspondent being a 
woman, a tiue devoted woman, were I 
in your place, to be an object of adora- 
tion to a c world of spirits.' 1 Were I 
the object of such zeal, vigilance, and 
devotion, had / called forth such talent, 
spirit, and ingenuity, I would not long 
remain ignorant of my invisible guar- 
dian. 1 would force my way through 
the mystery which conceals her, I would 
follow her from pole to pole, over alps 
and oceans, or remain fixed and rooted 
to the spot she inhabited * woo her, win 
her, cling to her, cherish her 

" And — marry her — " interrupted 
Lord Adelm, yawning. 

" Marry her!" repeated the general 
in a tone as if some sudden association 
of ideas were abruptly awakened by this 
proposition ; then, after a pause, he 
asked abruptly — " What do you think 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. &3 

©f that pretty, but extraordinary, look- 
ing, Lady Clancare? Her appearance 
was altogether sudden and singular." 

" Oh ! she struck me to be a mere 
minaudiere ! some stale engouement of 
my mother's, who came in this extra- 
ordinary way upon the scene, merely to 
make a sensation, and startle back Lady 
Dunore into a faded prepossession. You 
may trust me on the score of my mo- 
ther's fancies. This wild Irish peeress 
has been one of the lions, I suppose, of 
a London season, has been exhibited 
for her brogue or her howl, or shewn off 
' as the lady, whose father was hanged 
in the rebellion for my mother, who 
is one of the reigning autocrats of 
fashion, brings people into vogue upon 
her own emotions, as the old Dutchess 
of G. did upon a fiddle-string; and weeps 
or wonders them into notoriety, as her 
grace danced them into ton. This Lady 
Clancare has 6 fretted her hour upon 



94 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the stage/ and was heard no more; and 
she now issues from her own castle, a 
prisoner with her own consent into ours, 
merely to get up a scene, and occasion 
a rechauffee, in my capricious mother s 
c promptly cold affections/ ' 

" She seems, however, to have suc- 
ceeded, for she carried off Lady Dunore, 
even from you, who were so little ex- 
pected, so freshly arrived, and so rap- 
turously received." 

" Oh ! that is quite my mother. She 
is an excellent person in her way ; but 
in her engouemens her feelings are— 

c Momentary as a sound, 

Swift as a shadow — short as any dream.' 

Be not you, therefore, misled by her 
favour. You are made to win it ; but 
even you will find it 6 sweet, but not 
permanent/' 

" I shall not remain here to put her 
ladyship's stability to the test. I expect 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 95 

my little vessel round by the first fair 
wind, and then I am off/' 

" No, no/' interrupted Lord Fitz- 
adelm, " you do not mean that. You 
will not leave me here with dawdling 
dandies, and cast coquettes; for, save 
my excellent uncle Daly and Eversham, 
who, though a coxcomb, is a perfect 
gentleman, the whole set-out at Dunore 
castle is, I saw at a glance, perfectly 
detestable : but that I am spell-bound 
here, I would fly off with you to South 
America to-morrow." 

"And your election ?" 

u I have not even thought of that yet. 
If I am returned, however, I shall pur- 
sue my own course : if I am worsted I 
shall be left to follow it ; but all de- 
pends upon how my mother stands im- 
plicated : what is done cannot be un- 
done : for the present, however, other 
objects touch me more nearly." 

The castle bell (for they were still 



J)6 FLORENCE MACARTMY. 

pacing backwards and forwards beneath 
the rampart) now intimated the hour 
for dressing ; and Lord Adelm, urging 
the general's quick return^ subjoined an 
ardent request that he would take up his 
residence at the castle, while his business 
detained him in the neighbourhood. 

This Fitzwalter, with his wonted 
tone of decision, promptly refused. He 
insisted upon their original stipulation, 
which had guaranteed mutual and per- 
fect freedom of action. 

" How necessary it is to me," he 
continued, " yourself shall judge.'* He 
paused for a moment, placed himself 
between Lord Adelm and the postern 
gate, at which he was about to enter, 
and with a low voice and rapid but em- 
phatic enunciation, he continued—" I 
am here in this neighbourhood for the 
purpose of recovering my birth-right, of 
which, in my boyhood, I was fraudu- 
lently bereaved. I am here for the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 97 

purpose of dispossessing a powerful fa- 
mily of princely property, titl, honours, 
and influence of vast extent, which, but 
for my unexpected re-appearance on the 
scene, would in right be theirs. To 
effect this, the testimony of the lowly, 
and proofs in possession of the illiterate 
and the prejudiced, are necessary. My 
agents lie amongst those, purchaseable 
by their poverty or assailable by their 
simplicity. My opponents are among 
the great, the powerful, the noble, and 
the wily. Vigour, promptitude, perse- 
verance, and secrecy, are the arms given 
me to contend with. Judge then how 
necessary to my views are perfect free- 
dom, obscurity of position, and disen- 
gagement of mind. I am here collect- 
ing witnesses, whom I dare not trust 
with the secret of their own evidence. 
Brought forward in society in this coun- 
try, I should come into contact with 
those whom I am bound, not to injure 

VOL. III. F 



98 FLORENCE MACARTHY* 

(for I come but to claim my rights), but 
to dispossess : it may be to receive their 
hospitality in the common intercourse 
of the world, or to awaken suspicion by 
rejecting it. I might, perhaps, too, so 
ally myself to some one interesting 
member of that family, who, united to 
me by blood, and endeared to me by 
splendid qualities, would eventually 
weaken my efforts in the cause of jus- 
tice, general as well as personal : in a 
word — " he stopped abruptly : his eye 
darkened, his under Up trembled, and 
his silence was that of strong emotion; 
a seeming struggle between the impulse 
of a generous frankness, and the caution 
of necessary prudence. 

" Pray go on," said Lord Adelm, im- 
patiently: " your story interests me;" 
and he seated himself upon an abutment 
of the rampart, forgetful of the time, 
the place, of every thing, but the extra- 
ordinary person who stood before him ; 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 9$ 

and who now, like a creature restored 
to its native element, was energized by 
strong passion, and animated by emo- 
tions best adapted to his nature and 
existence. 

" In a word then/' continued the gefc 
neral, firmly, and after a pause, " such 
a person as I have described exists; and 
I have suddenly but decidedly resolved 
to make him, who must chiefly suffer by 
my claims, the sole confidant of my 
strenuous efforts to establish them ; to 
relate to him a story which will cover 
those nearest to him with ignominy, and 
tend to deprive him of the greatest ob- 
jects of the world's ambition. Imagine 
how highly I think of the honour and 
the spirit of this person, of the truth of 
his character, of the elevation of his 
mind, of the disinterested generosity of 
his nature." 

" By heavens ! I would rather be that 
selected person," said Lord Adelm^ ircu 
f 2 



100 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



petuously — " I would rather merit and 
obtain such proofs of esteem, confi- 
dence, and admiration, than possess the 
highest sounding titles, which eventually 
await me, or lord it over these rich do- 
mains, which must one day be mine." 

" Would you?" exclaimed the ge- 
neral, catching his extended hand in a 
grasp of iron ; " would you — " he stopped 
short: a slight convulsion passed across 
his countenance, and, suddenly letting 
fall the hand he so firmly held, he 
added — " But you shall hear my story : 
I will confide to you events, and names 
blasted by those events, consigned to 
shame and ignominy, which have 
long lain deep buried in my heart with 
feelings of indignation, stifled, indeed, 
but not extinct. In my person justice 
has been set aside, right overthrown, 
nature's holiest ties violated; my nearest 
kindred have been my deadliest foes, 
and the legal guardians of my youth 



FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 101 



have torn me from my natural position 
in society, exposed me to misery, to 
slavery ; through them I have been 
bought and sold like beasts of burden ; 
through them " He paused ab- 
ruptly: he clenched his hands with a 
violence that proceeded from acute and 
powerful feeling, seeking vent in physi- 
cal sensation, acute even to pain ; then 
with a flashing eye, and an illuminated 
countenance, he added — " But it is 
passed, and I have asserted all the rights 
of man, recovered and protected them 
for myself and others : I have broken 
the chain of oppression wherever I have 
found it galling the oppressed: I have 
fought my way to glory and success ; 
and now, I trust, I come to illustrate the 
name I claim, to add to the splendour, 
not to darken the brightness, of heredi- 
tary nobility. This, however^ is no 

moment 99 

" Yes, yes/' said Lord Adelm, catch- 
F 3 



102 



FLORENCE MAC ART HY. 



ing his enthusiasm, and borne away by 
the energy and rapidity of his manner, 
" go on ; this is the time." 

" Will you/' said General Fitzwalter, 
after a long pause, " will you trust 
yourself to-night in my lodging among 
the ruins of Monaster-ny-Oriel r" 

" To night ! at what hour f] 

" The tide will be out at midnight: 
by taking the strand you will reach the 
Friary in less than twenty minutes." 

" At midnight, then," said Lord 
Adelm, shaking the hands of his com- 
panion ; and, for the first time in his life, 
interested in the details of a story of 
which he was not himself the hero; 
for till this moment he had never been 
associated with one, whose high qualities 
and superior endowments assimilated 
with his own. The singularity and 
mystery of the stranger's position had 
also fastened with tenacious influence 
on his imagination ; and a secret mid- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 103 

night interview, for the purpose of re- 
ceiving a momentous confidence, in the 
ruined towers of a desolated abbey, on 
the wild shores of the vast Atlantic, had 
each their due effect ; and, for the mo- 
ment, the invisible sylph was super- 
seded, if not forgotten, in the interest 
excited by the stranger chief. 

The dressing bell had now ceased to 
ring; and the new, but firm friends, 
parted for the moment. 



104 



FLORENCE MACAXTIIV. 



CHAPTER III. 

"Ronge de flel ct bouffi d'orguil." 



As the judges were to proceed on 
their journey early in the evening, din- 
ner had been advanced by nearly an 
hour earlier than the ordinary time, 
and the last bell had rung before any 
one had descended to the saloon. The 
judges alone were impatiently observ- 
ing the gradual refrigeration of soups, 
fish, and pates, as the party dropped 
into the dining-room, one by one. Lord 
Adelm and General Fitz waiter were 
among the last. They came in toge- 
ther, and all were standing in expecta- 
tion of the entrance of tne marcnioness, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 105 

when a servant presented a note to 
Lady Gcorgina. 

" Oh !" said Lady Georgina, as she 
finished a few lines, written with a 
pencil on a bit of twisted paper, " here 
is a note from Lady Dunore : she desires 
me to offer apologies to all for her ab- 
sence, to take the chair, and to say 
that she will join us at the dessert. — She 
dates from Castle Macarthy, the seat of 
Lady Clancare." 

Some smiled at this last intelligence, 
and some looked sad: among the 
former were Lord Frederick and Mr. 
Daly: the latter were exclusively com- 
posed of the Crawley s — all took their 
places at the table. The presence of 
the servants prevented the turn the 
conversation would otherwise have taken 
from the circumstances of the morning; 
and the dinner passed off with a heavi- 
ness, which not even some occasional 
flashes from Baron Boulter could en- 
F 5 



106 FLOE ENCE MAC A I? THY. 

liven. Lord Adelm, with his look of 
habitual haughtiness and abstraction, 
sat silent and reserved. Judge Aubrey 
talked only in a low voice with General 
Fitzwalter, who sat next him. The 
Crawleys, formal and constrained, equal- 
ly by the presence of Lord Adelm, 
w T ho did not notice them, and of a per- 
son whom they had calumniated, and 
would have injured, scarcely concealed 
the chagrin and vexation under which 
they laboured. Lord Frederick mur- 
mured soft nonsense and satirical re- 
marks into Lady Georgina's "pleased 
ear/' Mr. Heneage was too fine, 
Lord Rosbrin and Mr. Pottinger too 
busy to speak, while the absence of 
Lady Dunore's restless vivacity was 
evinced by the general quietude of the 
table, which was solemn and dull as any 
fashionable dinner of extreme London 
bon-ton could have been. 

The announce of the judges' carriages- 



FLORENCE MAC ART H Y. 10^ 

before Lady Dunore's return, and while 
the fruit was still upon the table, in- 
duced the whole party to rise, and ad- 
journ to coffee and the drawing-room, 
d lafrancaise; and Mr. Daly, shocked 
at the w T ant of all bienseance in his niece 
towards her high judicial guests, en- 
deavoured to apologize for her absence, . 
by jokingly remarking that she had 
fallen into the thraldom of some en- 
chantment; and that he did not doubt 
that the pretty Lady Clancare was 
some "Irish night-tripping fairy/' who 
had carried her off, for special reasons, 
known only to the high court of faery. 

" By the bye/' said Lord Frederick, 
"I should like to be better acquainted 
with that same Lady Clancare, who 
chose to be made a prisoner, just pour 
s'egayer! Does no one know any tiling 
about her?" 

" Not a great deal, I believe/' said 
Miss Crawley, eagerly and pointedly, 



108 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



" at least in this neighbourhood, my 
lord/' 

" More than is good/' muttered old 
Crawley ; while Lady Georgina, not 
perhaps quite satisfied with Lord Fre- 
derick's inquiries, replied, 

" Oh, you must have seen her last 
season in London. Lady Dunorc 
shewed her off for a night or two, and 
took her from old Lady Newbank, who 
picked her up, as she picks up all odd 
people and old china, nobody knows 
where." 

cc What does she do?" said Lord 
Frederick, sipping his coffee. " Is 
she one of the 1 Guitar arie^ the e Tu 
mi Chamas* ladies, who thrum'd us 
to death, when Spain was in vogue ? 
f Et Dieu sait la raclerie que cctoit? 
Or does she play the f devil r* or is 
she a waltzer, or a quadriller ? or does 
she invent Chinese puzzles r or make 
mottos and draw trophies, or what ?'* 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. K>9 

xc I think she was brought about for 
writing books/' said Lady Georgina, 
languidly, " as well as I remember/' 

" Writing books!'* re-echoed Lord 
Frederick in a tone of alarm: "you 
don't really mean that ?" 

u Not absolutely books, I believe, 
but tales , stories, something about 
Ireland, and Spain, and South America. 
I almost forget what ; but I fancy peo- 
ple thought they were very amusing 
and odd." 

" De tout mon coeur" said Lord Fre- 
derick, " I have no objection. But 
with respect to ladies tliat write books, 
c en tout etpar tout, je quitte la partie.' 
It's a pity too, for she's a pretty, odd, 
shy, sly looking concern enough. But 
really Lady Dunore's bringing a live 
author down upon us, dporte forme e 9 
as we are living at present, is too bad ; 
and the worst of all authors, a noble 
author, 'Tis misprision of treason, against 



110 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



all ease, comfort, and enjoyment. Has 
she a husband belonging to her, do 
you know J? 

" Oh dear, no," said Miss Crawley, 
eagerly. " She is a peeress in her 
own right — he! he! he ! She has nothing 
belonging to her ; she is a very in- 
dependent sort of person :" and she 
laughed affectedly. 

66 In fact," said young Crawley, u we 
know nothing of the lady whatever, 
except that such a person came down 
to this neighbourhood two years ago ; 
took an old ruined mansion, called Cas- 
tle Macarthy, in the village of Bally- 
dab, passed herself as the grand-daugh- 
ter and heir of old Denis Macarthy, 
commonly called the titular Earl of 
Clancare, who died in Dublin in jail 
about that period ; and with no other 
inheritance than an old greyhound, 
and no other proof of the truth of her 
story than her own assertion, entered 



FLOREKCE MACARTHY. Ill 



at once upon a scheming course of 
litigiousness, broke some leases, and — " 

" Took my iligant mountain of Clot- 
no tty-joy from me/ interrupted old 
Crawley, despondingly. 

The pathetic tone in which this was 
pronounced excited some mirth ; and 
Mr. Daly observed, " if then she breaks 
leases, and made good her claim to 
Clotnotty-joy, there can be no doubt, 
I suppose, that she is the personage she 
asserts herself to be." 

"There is none whatever," said Judge 
Aubrey, who had sat silently listening, 
while Baron Boulter went to the stables, 
to look after a favourite mare, ridden 
by his crier, " there is none whatever. 
I have had opportunities of knowing 
something of this young lady ; but I 
did not know before that she labours 
under the odium of writing books, for 
there is certainly no personification of 
authorship about her — no pretension 
whatever." 



112 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" And that's the pity of it" said 
Lord Frederick : " there is, on the con- 
trary, an odd melange of the shy and 
the comic in her countenance, that one 
would think pretty if she was not aa 
author." 

" Comic!" interrupted old Crawley* 
gradually resuming his wonted tone of 
spirits, by mere force of temperament, 
while his eye occasionally turned on the 
stranger with a look of doubtful anxiety, 
as if some vague, unsatisfied suspicion 
still lurked in his mind — " Och ! she's 
comical enough ;— a little too comical, 
like Paddy Mooney's goose, full of fun 
and nothing to play with." 

The coarse vulgarisms of Mr. Craw- 
ley always excited unrestrained mirth in 
the finer part of the society at Dunore 
Castle ; and Lord Frederick, laughingly 
replied, 

" I should like then to know Mr. 
Mooney's goose most particularly : for 
I vote fun the best thing alive ; and if 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. ll'S 

your Lady Clancare has this talent in 
common with Mr. Mooney's goose, I 
believe I should almost be inclined to 
pardon the possess^n of others, even 
though they went as far as writing 
books. Pray, is this literary peeress in 
her own right rich ?" 

" Rich!" said young Crawley, "no- 
body knows how she exists ; and people 
laugh at her pretension to rank. The 
person last bearing the title of Clancare 
died abroad without issue : and in Ire- 
land titles are so frequently claimed by 
pauper pretenders, that little attention 
is paid to such events. We had, not 
long since, a basket boy a viscount, 
and a turf-cutter a baron ; and have still, 
1 occasionally, all sorts of adventurers re- 
turning to claim penny less rank in this 
country, in the hopes of obtaining a 
pension from government along with it." 

" The statement which appeared re- 
specting the extinction of this title was 



114 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



incorrect," saidJudge Aubrey ; " for al- 
though the former Earl ofClancare died 
in Italy without issue, yet a represen- 
tative of the title was found to exist in 
the person of the late Mr. Macarthy,. 
whose lineal ancestors were included in 
the general attainder of the Catholic 
peers who supported James the Second 
in the war of the Revolution. These 
attainders, however, have,, with a few 
exceptions, been reversed. I sat upon 
the Clancare cause, which terminated in 
the success and the ruin of the old chief- 
tain. He obtained his title, which de- 
scends in the female line, but died, as 
Mr. Conway Crawley states, a few (Jays 
after in prison, where he had been de- 
tained for costs for two years, having 
ruined himself for the honour of his fa- 
mily. Since that event, I have had the 
pleasure of once meeting Lady Clancare 
upon an occasion that did equal honour 
to her heart and her head. She inte- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 115 



rested herself in the fate of a person 
condemned to perpetual incarceration, 
under the shameful Irish bye-law called 
a rule of bail. She came to me last 
spring assizes twelvemonth, and made 
so clear and undeniable a statement of 
the mans innocence, and adduced so 
many proofs, that there was little dif- 
ficulty and great justice in reversing 
the order under which he suffered. 
He is now gaining an honest live- 
lihood, and runs a chaise and pair of 
Lis own, I understand, on some of the 
bye-roads between Cork and Kerry. 
Every one knows Owny, the Rabragh,* 
and is glad to employ him ; for he oc- 
casionally realizes all that has been said 
of the shrewdness and humour of an 
Irish postillion." 



* An Irish scholar translated this term for 
me — a u hearty fel'ow r** it in fact means a 
rustic u gay Lothario. \? 



116 FLORENCE MAC ART HY. 

General Fitzvvalter and Lord Adelm 
exchanged glances of significance. 

" A little hanging would do him no 
harm for all that, with great deference 
to your lordship/' said old Crawley ; 
" for there was neither pace nor quiet 
while he was in the barony, setting up 
the fairs and patterns after they were 
put down by miUthary law, and burning 
me in elegy, and thinking a beau-maison 
of himself, as the French says; with 
his white shirt sleeves and green rib- 
bons, at all the hurling matches that 
never would have been but for him, and 
the likes of him, in the place ; and too 
many of them there are, without having 
him turned on our hands again.' ' 

" I am glad of it," said Mr. Daly ; 
st and I wish with all my soul we had 
more rabraghs. The Irish peasantry 
are not only more indigent than they 
were forty years ago, but they have lost 
much of the gaiety and clieerfulness 



FLORENCE MCCARTHY. 11? 

of spirit which set sorrow at de- 
fiance. Their wakes and fairs, patterns, 
and Sunday evening cake, are almost 
wholly laid aside : these, and the hurling 
matches, that noble, athletic, and na- 
tional sport, are quite gone by : and 
of the troops of pipers and harpers that 
used to perform daily in their villages, 
or resort to the houses of the gentry, 
where welcome entertainment and ample 
remuneration awaited them, there scarce 
remain any of the order, I remem- 
ber as if it were but yesterday, fifty 
years back, heading the Leitrim boys 
against the Kerries, who were led on 
by old Florence Macarthy, the very 
grandfather of this Lady Clancare, in 
an hurling match between the coun- 
ties. Macarthy won the match, and 
more than the match, for he won the 
heart of the pretty Honor O'Connor, 
the toast of the two provinces, whom 
he afterwards married, and who, with 



118 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



all the reigning beauties of the day, 
followed the fortunes of the contest. 
¥ It warms one's old blood/' conti- 
nued Mr. Daly, starting up, with ani- 
mation, " even at seventy-three, to 
think of the native energy, force, and 
spirit of the genuine Irish character; 
and it chills it;' he added, with a sigh, 
and retaking his seat, " when one 
thinks upon the means which must 
have been employed within the last 
thirty years to weaken and turn it from 
its natural bias. To see that it is only 
great, vigorous, and fortunate, when 
transplanted from its native clime; but 
withering, drooping, and fading at 
home. — I doubt, Sir," he added, turn- 
ing to General Fitzwalter, " that had 
you remained at home (for I take it for 
granted you are one of those gallant 
Irishmen, who are forced by religious 
proscription to seek glory in a foreign ' 
land), I doubt that you would have de- 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 119 

veloped those great qualities in this 
devoted country, which have obtained 
for you, elsewhere, the epithet of the 
liberator, and have enabled you in a 
land of strangers to fight your way to 
high command, and higher consider- 
ation." 

General Fitz waiter had given to the 
details of this desultory conversation 
that animated and earnest attention 
which betokens deep interest. Thus 
personally addressed, he replied, with 
the abrupt frankness of one who rather 
courts than shuns observation, 

"I am an Irishman, Sir, and have 
been long an exile, but not from reli- 
gious proscription, (for my family were 
of the master cast), but by circum- 
stances connected with the political state 
of the country, through that demorali- 
zation which the misrule of centuries 
has impressed upon all the branches of 
its population. Turned adrift upon the 



120 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



world without compass or rudder, with- 
out a home to love, friends to cherish, 
or a country to defend or serve, I be- 
came by necessity a commoner of na- 
ture; and unfettered by the distinctions 
of clime, country, or kindred, I have 
early claimed alliance with all who suf- 
fer, whatever might be the region they 
inhabited. 

" The chances which threw me on the 
shores of America brought me early 
in life in contact with Don Narino.* 
Engaging in his glorious enterprise, 
when the possible emancipation of 
Spanish America was yet little more 
than a philosophical speculation, it was 
my good fortune to share his dungeon 
in Santa Fe, his escape to Europe, and 
his mission to England. I accom- 



* Narino visited England in consequence of 
certain plans entertained by the British ministry 
for separating Terra Firmafrom Spain, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 121 



panied him also in his venturous re- 
turn to New Granada, where, backed 
by English protection, he again risked 
his life in his country's cause. Pro- 
scribed, marked out for destruction, 
pursued, discovered, taken, he expiated 
the crime of patriotism by a long series 
of misery and incarceration. Narino 
has since appeared before the world 
in all his original splendour; and 1^ 
in common with many of my gallant 
countrymen, (*) have continued to fol 
low the standard of liberty, from the 
moment it was openly unfurled among 
the mighty regions of the Cordelliras." 

" Borne it, not followed it," said 
Lord Adelm. 

" The stranger," said Fitzwalter, 
• ; who risks his fortune in a foreign land 
on general principles of right and li- 
berty, usually becomes the favourite of 
.the more interested partizans. I have, 
therefore, occasionally led, as well as 

* Sec Pv'otc (1) at the end of the volume. 
^OL. III. G 



122 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



served, in almost every part of Spanish 
America, where the glorious impulsion 
of freedom has been given. In a late 
action, more than half the corps I com- 
manded were massacred in a pass of the 
Cordelliras; for the war of Spain against 
America is named, even by the Spaniards, 
a f war of death.' As their chief, I was 
reserved for torture, and for an ignomi- 
nious death. It was a romantic event, 
that one of the guards, placed over me, 
had in early life done me an injury 
that weighed heavily on his conscience. 
He took this moment for reconciling 
himself with heaven, released, and fled 
with me. I escaped from the Caraccas 
to Demerara, where, through the chan- 
nel of the public papers, an event of 
great personal interest accidentally 
reached my knowledge, which the re- 
moteness and occupation ef my scene 
of action, together with my more im- 
mediate incarceration, prevented me 
from sooner learning. — This event ha* 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 12£ 



brought me to my native country: 
and though, as an Irishman, I should, 
on general grounds, lament the cir- 
cumstances which introduced me to the 
castle of Dunore, yet upon principles 
of personal gratification I am not suf- 
ficiently disinterested to regret them." 

This brief sketch of auto-biography 
was thrown off with a frankness and 
energy of manner that gave it singular 
effect, and bestowed upon it all the 
evidence of truth, and all the graces 
of modesty, while it obtained for the 
brilliant and singular narrator an ad- 
miration variously felt and expressed. 

" Go on, General Fitzwalter, go on," 
cried a voice from the door : w you have 
no idea how you remind me of Kosi- 
usko, when I went to see him in Lon- 
don, lying wounded upon a sofa. You 
raconter so like him ; doesn't he, Georgy 
love? I must say, after all, that patri- 
otism and freedom and things always 
sound delightfully." 

Q 2 



124 FLORENCE MAC ART HY. 

This speech drew every eye to the 
spot from whence it proceeded ; and 
Lady Dunore appeared, leaning her 
back against the half-open door, con- 
cealing the figure of Lady Clan care, 
whose dark eyes were just seen peep- 
ing over her shoulder. 

The ladies had entered thus far unob- 
served, for the company sat with their 
backs to the door, at the moment when 
Mr. Daly had addressed General Fitz- 
w T alter ; and Lady Dunore, who loved to 
hear every thing about every one, and 
loved it the more in proportion as events 
were extraordinary, stood spell-bound 
while the general spoke, as forgetful of 
her 6 dear delightful judges,' as if they 
had never existed. They were now, 
however, recalled to her recollection by 
the entrance of Baron Boulter, bearing 
the intelligence that all was ready for 
their departure ; and Lady Dunore, 
translating the reproachful look and 
shake of her uncle's head, came for- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 125 

ward with a multitude of apologies for 
her absence, many anxious intreaties 
that they would prolong their stay, and 
as deep-formed wishes that they would 
return, with all their wives and all 
their children, to pass some time at 
Dunore, where she was going to have 
private plays and a chapel of ease, and 
Lady Clancare, and perhaps more 
trials. 

The judges, however, seemed pef^ 
fectly satisfied with the trials they had 
already witnessed ; and Baron Boulter, 
as spokesman, received and returned 
her ladyship's compliments with all 
the ardour and earnestness with which 
they were made. The judges were 
then conducted to their carriages by 
Lord Adelm and Mr. Daly, and de- 
parted. 

Lady Dunore now led, or rather 
forced forward, the really, or affectedly 
timid Lady Clancare, who, with the 
c 3 



126' FLOREN€E MACARTHY. 

manner that resembled the graceful 
awkwardness of a pretty but froward 
child, still held back. Lady Dunore, 
heated and dishevelled, was still m her 
morning dress, with her sautoir de cash- 
mir rolled round her head, and a grey 
cloak of Lady Clancare's on her shoul- 
ders, exhibiting a most sybil-like appear- 
ance. Lady Clancare, on the contrary, 
had exchanged her coarse unbecoming 
costume of the morning, for a black 
Spanish dress and mantillo, which were 
then still in fashion, for whatever was 
peninsular in sentiment or habiliment 
had not yet fallen " into the sear" of 
popularity. 

Lady Dunore, whose eyes were fixed 
upon her new protegee with delight and 
admiration, now turned them on the 
company, to observe the effect she had 
produced, and at last fixed their eager 
glances upon General Fitzwalter, with 
an expression, which, if not attributable 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 127 

to her wonted extravagance, was wholly 
untranslatable. There was in this intense 
stare a hope, a fear, something ex- 
pected, something dreaded. General 
Fitz waiter, whose eyes, like those ot 
the rest of the company, were turned 
on Lady Clancare, in mere curiosity, 
at last met those of Lady Dunore. 
For a moment they returned her fixed 
look, till reddening under the inten- 
sity of her gaze, he turned away, 
and picking up a screen, which lay 
at Lady Georgina's feet, he seized on 
this little act as an opportunity for 
addressing her. Lady Dunore whis- 
pered something to Lady Clancare, 
who smiled, and threw down her eyes ; 
and Mr. Daly, entering with Lord 
Adelm, was commencing his attack on 
his inconsequent niece, with " how 
could you, my dear Emily, leave your 
own house and the judges ?" when 
Lady Dunore, impatiently putting her 
g 4 



128 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

hand on his mouth, interrupted him 
with — " there, there, I know all you 
would say, all any one can say, on the 
subject ; but you don't really want me 
to bring the etiquette and tiresome- 
forms of the World into the wilds of 
Ireland. Besides, if I have done 
wrong, I bring my excuse in my hand,'* 
and she drew forward Lady Claneare. 

" You could not bring a fairer," said 
Mr. Daly, with an air of gallantry j 
" and had i been so tempted, I too 
should have so sinned I fear, though 
the whole bench of bishops, and all the 
judges of the land, had been making 
claims on my attention. I had the 
honour," he added, addressing Lady 
Clancare, " of knowing your ladyship's 
venerable grandfather, some short half 
century back. He was not very vene- 
rable then: — he was, indeed, as he is 
now present in my recollection, of a* 
race of men, in stature, look, and cha 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 129 

racter, now almost passed away in this 
country — we shall not look upon their 
like again." 

Lady Clancare bowed to this recollec- 
tion of her grandfather; and though she 
spoke not, there was something passed 
across her countenance, which induced 
Mr. Daly to take her hand, under pre- 
tence of leading her to her chair ; and 
he felt (or he fancied he felt) a gentle 
pressure of his, which he returned with 
an ardour that did not quite belong to 
seventy-three. 

H Oh ! par example, for fine men/' 
said Lady Dunore, throwing herself into 
an arm chair, " I think they are really 
quite extinct with us altogether. You 
know, Georgy love, we were observing 
at the opera, the last night we were 
there, that we thought all the presump- 
tive heirs of the great names were pig- 
mies. There is nothing coming forward 
now at all like the Dukes of A. and H— , 
G 5 



130 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the Marquis of A — , and the old Earl of 
E — , in his coronation robes, and that 
sort of thing. The fact is, though no 
one can be more devoted to the present 
ministry than I am, I must say they 
are by no means distinguished looking 
men. None of that school at all 6 shew 
blood} as the old Duchess of B. used to 
say. However, men may govern the 
state very well without being beauties, 
or poets either; for, as Lady C. says, 
if the opposition have all the wit on 
their side, the joke's all on ours. But 
with respect to those magnificent crea- 
tures that one used to meet in London, 
I think all that sort of thing now is 
confined to the patriots, that is the 
Pules, and South American chiefs. Don't 
you think so, Geor«y, love ?" and she 
turned her eyes on General Fitz waiter. 

To get rid of the awkwardness of this 
pointed compliment, which evidently 
distressed its object, Mr. Daly addressed 



s 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 131 

General Fitzwalter, with some observa- 
tions on a country where he had played 
so distinguished a part. " South Ame- 
rica/' he observed^ " is well known to 
us in the Spanish histories of its early 
discoverers, when Spain invaded it 
under the simoniacal pretext of re* 
ligion ; letting loose, at the same time, 
blood-hounds and apostles, while they 
opened its mineral veins, and extermi- 
nated its population. But it is only now 
that it has become an object of interest 
through the exertions of those states, 
which are seeking to shake off the yoke, 
that has almost deprived these great 
regions of a place in the history of na- 
tions ; the impulse, however, must have 
been given long since." 

General Fit z waiter replied. " The 
oppression and cruelty of the colonial 
legislatures, which have so long bathed 
the richest country of the world with 
the tears and the blood of her children, 



1312 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

had excited, even as far back as thi 
middle of last century, events, which 
seemed . remotely to prepare a new 
destiny for a population of fourteen 
millions of its inhabitants. To a torpid 
acquiescence of three centuries suc- 
ceeded a gathering tempest, a kindling 
resistance. The spirit of freedom, once 
vivified, rapidly brightened into flame, 
shining from north to south ; and the 
period soon arrived, when every Ame- 
rican heart beat in union under its in- 
fluence. The oppressor and the op- 
pressed stood before the world's eye, 
opposed and armed. The Americans 
would have made it a war of justice and 
of mercy ; for they had suffered much, 
and have learned to pity; but the fe- 
rocity of Spain has made it a war of 
extermination. 5 * Internal divisions may 



* The Spaniards term their contest with Ame- 
rica, la Guerra a mucrta — the war of death. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 133 

render this conflict long and uncertain ; 
but the cause belongs to humanity : it 
springs from the laws of nature, and is 
inevitable ; it is borne along by the 
spirit of the age and the progress 
of illumination, and it must finally 
succeed." 

" To be sure it must/' said Lady 
Dunore. " Don't you think so, Georgy, 
love ?" 

" For my part, I don't know," said 
Conway Crawley, with his brogue and 
his effrontery, 6i what parsons mean 
about giving liberty and independence 
to an unformed race like the South 
Americans ; a race defined by one of 
the Spanish fiscals as creatures des- 
tined by nature to work like moles in 
the mines. We have all read the solemn 
declaration of the consulado, or board 
of trade, in Mexico, that the Indians are 
a race of monkies, filled with vice and 
ignorance ; and they have extended 



134 FLORENCE MACARTHY, 

their remarks, I believe pretty justly, 
to the Creoles, or degenerate descendants 
of the first Spanish settlers." 

" That, indeed, changes the thing 
altogether," said Lady Dunore, " not 
but a race of monkies must be very 
amusing and very mischievous. Don't 
you think so Georgy, dear?" 

" It was," said Mr. Daly, " these 
same sagacious Jiscals, who ordered the 
olive and the vine to be rooted out of 
Chili, to compel a commerce with the 
peninsula. And it was in the bosoms 
of these American automata," he con- 
tinued, "of these monkies, that the 
British government, in 1797* resolved 
to cherish the spark of independence, 
already awakened there. We all know 
Mr. Pitt's plans of giving freedom, and 
a political existence, to Terra Firma ; 
and that the promises of assistance 
against Spain, then made, were nearly 
realized, when the British cabinet paid 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 135 

the expedition of the gallant Miranda 
to Venezuela." 

" Poor, dear Pitt!" said Lady Du- 
nore, " he was a clever creature. Mr. 
Heneage, move the lamp a little from 
under his engraving. He happened to 
be my most particular friend." 

" Temporary measures of expediency 
have nothing to do with general views/' 
replied young Crawley, to Mr. Daly's 
observation. " What is wisdom to-day, 
in the conduct of a government, may be 
madness to-morrow" 

" Wnat is, generally speaking, the 
condition of the lower orders ?" asked 
Mr. Daly, turning cooly away from 
young Crawley, and evidently anxious 
to draw out the general. 

" Borne down," he answered, " by 
long slavery and injustice, the native 
Indian submits to his vexatious ex- 
istence, with an affected patience, a 
seeming apathy, which veils the cunning 



136 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

and ferocity of the enslaved and de- 
graded in all countries ; for as, what- 
ever be the colour of man struggling 
against oppression, the language of 
energetic minds is still the same ; so 
every where the slave exhibits the 
same vice, jargon, and policy : and it 
does happen, that when a native Indian 
rises by low arts to petty power, and 
becomes the alcade, the magistrate, or 
loyal man of the colonial government, 
supported by that government, and 
backed by the Sudelgado or priest- 
hood ( for in South America, as else- 
where, the priesthood are usually on 
the side of oppression), he makes com- 
mon cause with his superiors, and adds 
by misrepresentations to the sufferings 
of his country." 

H Och ! the thief of the world T said 
old Crawley, while his son changed 
colour, for he felt the full force of the 
remark. " If we had him in Ireland, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 13? 

we'd soon take away his commission 
of the pace from him " 

A burst of good-humoured laughter 
in Lady Clancare excited a pretty 
universal sympathy ; and young Craw- 
ley, trembling with acrimonious emo- 
tion, continued. 

" The South Americans are naturally, 
by temperament, a bloody and inhuman 
people. Their very religion is a re- 
ligion of blood" 

" Oh, horrible V* said Lady Dunore: 
c: if that's the case, I wonder how Pitt 
could propose their liberation." 

" The Spaniards/' said Crawley, 
" found them sacrificing human beings 
in their temples." 

<c Yes," interrupted Miss Crawley, 
u so we read in the abridgment of the 
ife of Columbus." 

" And there exists a sect/' said young 
Crawley, ransacking his school-boy 
erudition, " who preach purification by 



138 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

blood. Such are the people who are 
to overturn a Christian dynasty, a le- 
gitimate sovereignty, and talk of rights, 
humanity, and that sort of trash, that 
one is sick of." 

u They are all naturally Atheists, 
and Deists, and Idolaters/' said Miss 
Crawley, triumphantly. 

" Georgy, love, did you ever, hear any 
thing so shocking ?" said Lady Dunore. 
" How can any one wish well to such a 
people. Mr. Heneage, bring me my 
eau de luce bottle." 

" Such facts,'* said Gen. Fitzwalter, 
" are a proof of the feebleness of the 
huirian mind. In South America, as 
in all parts of the world, atonement by 
human sacrifice is the dogma of nations 
in their infancy ; because the first re- 
ligion ot man is the religion of fear. 
He suffers more than he enjoys, and 
he propitiates accordingly. The early 
Britains stained their sacred groves 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 139 

with human blood ; the benevolent 
Hindoos shed it on the altar of their 
dark goddess Call; the enlightened 
Egyptians rejected not such sanguinary 
rites ; and the polished Romans per- 
formed them. Jeptha, like Agamem- 
non, vowed away the life of his only 
daughter ; and Spain still has her auto 
daft, and heaps her hecatombs on burn- 
ing piles for the love of God, and the 
recreation of the court.'' 

te Yes,'' said Lady Dunore, <c and a 
charming opera it is. That is not the 
auto da Je, but Ipiginie in Aulide." 

" But I believe/' continued the ge- 
neral, u we must not look too deeply 
into the history of man ; whatever 
region he inhabits, it is a fearful and an 
humiliating history ; and when backed 
by fanaticism, it is more than ordinarily 
blood-stained and terrific. But let us 
take him when we can, in his best 
aspect, free and enlightened ; so blessed 



140 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



by singularity of temperament, so 
formed of happy elements, that, like 
the mild Peruvian, he performs the 
rites of the heart, whose incense smells 
to heaven, and heaping on his sunny- 
altars the fruits and odours of his luxu- 
riant soil." 

u How beautiful P said Lady Dunore: 
" there is nothing like those Peruvians, 
par example, and their odours. * 

" Pcrjvi?.^* or Mexicans, they arc 
all a detestable race," said young Craw- 
ley, " unworthy of a better govern- 
ment ; and any one who knows their 
history, and has read their absurd my- 
thology, their deluge of Coxcox, and 
their— " 

" Is he any thing to the Coxes of 
county Kilkenny ?" interrupted old Craw- 
ley, taking snuff, and always anxious to 
say something to shew that he was not 
ignorant of any thing. This question, 
asked in great simplicity, for he had 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 141 



only caught the word " Cox," produced 
a very general laugh, in which Miss 
Crawley and her nephew alone did not 
share. 

Lady Dunore, now a very violent 
South American patriot, exclaimed — 
" Good heavens ! General Fitzwalter, I 
hope you are come to recruit here for 
your grand cause. I dare say there are 
a quantity of young men among our te- 
nantry would go for nothing at all ; 
don't you think they would, Mr. Craw- 
ley?" 

" Upon my credit, my lady, I can't 
take upon me to say," returned Mr. 
Crawley, quite unconscious of the laugh 
he had excited ; and now fearful that as 
he had already bailed his own prisoner, 
he would next be compelled to recruit in 
the cause of rebellion ; i: but I don't 
think they have any turn to fighting 
among the negers ; and then, I suppose, 
it is a good step off, Madam." 



142 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" Nothing to signify, my dear Mr. 
Crawley," interrupted Lord Frederick; 
" and provided you will take the com- 
mand of the Ballydab and Dunore he- 
roes, I don*t care if I accompany you as 
a volunteer whenever, you please to 
sally forth ; for I look upon it, Mr. 
Crawley, that you are one of those an- 
cient preux, pour fendre geant, derom- 
pre ha??iois } et porter en croupe belles 
demoiselles sans leur purler de rien" 

" Many thanks for your compliment, 
my lord/' said old Crawley, believing 
Lord Frederick must be civil, as he 
spoke in French. " I never was much 
given to travel ; only oncet was going to 
Lisburn for my health, after my suf- 
ferings on duty with the yeomanry in 
the rebellion of ninety-eight." 

" To Lisburn, my dear Mr. Crawley," 
said Lord Frederick, " is Lisburn the 
Montpellier of Ireland ?" 

u Not at all, my lord ; I mane Lis- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 143 

burn, the capital of Spain/' replied Mr. 
Crawley. 

" If I were twenty years younger, 
Mr. Crawley/' said Mr. Daly, covering 
out the general titter by addressing its 
object, u I should myself be tempted 
to go forth in this glorious cause. South 
America is the great stage upon which 
the world's eye is now fixed." 

" A stage," said Lord Rosbrin, shak- 
ing his head, " where every man must 
play his part, and mine a sad one." 

u See that now," said Mr. Crawley, 
" and never heard tell of it before, only 
theYankey-doodles and New- York, and 
the likes." 

" Man/' said Lord Adelm, starting 
up from a reverie, in which he had in- 
dulged while leaning over the back of 
Lady Georgina's chair, H man, in what- 
ever region he is found, may best be ty- 
pified by a squirrel in a cage." 

u A squirrel in a cage ! the Lord save 



144 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



us!" exclaimed Mr. Crawley, in asto- 
nishment. 

" His little sphere is so planned/' 
continued Lord Adelm, " that he can 
be nothing but what he is, do nothing 
but what he does. He goes round his 
circle, and repeats his rotations, with no 
difference in the performance, but a little 
acceleration or a little retardment. 
These South Americans, therefore, but 
repeat an old story : they are savage 
and unprotected, they are conquered ; — 
they are slaves, and degraded, they 
endure ;— they are pressed to the quick, 
they turn and resist; — they struggle 
and succeed, become great, prosper- 
ous, illumined ; conquer and oppress 
in their turn, moulder away, and leave 
to posterity the unheeded moral that 
in every clime, state, or being, man 
is neither to be praised nor blamed, ad- 
mired nor abhorred. He is what he 
is; otherwise he cannot be; for, after 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 145 

all, he is but an engine, a mere en- 
gine." 

f* A steam-engine," said old Crawley, 
shaking his head, and anxious to agree 
with Lord Fitzadelm, of whom he stood 
in awe ; " sorrow a thing else." 

" Faith, pretty much," said Lord 
Adelm, with a gravity none preserved 
but himself, "except that a steam-engine 
has this superiority over him, that it is 
neither susceptible of caprice nor dis- 
traction. It turns also upon a beneficial 
principle, while the mainspring of the 
machinery of man inevitably turns on 
evil" 

" Evil to him as evil thinks," re-, 
echoed old Crawley; " honey swa hey 
molly panse, as the French says.'* 

" That's not ill put, Mr. Crawley," 
said Mr. Daly, while every body else 
laughed ; " but, my dear Fitzadelm 
you, at least, admit the principle of 
good to exist conjointly with that of 
evil. You will not establish a doctrine 

VOL. III. H 



146 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



less consoling than that of the dark de- 
moniac, Indian mythology." 

" Oh, I deny good as a principle al- 
together," said Lord Adelm : " good is 
merely relative, evil is positive. Evil is 
necessary to man as the air he breathes ; 
an inherent part of hi 5 existence : de- 
prive him of his principle of evil, and 
he becomes a vegetable. 1 ' 

" A vegetable I" repeated old Craw- 
ley; u see that now." 

gt Evil is the source, food, end, and 
object of the passions ; or, to give them 
their proper names, the appetites. It 
is the grand agitator of life, its food and 
occupation : without evil there would 
be neither genius, virtue, nor valour ; 
for what is virtue but an effort against 
vice ? What genius ? — the nisus to over- 
come suffering. What valour ?— the ne- 
cessity of massacre and bloodshed." 

" Christ save us!" exclaimed Mr. 
Crawley. 

P What is ambition the selfish wish 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1 4f 

<of rule. What friendship? — helplessness. 
What love ? — a want. Whence arise the 
liberal professions but from the innate 
tendency of man to evil ? Law, for in- 
stance/* continued Lord Adelm, while 
old Crawley drew back, " from the \ 
lany of the species. Physic from its in- 
firmities ; the arts from vanity ; the 
sciences from physical pressure. The 
whole business of life, then, is but one 
sustained effort against evil : and without 
evil, in a supereminent degree, those 
talents and properties on which we most 
pride ourselves, — skill, wisdom, virtue, 
imd courage, could not be developed, 
because they would not be called for. 
Taking then a just view of things, 
there is little fo move either our 
wrath or admiration. He who feels 
little and digests well ; he who has a 
bad heart and a good stomach, is, 
after all, the true sage and the happy 
man." 



148 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



Here Lord Adelm was interrupted by 
a servant^ who gave him a note. It filled 
the room with perfume, and covered 
Lord Adelm's face with blushes, warm 
as the hues of the paper he perused. 
Every one smiled as he hurried out of 
the room ; and though the established 
laws of bon-ton prevented the slightest 
notice being taken of this incident, Mr. 
Daly could not help saying, with an 
arch smile — " So much for the philo- 
sophy of indifference." 

" Philosophy !" repeated Lord Ros- 
brin, laying down his play-book : 

* There never yet was found philosophy 
Could bear the tooth-ach patiently." 

The quick eye of Lady Dunore had 
rested on the face, and observed the 
emotions of her son. Her feelings of 
maternity had been so little influenced 
by his return, that the first pleasure 
over, which surprise always occasioned 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1 4<j 

in her, she ha J not been induced to 
retire with him for a single half hour 
since his arrival, but had been quite sa- 
tisfied with the few words he had said 
to her in the hall, stating the motive of 
his journey to have been his wish to 
preside at his own election. Since then, 
other objects had arisen to ingross her 
attention, and obliterate the sensation 
his return had roused into transient 
existence. His sudden emotion and 
exit now seized on her imagination. 
She was not yet exhausted by the 
events of the day ; and after struggling 
for a moment in contest with her own 
feelings, she arose and followed him. 

The servant who had delivered the 
note met her m the hall; but to her 
inquiries whence it had come, the 
answer was > it had been left in the 
porters lodge, and had come from the 
post-house. 

Meantime, Mr. Daly had ordered 

a 3 



150 



FLORENCE M AC ART II Y. 



the brag tabic ; and while the part) 
stood waiting for Lady Dunore to join 
them, Lord Rosbrin proposed reciting 
" Collin's Ode on the Passions," which 
w as by common consent over-ruled in 
favour of his imitations of the favour- 
ite actors of the day. With Miss Craw- 
ley's scarf bound round his head, a 
cashmir of Lady Georgina's wound 
round his body, a row of candles 
placed at his feet, and the company 
circled round him, he gave a very close 
imitation of some of the best modern 
tragedians, in the parts of Othello, 
Richard III. Macbeth, and Hamlet, 
successively. This imitation was, in- 
deed, so faithful, that it not only ren- 
dered look for look, and tone for tone, 
but every inflection, gesture, and gri- 
mace, was preserved precisely the same 
as in the original he copied. It was 
curious, however, to observe, that the 
representation, which in public had ex- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 151 



eited admiration, in private elicited" 
only ridicule : that, which on the stage 
was called fine acting, was in the draw- 
ing-room rank buffoonery ; and tones, 
gurgling in the throat, as in a cauldron, 
heaved from the lungs as from a se- 
pulchre, or growled forth from lips dis- 
tortingly compressed, with a chin ele- 
vated to the nose r an eye sunk under a 
projected brow,, or starting from its 
socket, and teeth ground, till they are al- 
most broken, with starts, pauses, groans, 
strides, drags, drawls, and contortions* 
so often termed " true to nature," and 

original conceptions," when viewed 
on a great theatre, and with a mind 
ruled by conventional judgment, now, 
when exhibited in the midst of real 
life, appeared ludicrous, broad, and 
coarse, as scene-painting compared to 
the cabinet pictures of a master. 

The audience could, however, have 
" better spared a better man p for if 
H 4 



152 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

the tragic throes of Lord Rosbrin did 
not make them weep, it did better, it 
made them laugh. No delicate feeling 
on their part inhibited the indulgence 
of this enjoyment ; and no sensibility 
of his own ridiculous position on the 
part of Lord Rosbrin rendered him 
alive to the ridicule he excited. To 
have pitied such folly, would have been 
to have surpassed it. 

This exhibition, so well adapted to 
the idle and the gay, as combining 
(what the great love) amusement and 
ridicule, had so entirely occupied the 
minds of the audience, that nearly two 
hours had been passed in recitations, 
accompanied by bravoes and encores, 
(for the noble Roscius was always en- 
cored, in proportion as he was ludicrous) 
without Lady Dunore's protracted ab- 
sence becoming a subject of notice to 
her pre-occupicd guests. When at last 
she returned to the drawing-room^ her 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 153 

countenance was disturbed; there was 
a cloud on her brow, and her cheek was 
stained with tears. 

The lights on the floor, however, the 
turbaned head, and draped figure of 
Lord Rosbrin, operated as talismans on 
her oppressed spirits* He was com- 
manded to go over the course again, and 
was again rewarded with vociferated 
bravoes and hysterical laughs. Plans 
and schemes for building a new theatre 
became an animating subject of discus- 
sion, which occupied the general at- 
tention, until Lady Georgina observed 
that both Lady Clancare and General 
Fitzwalter had disappeared during the 
representation. 

r " Gone ! and together ?" asked Lady 
Dunore, starting up in emotion: " when, 
where, how ?" 

" Together !" repeated Lord Frede- 
rick. " On crie d la scandale F Lady 
Dunore repeated her question, but no 
H 5 



154 FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 



one could give any answer. While 
Lord Rosbrin had strutted his hour, 
none had eyes or ears but for him; 
and the marchioness, in an agita- 
tion no one could understand, left the 
room. 

Si There she goes, like a sky-rocket," 
said Lord Frederick. " I should like to 
know her impulsion." 

" If her ladyship means to watch 
the extraordinary disappearances of 
Lady Clancare," said Miss Crawley, 
" she will have something to do. Her 
stealing away with General Fitzwalter 
tvas, however, a strong measure, if this 
was their first acquaintance." 

" You don't mean that, my dear 
Miss Crawley/' said Lord Frederick 
with a significant look. " If this little 
shy thing has had an illustrefoiblesse, 
we must forgive her her authorship." 

" I don't wish to say any thing inju- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 155 



rious of the pseudo Lady Clancare," 
said Miss Crawley, " but it will cer- 
tainly surprise the people of consequence 
in this neighbourhood, when they hear 
of her being received at Dunore. She 
has now just returned from a myste- 
rious disappearance of some months." 

" Oh ! you are raising her cent, per 
cent, my dear Miss Crawley," ex- 
claimed Lord Frederick; " if you prove 
this Irish Sappho is a Sappho, head, 
heart, and all. You redeem her to all 
intents and purposes.'* 

Lady Dunore now re-entered, her 
countenance brightening into smiles. 
K It is very extraordinary," she said, 
" that none of you could tell me Lady 
Clancare went away twenty minutes be- 
fore General Fitzwalter, which I mid is 
the case." 

11 Are we your lady's keeper ?" asked 
Lord Frederick. " But, marchioness 
of my soul, what is your extraordinary 



156 FLORENCE MACARTRY. 

anxiety about these new god-sends, who 
seem to have arrived here for the sole 
purpose of keeping up the ebb and flow 
of your solicitude ? Your secret, lady. 
Pray f let me not burst in ignorance." 

" Secret!" said Lady Dunore, laugh- 
ing: " why should you think I have 
any r" 

" Well them. Lady Clancare's secret ; 
for we know, as Rosbrin would say, 
only he is now too tired to say any 
thing, you c eould a tale unfold;' and 
Miss Crawley has just been giving us 
some hints of Vaimable sceleratesse of 
your Irish peeress. In short, it seems 
that the inhabitants of our good city of 
Dunore do not visit her. It seems she 
has come no one knows whence, goes 
no one knows where, and, pour trancher 
le mot, is just a little equivocal? 

" And does Miss Crawley presume," 
said Lady Dunore, turning full upon 
the shrinking Miss Crawley, (the only 



FLORENCE MAC ART HY. 157 

one, save Lord Frederick, at that mo- 
ment not engaged at the card table,) 
" does Miss Crawley presu me to throw 
a breath of slander upon a friend of 
mine, to talk over in village commerage 
a person of Lady Clancare's rank and 
celebrity 

" I assure your ladyship," said Miss 
Crawley, pale with mortification and 
fear, " I did not say — did not mean . ." 

ft No, no," said Lord Frederick, half 
amused with the consternation he came 
to relieve, ee they are rather my sur- 
mises than Miss Crawley's assertions^ 
who merely hinted that 

c Lips though lovely must still be fed,' 

and that if this lady were not fed by the 
gods with nectar and ambrosia, her 
mode of existence was a mystery, if not 
a miracle, unknown to any one." 

u Yes," said Lady Dunore tri- 
umphantly, " there is a miracle and a 



158 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

mystery in Lady Clancare's retreat from 
the world ; but its secret is known to 
one person ; and I am that person : for 
the rest you may trust me. I would not 
present in my own exclusive circle one 
who was not in all points comme U 
faut. One thing, however, I must ge- 
nerally observe to you all, good people, 
— Lady Clancare must not be obtruded 
on : she receives no visits from either 
sex; admits no strangers; and I alone 
have obtained permission occasionally 
to join her in her solitude. Meantime 
I stand pledged that no constraint shall 
be put upon her movements. She is 
to have free ingress and egress, dplaisir, 
at Dunore Castle, and is to creep in and 
creep out like a pet kitten, as she ex- 
presses it, 6 without let or molestation" 
" But dear love," said Lady Geor- 
gina, as she dealt round the cards with 
sparkling ringers, " your kitten will at 
least pur a little, I hope, for us. Do 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 159 

you know she was not the least in the 
world entertaining to-night." 

" By the bye," said Lord Frederick, 
u now I think of it, she sat staring her 
pretty round eyes out, like one of the 
little sourds et mnets of the Abbe Si- 
card, looking unutterable things, but 
speaking not a word. I thought the 
female author species always talked as 
it wrote, for the amusement of the 
public, and got up things cut and dry 
for the occasion; quotations, sentiments, 
impromptus a loisir, and all that." 

" Well V said Lady Dunore, " don't 
judge her hastily ; leave her to time and 
to me." — She looked oracularly mysteri- 
ous as she spoke, cut in as Mr. Heneage 
cut out ; and having convinced the com- 
pany she had some profound secret 
in her keeping, and won fifty pounds 
from old Crawley, she retired to bed 
at three in the morning, in great 
elevation of spirits, repeating to Lady 



l60 FLORENCE MAGARTHY. 

Georgina, as they parted on the cor- 
ridor, — 

te Well, after all, sweetest, there is 
nothing like these wild, barbarous, re- 
bellious countries, par example : and 
gay as we are now, and amused as we 
are with all these judges and Padreen 
Gars boys, and Peruvian chiefs, and 
things, there is no saying but we may 
be all murdered before morning." 

With this consolatory reflection, she 
kissed the forehead of her sleepy, srai-? 
ling friend, and retired. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. l6l 



CHAPTER IV. 

■ For I will tell you now 

What never yet was heard in tale or song, 
From old or modern bard, in hall or bower. 

Milton. 



General Fitzwalter had alone ob- 
served the retreat of Lady Clancare. 
Amused as she had appeared to be in 
common with the rest of the company, 
by the buffoonery of the noble amateur, 
the perpetual folly might at length have 
wearied her; for she had taken the ad- 
vantage of an open door to escape, half 
an hour before the general had himself 
retired. There was something in the 
popularity which she enjoyed under the 
rude title of the Bhan Tierna, some- 



l6% FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

thing is her story, as the representative- 
of an illustrious but ruined family, 
something in her sudden and unex- 
pected appearance in the hall of Du- 
norc, which, taken together, and con- 
trasted with her youth, her very femi- 
nine person, unprotected state, and ex- 
treme reserve, powerfully interested 
him. He had once or twice also, as he 
stood opposite to her, met her eyes, and 
they were not eyes to be met with im- 
punity^ nor were their glances less 
impressive, from being suddenly and 
bashfully withdrawn. Still he fancied 
that he could trace something sinister 
in her looks; and the singular mobility 
and intelligence of her peculiar counte- 
nance (a countenance whose character 
was not unknown to him) were strangely 
opposed to her timid and unbroken ta- 
citurnity, leaving it doubtful which was 
her natural habit, the reserve of a recluse, 
for the acuteness of a practised observer. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 163 

That she had 66 written books" as 
Lady Gcorgina termed it, was a proof she 
possessed either talents or pretension; 
yet there was nothing in her address or 
manners that bespoke the conscious- 
ness of the former, or the importance 
of the latter. While, therefore, General 
Fitzwalter pursued his way along the 
strand, he continued to puzzle himself 
in the research after the cause of her 
attraction (her attraction for him at 
least, for after the first surprise of her 
appearance, she seemed to have excited 
little interest in others), he at last 
summed it all up in her eyes. He had 
somewhere met such eyes before; and 
which ever way he now turned his 
own, whether upon the stars, which 
seemed to start from the heavens like 
wandering fires, or downward upon 
their fairy reflection in the smooth ebb 
tide, still the full, dark, and fixed eyes 
of Lady Clancarc were before him. 



164 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

He had not proceeded many paces 
from the rampart wall of the castle 
when Lord Adeltn overtook him. 

"You are an hour before your ap- 
pointment/' said Fitzwalter, "for the 
castle clock now tells eleven." 

"How could you remain so long 
among those tiresome people?" returned 
Lord Adelm, petulantly. 

" I came away as soon as decency 
would permit. I waited for the return of 
Lady Dunore." 

" She had not then returned when 
you came away?" 

" Not to the drawing-room ; but I 
heard her voice in the gallery as I 
passed through the hall.'* 

" You can have no idea how she ha3 
crossed my way to-night/' said Lord 
Adelm, in a tone of vexation: " you saw 
me receive a note ?" 

" Yes, most appropriately. It pro- 
duced in your countenance a refutation. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. l65 

of your doctrine ; and eloquently proved 
that mind is not wholly dependant on a 
good stomach and a bad heart for its 
happiness." 

" Yes, I felt I was shewing up most 
confoundedly. But the circulation is 
still stronger than that moral mover we 
call reason, which, after all, means no- 
thing, but more or less of temperament. 
You guess who the note was from." 

" Certainly, by its hue and odour" 

" Well, she who has \ed me here, 
has followed me here, or rather has 
preceded me." 

" And where is she ?" 

" Perhaps bedded in that rock, or 
perched on the wing of the sea breeze 
that whistles by us, for aught I know. 
Now imagine, if you can, a contre terns 
like this. The prettiest little French 
billet, inclosed in an envelope, which 
bore the post-mark of Dunore, sum- 
mon e'd me to a rock under the castle 



\6G FLORENCE MACARTJIY. 

terrace, called the Hag's Tooth. I was 
to come alone; not before ten, nor 
after eleven: this was the only stipula- 
tion : I was to be astonished — this was 
the only promise. The rest was sup- 
posed; but hope was not idle. I found 
the spot with some difficulty. All was 
solitary and silent; not even the rip- 
pling of the wave, nor the sigh of the 
gale. I had been at my appointed 
post but a few minutes when I per- 
ceived a female form, gliding like a sea 
nymph over the glittering sand, light 
as air, and rapid as light. The dupe of 
my heart, or my hopes, or what you 
will, I stood spell-bound. Had I be- 
held a vision descending from the 
clouds, it could not have held more in- 
fluence over my imagination. I had 
scarcely power to breath, to stretch 
forth a hand, to clasp that which was 
presented to me. — I did however 
clasp it." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. \6j 

"Then it was a mortal hand, true 
fiesh and blood, after all ?" interrupted 
the general, eagerly. 

" It was," said Lord Adelm, stamp- 
ing his feet, and grinding out his words: 
ii it was my mother's hand." 

" Then the promise of astonishment 
was at least fulfilled." 

" Lady Dunore, it seems, had herself 
received a note," continued Lord Adelm, 
iC advising her to watch my steps this 
evening. I half suspect it was some 
trick of those delectable Crawleys. She 
followed me out : I was annoyed, bored 
beyond all expression, and not over 
guarded in concealing my feelings. A 
scene, often repeated, ensued between 
us. I condemned and contemned her 
interference upon all occasions : she re- 
proached, retorted, and wept ; then 
grew hysterical as usual ; and in this 
way I conducted her home. Trembling 
With apprehension and solicitude, I 



l68 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

again issued forth, when that petite 6va- 
porie, my mother's new Irish caprice, 
appeared in the portico, getting into her 
mule cart. I had now to make a se- 
cond retreat, and saw her take the 
strand road with such feelings of patience 
and pleasure as you may suppose ; at 
last, literally speaking, the coast was 
clear, and I bent my steps towards the 
rock of my disappointed hopes ; for 
there I found only this black handker- 
chief or scarf, a token of my ill luck, 
and an indication, of course, that my 
sylph had been true to her appoint- 
ment, and had kept it, while I was con- 
ducting my mother home. Now what 
think you of all this ?" 

" Think ! why, that your sylph is 
some devoted woman ; so ingenious, so 
zealous in her devotion, that did there 
exist for me such a being " 

" I have examined the handkerchief,'' 
interrupted Lord Adelm, " and I should 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. I69 

think there was ' magic in the web of 
it but that it bears a sign to conjure 
away all magic : a red cross is em- 
broidered on its centre ; it is too of 
Spanish manufacture, of true Barcelona 
workmanship.' ' 

" 'Tis altogether most strange, most 
romantic, and most flattering," returned 
the general, thoughtfully, as they pro- 
ceeded arm in arm, and in silence, each 
apparently wrapped in profound mus- 
ings, till they arrived beneath a sweep 
of irregular and massive cliffs, above 
which, dark and indistinct, rose the ruins 
and cemetery of Monaster-ny-Oriel. 

The pathway to the coast, cut cen- 
turies back by the monks, and the 
round topped perforated cross, which 
they had raised at its entrance, to the 
honour of St. Peter, the fisherman, and 
as a land-mark to distressed mariners, 
still remained. The friends ascended 
this rude rocky avenue by a flight of 

VOL. III. 1 



170 FLORENCE MACARTHY, 

steep unevenly hewn steps, piled on 
either side with a stratum of human 
bones— a gloomy order of architecture 
not unusual in the ancient burying 
grounds of Ireland, and terminating in a 
circular and spacious mandrae (2). The 
night was still and dark ; a few stars 
only glimmered in the cloudy firmament. 

The peculiar genius of Lord Adelm 
was well adapted to scenes and seasons 
characterized by images gloomy and 
fantastic as his own morbid fancy. He 
paused frequently in his wearisome as- 
cent, while his more active companion 
strode on rapidly before him: and when 
he had reached the summit of the rocks 
which formed the site of the monastic 
ruins, he halted, and looked around him. 
The scene was wild, desolate, and 
silent — rocks, ruins, remote mountains, 
bounding the land view ; while the 
steep Atlantic spread wide and dark, 
and lost itself in the distant clouds. He 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1 7 ^ 

measured the tower, under which they 
now stood, with his eye : a light was 
streaming from its loophole casement, 
and it beetled over the cliff like some 
lone watch-tower of the deep. 

" These are scenes," said Lord Adelm, 
" that transport us beyond the present, 
that bear us into regions of thought and 
feeling, beyond all mean ambition and 
human cares." 

" They are the better adapted to 
prelude the tale I would unfold to you," 
said Fitzwalter, impressively. 

" This tower," continued Lord Adelm, 
u resembles the cell of the 6 Subtil 
Archimago' of Spencer, whose scenes in 
the Fairy Queen are, indeed, all Irish." 

* Far from resort of people that did pass> 
In travel to and fro. A little wyde 
There was an holy chapel edifyed, 
Wherein the hermit daily wont to say 
His holy things each morn and even-tide, 
* * ********* 

1 2 



172 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

He told of saints and popes, and evermore 
He strowed an A?e-Mary after and before." 

" The tale to which you arc about 
to listen/' said the general, as he raised 
the latch of a low arched door, " is no- 
thing less than of saints and popes : 'tis 
of men and sinners." 

" Your story !" said Lord Adelm, in a 
tone of recollection, for over the mirror 
of his imagination reflections passed ra- 
pidly ; and it was only now he recol- 
lected the purpose for which he accom- 
panied his new friend to the Friary of 
JSt. John s at an hour so unseasonable. 
Oh ! aye, I had half forgotten your 
story." 

They now ascended the spiral stairs 
of the tower. O'Leary, from above, 
held forward a lamp, whose light pro- 
duced uncertain shadows upon the dark 
damp wall ; but when he perceived by 
its flickering ray that his guest was ac- 
companied by Lord Adelm Fitzadelm, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1/3 

lie started back, then came again for- 
ward, and drew up against the doorcase 
to let them pass, changing the lamp to 
his left hand, that he might make the 
si<ni of the cross on his breast with his 
right, as a sort of exorcism of an event, 
which, to his confused and wandering 
mind, appeared little less than mira- 
culous. He then followed them into 
the room, where a fire had already been 
kindled in the open hearth; the can- 
dles, also, stood ready lighted ; yet, 
under various pretences, he lingered in 
the apartment, occasionally coming for- 
ward with the snuffers, and snatching 
hasty and anxious looks at the two 
gentlemen, who were already seated at 
a little deal table, both leaning on their 
elbows, both earnestly conversing in 
Spanish. O'Lcary, as he gazed on 
them with an half-murmured exclama- 
tion, crossed himself devoutly, and made 
new causes for delay ; till the general, 
i 3 



174 FLORENCE M ACARTHY. 

telling him that he had no further occa- 
sion for his services that- night, peremp- 
torily desired him to retire to rest : he 
then slowly retreated ; and was twice 
called back to' shut the door before he 
obeyed. 

The morning after this midnight in- 
terview had taken place, O'Leary, at an 
hour lator than usual, entered the apart" 
ment of the general to attend at his 
toilette and breakfast. He found him, 
however, asleep in Friar O'Sulivan's 
great chair, where he had left him seated 
the night before, and his bed had not 
been occupied. His repose was so pro- 
found, that O'Leary had rekindled his 
turf fire, and got ready his dressing 
things, without awakening him. But 
the heavy pacing about the room, and 
murmured ejaculations of thepedagogue, 
at last aroused him from his slumber. 

" I'm afeared I put the sleep astray 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1/5 

upon your honor/' said O'Leary, witli 
an anxious look. 

u It is time, I believe, to rise, 
O'Leary, is it not?" said the' general, 
starting up, and shaking off his c obe- 
dient slumbers, as one accustomed to 
snatch repose, when, where, and as he 
could, and to dismiss it at will. 

" To rise!' said O'Leary, shaking his 
head, " and your honor not in bed, 
gineral, the whole live long night, 
Sir!" 

" How do you know that, O'Leary?" 

" How do I know it ? Why, the day 
was breaking on th' Atlantic, plaze 
your honor, when I saw the young lord 
going down the rock there, and you look- 
ing after him from the top of the friar's 
leap, as it is called ; and wonders but 
he'd be afeared to be wandering his lone 
that away in the country. It's little his 
father, Baron Gerald, would dare it, 
great a Calebalaro as he was ; for he 
I 4 



17^ FLORENCE MACABTHY. 

was a soiild man, Sir, from the time he 
planned the ruination of young- De 
M*ontenay ; and its only for him your 
honor would be alive and hearty this 
day: not all as one - that's his own ne- 
phew I mane ; and when I saw you 
both sated cheek by jowl last night, and 
my Pacata Hibernia between yez, it 
minded me the last time I seen the two 
brothers at Court Fitzadelm together : 
it was a little time after the Honorable 
Gerald had married the great English 
lady, th' ould marchioness that is now, 
and came over his lone to Ireland. 
They were seated together in th' oak 
parlour, that's the two Tiernas, with 
a tankard of claret, and a bottle of 
brandy to qualify it, between them.' I 
was only called in about a date, being 
then at the court, and corned to see the 
child ; for the rumour was, he was 
going to be carried to Dublin by his 
uncle, and his mother only buried the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1/7 

week before: and the TiernaDhu handed 
me a glass of wine, saying, pleasantly, 
he believed I'd rather the whiskey." 

" I'm afraid/' said the general smil- 
ing, and who was preparing for a sea 
bath before he went to breakfast, "I'm 
afraid, O'Lcary, that preference still 
clings to you ; and I was sorry when I 
looked in on you this morning to find 
you sleeping in your clothes, with a 
bottle of spirits half consumed by your 
side. This is not the way to recover 
your health, and compose your mind, 
O'Leary." 

" And did your honor look in on 
me ?" said O'Leary, in a softened tone. 
" And never felt * you, gineral, dear ; 
for when I went to my truckle, I fell 
asleep like a rock, Sir. But as to the 
whiskey, Sir, you need not fear it, and 



* A common Irish idiom. 
I 5 



1/8 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



only laves it by way of two-milk- whey 
at my bed-side ; for whiskey, plaze 
your honor, is so qualified in the mak- 
ing, that it dryeth more, and inflameth 
less, than other hot confections. It 
sloweth age (saith the philosopher), 
and helpeth youth ; it reviveth the 
heart, lighteneth the mind, quickeneth 
the spirits, keepeth the veins from 
crumpling, the bones from aching, and 
the marrow from soaking;. Musha ! its 
the elixir of life, and only for it, I'd be 
dead long ago. For when the world 
deserted me, that staid by me, and when 
I lost joy elsewhere, sure its there I 
found it, Sir." 

O'Leary had pronounced this eulo- 
gium on his favourite beverage, as he 
followed the general down the rocks to 
a little creek, or basin, which was 
always sufficiently full to afford a bath ; 
and then having left him his dressing 
gown, at his desire he went back ta 



FLORENCE MA CART HY. 1J$ 

prepare his coffee. When the general 
returned , and had seated himself at the 
breakfast-table, with a book in his hand, 
as he was wont, O'Leary, who attended 
him, took his place in a window-seat, 
at a respectful distance. He drew forth 
an old tattered volume, which for a few 
minutes fixed his attention ; but, ha- 
bitually wandering and unsettled, his 
rapid eyes glanced frequently from his 
studies to the general, who, like himself, 
seemed incapable of giving a continued 
attention to the book which he held 
open in his hand. O'Leary, perceiving 
tha this guest had laid down the volume, 
and leaned thoughtfully on his elbow, 
closed also his own ; and advancing to 
pour out some coffee, observed — 

" I think, your honor, the Memoir I 
am perusing of the Fitzmaurices of Lix- 
no w, a great branch of the Geraldines, 
and Lords of Muskerry, would plaze 
you intirely. Och ! its a great legend ! 



180 FLORENCE MACARTH'Y. 

Its done into rhyme, Sir, Irish rhyme, 
by a priest, who was confessor to the 
family. The argument runneth thus. 
The young Lord Thomas Fitzmaurice, 
of Lixnow, was in foreign parts fighting 
against the Pagans, when the Barony of 
Muskerry fell to him by right. And 
it being reported that he was captured 
by the Turks, an usurper, a bastard of 
the family, did forthwith start up and 
seize his title and domains. And the 
Lord Thomas, when the wars were over, 
would have returned a beggar, but for 
his faithful fosterer, one Joan Harman, 
Sir, an ould Irish servitor of the family, 
married to an English bowman. She 
was aged and infirm ; but when the 
rumour was spread of the devised usur- 
pation, she took ship at Dingle, then a 
great port, and was landed in France, 
when the young lord was at court, as 
became his nobility, having changed 
the service of the Emperor of Austria 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 181 



for that of the French kins. And there 
Joan sought him out, and made him 
acquainted with the ill tidings, and 
brought him back without delay ; and 
saw him cross the threshold of his own 
castle, and restored to his fair posses- 
sions. And one calendar month, from 
the date of her mission, as she foretold, 
she died, being the day of the young 
lord's investiture in his ancient rights. 
For Fve heard tell the heart will break 
with joy as well as sorrow ; and shews 
the room to this hour where Joan Har- 
man died. Och ! it would not grieve 
me a taste to be old Joan Harman this 
day, if it was the will of God ; for its 
remarkable, that affections of fosterage 
never weaken, but 

i Ner longas invaluere moras.' 

And there was little use in making 
gossipping and fosterage treason, by the 
famous statute of Kilkenny ; for they 



182 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



both only just flourished the more, 
though the queen, that's Elizabetha 
regina, sent down the great Earl of 
Thomond, to abolish that same in, his 
palatinate ; and he entered recogni- 
zances, and bound himself to her ma- 
jesty in a thousand pounds, that he 
3hould not marry, foster, nor gossip, 
contrary to the statute in that behalf 
provided, without the special license 
of the lord-deputy for the time being. 

Now gossippred, or confraternity, 
plaze your honor, was said to produce 
confederacies of actions in all things, 
whether lawful or unlawful ; but foster- 
age proved an iron link to bind the affec- 
tions for laudible purposes, not only of 
the fosterers and fostered, but of tfm 
friends and relations on each side ; and 
it bound the Irishry to the English by 
descent; as the O'Callighans to the 
Butlers formerly, and the O'Learys to 
the Fitzadelms to this blessed hour, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



183 



do you see, your honor ; for says ould 
Stanihurst, and your honor knows him 
well, Lib. p. 49, says he, you cannot 
find one instance of perfidy, or deceit, 
or treachery, among them. Nay, they 
are ready to expose themselves to all 
manner of dangers, for the safety of 
those who sucked their wives' or mo- 
thers' milk. You may beat them to a 
mummy, you may put them upon the 
rack, you may burn them on a grid- 
iron, you may expose them to the 
most exquisite tortures, that the crudest 
tyrants could invent, yet you will never 
remove them from that innate fidelity 
which is grafted in them ; you will 
never induce them to betray their duty. 
And Cambrensis addeth (who was 
loath to afford a good word for the 
poor Irishry), c if any love or faith be 
found among the Irish, you must look 
for it among the fosterers and the fos- 
ter childre." 



184 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



But/' said the general, throwing 
down his book, which he had for a 
moment resumed, rising in agitation, and 
placing himself opposite to O'Leary, 
who had resumed his seat, but who 
now rose also — " but, O'Leary, love and 
faith are not alone sufficient, where 
there is a perilous confidence to place, 
where the point at issue may be pro- 
perty, freedom, life Itself; there must 
also be discretion, prudence, firmness, 
vigilance, command of thoughts, of 
looks, of feelings, and of language." 

As he spoke, O'Leary advanced step 
by step, but trembling, and gradually 
folding and compressing his hands, his 
mouth half open, his colour livid, as 
if he expected something he almost 
feared to learn. "O'Leary," conti- 
nued the general in a calmer voice, 
and throwing himself back in his chair, 
" O'Leary, sit down, compose yourself, 
and hear me." 



FLORENCE MACAUTHY. 



185 



O'Leary in part obeyed. He sat 
down, but his composure was irrecover- 
able. He remained for a few minutes 
silent. Suspense, hope, fear, almost to 
agony, were pictured in his counte- 
nance ; while with a mechanical motion, 
he stooped to pick up a black silk hand- 
kerchief which had fallen from his 
breast, to wipe the cold drops that now 
bedewed his furrowed forehead, and 
rolled down his colourless cheek, when 
a crimson cross worked in its centre 
caught General Fitz waiter's eye. He 
started up, and snatched the handker- 
chief from O'Leary's hand. 

" How came you by this handker- 
chief? 1 ' he asked eagerly. 

O'Leary, with a wild and wandering 
look, his mind bent upon other objects, 
made ah effort at recollection, then re- 
plied, 

" The kerchief, Sir ? is it the kerchief 
with the cross on it ? Oh ! plaze your 



186 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



honor, I did not mane to purloin it, 
only return it, Sir, to the right owner, 
plaze God. 

" And who is that:" demanded the 
general with impatience. 

"Is it who owns it, gineral? ,, replied 
O'Leary, endeavouring to recover him- 
self. " If it is not the Spanish American 
nun, Sir, owns it, one Madam Florence 
Macarthy, I don't guess who can own 
it, that's in respect of the blessed and 
holy crucifix." 

" Did you say Florence Macarthy ?" 
asked the general with great emotion, 
and in a voice scarcely articulate, — "a 
nun from Spanish America ?" 

" I did, your honor/' replied O'Leary 
in a low voice, as he contemplated with 
apprehension the change which had 
taken place in the general's counte- 
nance, — " Florence Macarthy, Sir. Did 
you know her, gineral, in foreign parts? 
Her father was son to the ould Earl 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 187 

of Clancare's brother. He went to be 
made a merchant of in some of the 
West India islands ; and was the first 
of the family that turned his hands to 
business, which made a great bruite in 
the country ; and then he went into 
South America, and joined the wars 
there when they first broke out, as 
I heard tell, and was killed or died 
there I disremember me which. And 
his daughter, Florence Macarthy, his 
only child, went into a convent, her 
aunt being an abbess somewhere in 
Spain, so Father O'Sulivan tould me; 
and when it was broke up by the French 
army, who let loose the craturs, she 
fled back to Ireland, to her people in 
her own barony, which she had quit 
when a child ; and none was in it left, 
only the Bhan Tierna, and one Mrs. 
Honor Macarthy, called Honor ni 
Sancta, or Holy Honor, who is the 
superior of ' our Lady of the a.nnun- 



188 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



ciation/ near the Abbey of the Holy- 
cross : and when there was a place 
vaquent in the convent, which was 
soon, Madam Florence Macarthy went 
to the convent, and was brought there 
by the countess, who has no vocation 
that way, the little sowl, with her caen- 
coihar> as her ould grandadda used to 
call her curley black head ; and the 
mouth and teeth of her, just like a 
young hound's, in regard of her red 
gums, gineral. M 

A silence of many minutes succeeded 
to this information, and accompanying 
digression of O'Leary's, who usually 
" drew the thread of his verbosity Jiner 
than his argument 

At last the general, who was walking 
up and down the apartment in great agi- 
tation, stopped opposite to O'Leary, and 
asked, " Where did you find that hand- 
kerchief? How came you by it?" 

" How came I by it, Sir, is it? I 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 189 

came by it, Sir, when I was just creep- 
ing out for a mouthful of fresh air, be- 
fore dawn, this morning, and was look- 
ing up at the light in your casement, 
gineral, and thinking there must be great 
shanaos * between you and the young 
lord, would keep you up talking all 
night, and my foot caught in this ker- 
chief, Sir, and I thought it was my 
own ; only when day-light came I saw 
it was not, for by the cross marked on it 
in the centre I thought it must be 
Madam Florence Macarthy's, in regard 
of the cypher done in dormy red letters, 
Sir." O'Leary pointed to the small 
F. M. in the corner as he spoke. " But 
the wonder of the world," he added, 
" is, what would be bringing her here 
among the rocks, and she settled down 
in her own convent, inTipperary county, 
Sir, and is to take the vow in the begin- 



* Family tradition, genealogical details. 



190 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

ning of the month, and a great sight it 
M ill be." 

" Did you ever see this Florence 
Macarthy ?" asked the general after a 
pause, and standing opposite toO'Leary, 
with his eyes fixed on him. 

" I did, gineral, often, when she was 
for a month at Castle Macarthy, and 
afore she went into her convent, and 
used to come down here to the great 
Macarthy-More's tomb in the monas- 
tery, and remained half the length of 
the day on her knees before it. Och! 
Sir, that's the voteen *, and the saint, 
if there's one upon earth : and it's ex- 
traordinary, but her cousin oncet re- 
moved, Lady Clancare would be taking 
a turn that way too, — and she brought 
up in a convent too, and never had a 
calling, only laughing, and shewing 
them white teeth of her s, and circum- 



* Devotee. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. lOj 

venting the Crawleys, and has great 
learning and fine Irish for all that, to 
say nothing of her being mighty co- 
mical." 

" Does Miss Macarthy resemble her 
cousin, Lady Clancare ?" 

" Why then, gineral, I could not 
well tell you that, in regard of never 
seeing her face, only with a thick black 
veil over it, and never shewed it to sun 
or moon, they say, barring Fra O'Suli- 
van, who confesses both ladies ?" 

The general now resumed his seat 
and book, requesting O'Leary to return 
to his school. 

" You may lay out my writing desk, 

O'Leary," he added, " and no ; 

don't take away that handkerchief; 
and pray shut the door after you : I 
wish to be left alone." 

O'Leary sighed deeply, and laid 
down one writing article after another ; 
at last, taking up a pen to mend it, he 
observed: — 



IQ2 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" I thought, gineral, when I was 
brushing your coat yesterday, Sir, and 
you dressing for the castle dinner, 
that I heard you mintion a word of 
going away in a day or two, if the 
wind was fair, Sir ; and a bit of a 
ship coining into port at Cork ; and 
that — and then — and I thought your 
honor said something, Sir, about the say 
sickness being good for my complaint ; 
and that you was going t o - and the 
kerchief then came in the way ; that' 
this morning, gineral, a bit ago/' 

" And would you, O'Leary," said the 
general, in a voice of great kindness, 
" would you leave your home, your 
country, to follow me, uncertain as you 
must be whom " 

" Would I ?" interrupted O'Leary, 
with a burst of emotion, in which con- 
sciousness and insanity seemed to strug- 
gle for supremacy — " would I ?" and 
he fell at the general's feet, and seized 
his hands, while his tears fell fast. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 193 

S€ Would I follow you, is it ? Did not I 
lose my senses for you ? Did not I 
leave home, and kin, and friends, to 
wander the world over for you, when 
you were'nt in it ? And now that you 
are before me with your mother s smile, 
see here, gineral," and he attempted a 
tone of firm composure ; " if you are'nt 
yourself, and would tell me that at once, 
there would be an end of all ; and I 
would be what I was before I met you 
in the mountains, and still would go on 
quietly, and would just, some fine 
morning, lie down in the sun, like old 
Cumhal, and die." 

The general, in irrepressible emotion, 
with difficulty released his hand from 
the maniac grasp of O'Leary: then 
drawing from his breast an ancient mis- 
sal, he opened its clasps, and shewed, 
opposite to one of its illuminated pages, 
two certificates of a marriage and a 
birth. O'Leary seized the sacred vo- 

VOL. III. K 



194 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

lumej and kissed it eagerly and devoutly, 
with a look of anxious recognition. 
The general hurried it back to his 
breast. 

" You stand pledged to God and to 
me, O'Leary," said the general, in a 
deep and affecting voice. 

O'Leary remained silent, but his lips 
moved rapidly ; his eyes wandered 
wildly over the face that fascinated his 
gaze, till at last his clasp relaxed its 
firmness, his eyes closed, and he would 
have fallen to the earth, if the general 
had not received him in his arms. 

" O'Leary, my old boy P he said, 
bearing him to the fresh air admitted 
at the open window ; and at this well 
remembered epithet, O'Leary, shaking 
off his faintness, cried, with a burst of 
hysteric laughter — 

" That's it ! that's the voice I have 
heard in the lone mountains by day and 
by night. They tould me it was my 



FLORENCE MAC ARTHY. 1<)5 

fitch. My fitch ! oh, Jasus !" and he 
wept freely. Then suddenly drying his 
eyes, and throwing their rapid glances 
over the face of Fitzwalter, whose hand 
he still held, new lineaments seemed to 
start forth to his recollection, and he 
continued to repeat : — u And there was 
a mole under the curls of the left tem- 
ple ; and axes your honor's pardon- 
yes, there it is; and the curls too, only 
far blacker. Shoosheen used to call 
it the fairy's lock, because the world 
would not take the curl out of it: and 
weren't drownded after all ; sure I said 
so. And them transport ships off the 
coast, from Cork. And how was it, 
gineral, dear? And the boat there, 
turned upside down, when we went out 
to look for you; and your foster- 
mother had sat up all night, and had a 
warning. And not many nights she sat 
up after — barring at her own wake, 
God help her: and that was too much 
for any man; and twenty-two year* 

K 2 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

ago! and all that time never to claim 
your own, nor just write one's own 
foster-father a line from foreign parts; 
and so ready at the pen formerly, in re- 
spect of them themes and exercises !'* 

" O'Leary," said the general, in a 
firm and imposing voice, " let it suffice 
that I live, and am here ; that I have 
returned to my native country with a 
name as distinguished, through my own 
exertions, as that which I received from 
my forefathers ; a name too not as- 
sumed, but inherited : for, after tlie an- 
cient manner of my family, I have but 
given the Norman prefix to my father's 
baptismal appellation.' ' 

OXeary started, "Fitzwalter! Walter, 
the Black Baron, and never thought of 
that. Och ! I've a poor head now, and 
a beating in it that wears the life out 
of me by times. — To be sure, Walter 
de Montenay Fitzwalter; the ould 
Geraldine fashion evermore." 

" For the rest, O'Leary, secrecy the 



FLORENCE MCCARTHY. 19/ 

most profound of my present existence 
in this neighbourhood is necessary. It 
is for the interest of many that I should 
never re-appear. My presence here, if 
even suspected, might endanger my life 
or liberty : besides, I wish to avoid all 
publicity — to compromise rather than 
contend, and to save the honour of my 
family, by touching lightly on the crimes 
of one of its members ; or, if possible, 
by burying them in eternal oblivion. " 

" That's the Honorable Gerald/' in- 
terrupted OXeary, " the Marquis, and 
Lord Adelm's father." 

" It matters not whom, O'Leary," 
said the general eagerly ; " and now 
leave me for the present ; resume your 
ordinary habits ; be secret — be circum- 
spect—my life is in your hands; but 
hold yourself in readiness to depart at 
a moment's warning. Had it not been 
for a circumstance that has become ac. 
cidentally known to me this morning, I 
k 3 



198 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

should have left this country to-night, 
and even as it is perhaps." 

" To-night !" repeated O'Leary, who 
had moved a few paces, but who still 
loitered at the door. 

" To-night. I must first, however, see 
the Countess of Clancare; and I think 
I will try my fortune at her door in an 
hour hence." 

" You will, Sir!" said O'Leary, in 
astonishment. " See that — and in amity, 
plaze your honour ?" 

" Certainly not in enmity" returned 
the general, smiling. " But you seem 
surprised by my intention, O Leary." 

" No, plaze your lord — , your ho- 
nour, I mane ; not a taste ; for sure 
'twas just the same anno 1321, when 
the English by blood leagued with 
the Irish mere in the common cause, 
that's ould Ireland, Sir; and enemies 
before, became fast friends sithence, 
as Ayphraim against Menasses, and Me- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 199 

nasses against Ayphraim; and botli 
united against the tribe of Judah, that's 
the Crawley s, Sir, the land pirates ! — 
and will step down and order your fine 
new charger from Cork, Sir, to be 
brought from the Dunore Arms, and will 
put on my Sunday apparel, and mount 
the little Kerry asturiones, and ride 
after your honor in the capacity of an 
ecury, as is right and fitting, till you're 
Lord — , till you have a better ■ and 
will just induct Teague Rourke, my head 
Homer, into the office of my coad- 
jutor and assistant in the seminary ; 
that is, gineral, he'll tache the classes, 
while I'll attind your honor." 

" No, O'Leary/* said the general, 
shaking his head, " that will never 
do. You must return to your learned / 
runagates, of whom I found you so 
justly proud when I arrived here: and 
if you do not wish me to repent of the 
confidence I have placed in you, you 
K 4 



200 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

will in no respect change your wonted 
habits." 

" Then I'll engage I won't, Sir ; re- 
plied CTLeary, emphatically, " and 
never will call you my lord, till the 
day of judgment ; that is, till all's 
proved ; and your lordship, the great 
Marquis of Dunore (which you are at 
this blessed moment), taking possession 
of your castle : for fortune, though she 
be pourtrayed to stand upon a rolling 
stone, as being flighty by nature, yet 
for the most part she helpeth such as 
be of courageous mind, and valiant 
stomach. — Did not Thomyris the Scy- 
thian queen, and collateral ancestor of 
the Macarthies, by her great spirit, 
with a few hundred followers, bate 
Cyrus intirely, with many thousands ? 

and did not , but I will not bother 

your lordship with needless tediousness, 
only just will defy the world, from this 
day out, to prove that I care a testoon 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 201 

for you ; and thought, Sir, that I'd ride 
the asturiones after you, to shew you 
the way, Sir, to Castle Macarthy." 

u I should, for many reasons, pre- 
fer going alone," said the general. 

" Och ! very well, gineral : sure I 
have no control over you now, Sir, 
why would I, only in respect of finding 
out the Bhan-Tierna, who does not care 
to be in the way of the quality ; foreby 
being always in the fields, or on her own 
mountains, from sun-rise to sun-set, 
just like a little grasshopper, the sowl ! 
chirping and hopping, and living on 
dews and air, as one would say ; that's 
as Anacreon says, Sir : — and remembers 
your construing that same into mighty 
pretty Latin; and you only twelve years 
old and three months." 

" You may order my horse in an hour 
hence,' ' said the general. 

O'Leary now drew towards the door, 
throwing back one eager, anxious, and 
K 5 



202 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

affectionate look, which the general 
returned with an expressive smile. 
O'Leary raised his eyes in thanksgiving, 
murmured an Irish prayer, dashed the 
gathering tears from his eyes, and 
crossing his hands behind him, retired 
muttering to himself as he slowly de- 
scended the steep stairs, " And Cumhal 
the cratur, not alive to see this day IV 

An hour had scarcely elapsed when 
O'Leary, mounted on the fine horse he 
had alluded to, appeared under the 
window of the general's apartment. He 
had thrown off his pedagogue costume, 
was habited in his gala dress of many 
coats, had put on a new wig and hat, 
was shaved unusually close, and exhi- 
bited a countenance far indeed from 
placid^ but from which every trace of 
anxiety and solicitude was banished. 
The flutter of new-born, unexpected 
happiness still distinguished his manner. 
He had given his boys an holiday, and 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



203 



was incapable of fixing his attention to 
his daily habits ; but there was an air 
of contentment about him which in- 
dicated an evident revolution in feelings 
and ideas. His short cough, and ex- 
pressions of kindness to the animal on 
which he was mounted, drew General 
Fitzwalter to the window ; and he stood 
for a moment contemplating this warm- 
hearted, zealous, and devoted being, 
with an emotion of pride and bene- 
volence, as one, who true to human 
sympathy, beholds with triumph the 
happiness he has created. 

In a few minutes he was mounted on 
his steed ; and O'Leary continued to 
walk beside him, with one hand behind 
his back, and the other leaning on the 
horse's flank. 

u I'll just step on a taste with your 
honor," he observed, to excuse his in- 
trusion, " to shew the good road, Sir, 
and open the little gates, and remove 



204 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



the brambles that stop up the gaps in 
the mearings betwixt the pratie grounds 
of the Dunore tenants." 

To this the general made no objec- 
tion; and O'Leary continued, 

" And so, you are going, gineral, 
jewel, to make your courtesies, and to 
pay your obeysance to the Countess of 
Clancare, which makes the friar s words 
come true, anno 1505." 

u What friar, and what words, 
O'Leary?" 

"Och! an holy man your honor," 
said O'Leary, lowering his voice, and 
raising his head towards the general's 
ear, "who was superior of the order 
here, in the time of the first Lord Du- 
nore, who got the castle after the Ma- 
carthies, and who chased away the 
brotherhood. He left a curse on Du- 
nore castle, which remains unredeemed 
to this day. His prophecy, which is in 
Irish, may be thus construed : 



Florence MACARfHY. 205 



Macarthy More shall hare his won, 

When, after battles lost and won, 

The Norman shall cross the theshold floor, 

To woe the heir of Macarthy More : 

When the dexter hand from the clouds shall bend, 

And the moose deer* to its home shall wend; 

When he shall return, who was dead and gone, 

Macarthy More shall have his own — 

Such are the words of Friar Con." 

M The prediction of your friar, 
O'Leary," said the general, smiling, 
" like most prophecies, is sufficiently 
vague and indefinite. It may mean 
anything or nothing." 

" Anything or nothing V returned 
O'Leary, quickly. " Does battles lost 
and won mane nothing? And the re- 
trate of Masha-na-glass, and the Foray 
of Dooghna-go-hoone, between the 
Fitzadelms and the Macarthies, about 
a prey of cattle, and divers other com- 

* The dexter arm, the crest of the Fitzadelms: 
—the moose deer, that of the Macarthies. 



206 FLORENCE M AC ARTHY. 

bats, as will be seen in my Genealogical 
History, written in the Phoenician 
vulgo vocata Irish; do they mane no- 
thing ? And does the Norman crossing 
the threshold floor, to woo the heir of 
Macar thy More, mane nothing, gineral? 
and your honor" (here he lowered his 
voice to a whisper), u and your honor 
going to make your obeisance to the 
Bhan Tierna of the world? And does 

" The dexter hand from the cloud shall bend, 
And the moose deer to its home shall wend y " 

mane nothing? when the dexter hand's 
the device of the Fitzadelms; and is 
going, in lowly suit, to tender itself to 
the Macarthy's heir: and the moose 
deer, the crest of the Macarthies, which 
was found cut beautifully in stone 
among the rubbish at Castle Macarthy, 
and set up over the portal, by Lady 
Clancare, when she came home, a 
wandering deer herself, the cratur! the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 207 

wide world over ? And then »" he 
added, in emotion, "for him who shall 
return, being " 

" Yes, yes/' interrupted Fitz waiter, 
" that is plain: but it is by no means 
so certain, because a Norman stranger 
visits the heiress, or representative of 
the Macarthy family, that he is to woo 
her. And if the restoration of the 
greatness and property of the Macar- 
thies rests upon that part of your Friar s 
prophecy, I'm afraid, O'Leary, the 
whole falls to the ground." 

" If she chooses it, plaze your honor, 
she'll make you woo her, and win her 
too/' said O'Leary, with an air of mys- 
terious doggedness. 

"Indeed!" 

" Troth ! and deed, Sir. Sure she 
rules the world intirely, Sir : and has 
greatly quelled the Crawleys since she 
came into it. — And is like her great an- 
cestor, the famed I lien Macarthy, the 



208 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

first Countess of Clancare, only child 
to the great Florence : she, who rescued 
the title from Daniel the base-born, and 
bestowed it upon her own husband 
(the queen consenting thereunto), Sir 
Donach Macarthy Reagh of Carberry; 
and like her the Bhan Tierna is sharp 
witted, a great lover of learning, capa- 
ble of any study, and has, at this 
present speaking, my Irish and Latin 
dictionary, which she walked down 
herself to borrow, the very evening of 
the day your honor set off to Cork; 
which was the day, Sir, she arrived 
from England, where she had been so- 
journing, to the intire loss of the coun- 
try ; and the Crawley s waxing cockish 
the moment her back was turned; and 
brings me home this piece of antiquity; 
and thinks it will plaze you, O'Leary, 
says she, here it is, plaze your honor." 
He pulled from his breast a tattered 
volume, adding, " It is entitled ' Tom 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 200 

Loodles* rhymes, Sir, c nipping by 
name divers honorable and worshipful 
of the realm, and certain officers of the 
deputy's household, for grieving the 
land with impo s it iotis— .bearing date Jan. 
28, Anno Dom. 1576.' Making, with 
the deputy's answer, and a speech of 
one James Stanihurst, an Esquire of 
worship, Warder of Dublin, but eight 
sheets closely indited — which, with 
your lave, gineral, I'll peruse aloud to 
beguile the way, which is bare and 
bleak." 

w I would rather you would explain 
to me, OLeary," said the general, 
alighting, and throwing the bridle of the 
horse over his arm, " why, talking as 
you did, so much and so frequently of 
the ancient state and fortunes of this 
Macarthy family, you should have said 
roothing of their present existence ; of 
this Lady Clancare, for instance, whom 
you merely mentioned as an ancient 



210 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

lady, absent from the country, and 
whom I naturally supposed to be the 
widow of the late earl." 

" And isn't she an ancient countess, 
though a young faimale, your honor? 
Anno, 156o ; estates regranted by letters 
patent, to hold them of the crown after 
the English fashion ; and sat in parlia- 
ment afore 1584 : and as for not cosher- 
ing* about her with a stranger in the 
mountains (no stranger to the heart if 
strange to the eye), would you ax one 
of the Pobble O'Leary's to betray their 
Tanista, their Bhan Tierna? and her 
last words, laving the country in Owny, 
the Rabragh's ould chay, being " 

" Owny, the Rabragh P repeated the 
general, with a little start. 

" Yes, my lord, Sir, I mane ; the 
last words laving the country, and the 
first when she came back was, not to 



* Coshering, ^literally, gossipping. 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 211 

be talking her over with strangers ; nor, 
'bove all, with any of the Fitzadclms, 
who were expected over every day them 
two years : and when I tould her that 
I was sure I had the Lord Adelm 
houselled under my roof, and described 
your honor to her verbatim et literatim, 
she swore me over again that I would 
not sell her to yez." 

" Sell her ! but what was her object 
in this concealment ?" 

" Pride, Sir ; what else would it be. 
The pride of the Macarthies, Sir, the 
proudest race in Christendom, dead or 
alive, this day : and didn't choose, the 
sowl, to be overshadowed by them Du- 
nores and their greatness, in her poor 
ould castle, (3) without her tiernas or 
clans, her bonagh, sorohen, cuddy, 
shragh, or mart ; without her warder, or 
constable, or gallow glasses, or calivers, 
or hand weapons; but only just Ulic 
Macshane, the cow-boy, and Sibby, her 



212 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



little bit of a handmaid, with only thirty 
pounds per annum, chief-rents of great 
estates on the Kerry side of Clotnotty- 
joy, that are worth thousands to their 
owners; and that's all coming to her 
now, who by right is king of the Cori- 
anddi ; and all that's left of her barony, 
town-lands, plough-lands, castle, and 
manor, with all royalties, mines, quar- 
ries, suit and service, knight's fees, 
wardships and marriages, escheats, 
waifs, strays, goods proclaimed, persons 
or bondmen, estovers, villains and their 
followers, fairs, markets, tolls, and all 
franchises and privileges whatsoever, 
with a court baron at Ballydab for the 
Cork estates, and another at Clancare 
for Kerry ; to say nothing of chief- 
tainries all through the province, sowled 
scrubal by scrubal to such land pirates 
as the Grawleys ; and broke some of 
their sword-blade company bargains 
since she came home. Now to see her 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 213 

rinting her own castle, and going a foot 
to mass, barring when the mules isn't at 
work, and has them put to her cabriole, 
made by ould Cormack the wheel- 
wright. Mules! BachalEssu! she that 
had her Spanish jennets, and her Ho- 
bellers, and Asturiones, and Arabians, 
sent over by Don Jacobus Macarthy 
as a gift to the great Florence; foreby 
her steeds ready caparisoned afore the 
rack in case of a sudden foray, and 
the O'Driscols coming down the moun- 
tains to make a prey of kine ; and 
that is the raison, plaze your honor, 
why she'd wish to keep aloof of them 
English quality, who might stand upon 
the pantoufles of their English rank, 
and treat her, as she pithily observed 
to me, as the Saxon King John and his 
Norman gallants did the great Milesian 
O'Connors, and O'Briens, and O'Byrnes, 
and Macarthies, who set the Irish 
chiefs at nought, laughed at their man- 



214 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

ties and truises, mocked their glibhs 
and beards, and with flaps on their lips, 
and thumps on their backs, discourte- 
ously received the courtesies of the na- 
tive nobility of the land. Besides, she 
might not like, being a lone lady, to 
come in the way of the young Lord 
Adelm, who is, according to rumour, a 
rake and raparee, one in whom there is 
no stay, no sobriety, likening his father 
the Honorable Gerald." 

" And yet," said the general, u Lady 
Clancare chose to let herself be taken 
prisoner to Dunore, when a word would 
have saved her the mortification of 
standing in so humiliating a position be- 
fore those persons she was so anxious to 
avoid." 

" And if she did," said O'Leary, 
with a significant look, u I'll ingage 
she had her reasons for that same : and 
did not you mind, that secret and 
drifty as them Crawleys was, to ruhu 



FLORENCE MACAKTHY. *2lb 



the world round, and your honor to 
boot, they were all outwitted and cir- 
cumvented every step; and mark my 
words, the Bhan Tierna was at the bot- 
tom of all, overthrowing their complots 
and their policies ; and when I saw 
your honour there in the midst of them, 
your natural kin, it minded me of the 
secret enemies of the great ould Earl of 
Kildare, and their accusations against 
him, deposed before Henry the Seventh, 
anno 1501, charging him with burning 
the cathedral church of Ca shell ; and 
he, baited at the stake, did confess the 
fact : and when it was looked for that 
he should justify the same, ' By J asus/ 
quoth he, ' I would never done it, 
plaze your majesty, had they not tould 
me the archbishop was within;' and 
merrily laughed the king at the plain- 
ness of the man, the archbishop being 
present ; and when it was deposed that 
all Ireland could not govern this earl, 



21 6 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

' No f quoth the king, 6 then in good 
faith shall this earl govern all Ireland 
and forthwith he made him lord-deputy 
and knight of the garter, to the discom- 
fiture of his enemies, and is ancestor to 
the young Duke of Leinster to this 
day." 

O'Leary chuckled over this anecdote; 
and though General Fitz waiter could 
perceive no parallel between the Earl of 
Kildare's case and his own, yet there 
was such animation and cheerfulness in 
O'Leary's manner, out of the abundance 
of whose heart the mouth now spoke, 
that he was unwilling to chill it by a 
dissentient opinion upon a subject which 
it seemed to give him such pleasure to 
maintain. 

They had now passed the last fence of 
the potatoe grounds, had got upon the 
highway, the general had mounted his 
horse, and was declining O'Leary's offer 
of accompanying him to Castle. Macar- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 217 

thy, when Lord Adelrn, followed by a 
groom, appeared galloping towards 
them. He stretched out his hand to 
General Fitz waiter, who rode up to 
him, and took it cordially. O'Leary 
stood with his head uncovered, and with 
something between amazement and con- 
sternation painted in his looks. 

u I have met with a great loss," 
said Fitzadelm, as they rode on toge- 
ther. 

(t You bear losses with such philoso- 
phy," said Fitzwalter, " that it would 
be throwing away sympathy to offer it 
to you. But what further trials has 
your disinterested generosity been put 
to?" 

" I have lost," said Lord Adelm, 
with a melancholy look, " my sybil's 
kerchief." 

General Fitzwalter rode close up to 
him, and throwing his arm over Lord 
Adelm's shoulder, said— " And what, if I 

vol. in. *, 



218 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

have discovered the sybil who owns 
that handkerchief?" 

" Discovered !" said Lord Ad elm, 
almost springing from his horse, and 
taking the bridle of the general's, so as 
to draw them still closer together— 
" discovered, say you ! how ? when ? 
where ? what is she, sybil, sylph, wo- 
man, maid, widow, or wife ? Speak, I 
conjure you." 

" A woman and a wife ; almost, at 
least, a wife," replied Fitzwalter, with 
a half-repressed sigh. 

" Whose wife :" demanded Lord 
Fitzadelm, with the blood mantling to 
his cheek. 

" Mine," was the abrupt reply. 

A short silence succeeded to this sin-* 
gular and most unexpected answer; 
till Lord Adelm, recovering from the 
shock a reply so mysterious was calcu- 
lated to give, at last, with a look, in 
which some faint indication of plea- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 21*) 

surable triumph was discernible, ob- 
served: — 

u Every thing about you: is extra- 
ordinary. You are out of the pale of 
every-day creation. All things con- 
nected with you are calculated for 
amazement or admiration : but that 
any one you have deigned to— to— 
should turn her eyes on me! — in short, 
you trifle with my folly, you play with 
my credulity — you — " 

u At the present moment," said the 
general, cc I cannot satisfy your doubts, 
or clear up your perplexities. I am 
myself doubtful and uncertain; per- 
plexed in the extreme. If the owner 
of the mystic kerchief is the person I 
suspect she is, or might be still — but I 
demand your indulgence, and the sus- 
pension of your curiosity. To-night it 
may be in my power to become more 
explicit. Till then, or till that moment 
arrives when 1 can fully explain my- 
Ei 2 



220 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



self, confide in my truth, rely on my 
friendship, and believe that my feelings 
are not more at ease than your own. 
Where can I see you this evening?" 

" Where ! where, but at the castle ? 
My mother *s dinner card of general in- 
vitation is now on its way to you. It 
was with difficulty I could confine her 
to that ; not but that I consider your 
delicacy as morbid and sickly upon this 
point." 

" It must not, and it ought not to be," 
said the general. 

u It must, and ought. It's folly to 
act otherwise. To me it is privation, 
*nd in you suspicious. I will call on 
you in my w r ay home, and we will re- 
turn to dinner together; or, rather, I 
wish you would accompany me now/' 

" Where are you bound to Y* 

" To Glannacrime. This morning, 
at breakfast, I thought I perceived a 
little intelligence between my mother 



FLORENCE MACARTHT. 221 

and her election agent, to keep me for 
some time out of the scene of action; 
so I ordered my horse, and came off to 
canvass the e most sweet voices' of those 
purchaseable worthies, in person. But 
this most extraordinary intelligence, 
mysterious and unsatisfactory as it is, 
which you have now communicated to 
me, leaves me without thought or view 
for any other object, save that which 
has so long occupied my existence; 

that which Your wife ! Oh ! 

you jest. Impossible ! you never men- 
tioned, never hinted, that you were 
married before ; and now . . . 

" To tell the truth," said Fitz waiter, 
shrugging his shoulders, " I had almost 
forgotten it myself. It was an event 
in my life brief and fantastic as a 
dream, made up of circumstances as 
wild and as discordant; occurring amidst 
scenes, perilous and foreign to such an 
engagement, amidst the crash of war, 
l 3 



222 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the groans of the dying; when the vow, 
half breathed, remained unratified ; the 
benediction, half pronounced, was un- 
finished ; and the ceremony, all but 
concluded, was broken off in time to 
render the forms which had passed 
binding only to faith, to honour, and to 
gratitude. These ties all remain ; and 
if they arc to be irrevocably broken, 'tis 
not by me. This you are going to say 
is all enigma ; and so it is. Yet now 
I will be pressed no further. To-night 
perhaps . . . till then, farewell/' 

He now spurred his horse, and in a 
moment was out of sight. There was 
in the tone, the air, and the manner, 
more than in his words, an imposing 
firmness, and indisputable decision upon 
all occasions, when he chose to be pe- 
remptory, which left persuasion hope- 
less. 

" He is his own destiny and mine," 
said Lord Adelm, with a sigh, as he 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. £23 

looked after him. " To contend with 
him, or to oppose him, were to struggle 
with fatality." In this conviction there 
was something extremely accordant to 
the habits of mind and morbid ima- 
gination of him who embraced it. 
Mystery was his element ; and whatever 
was wild or terrible, dark or extra- 
ordinary, whatever roused profound 
emotion, or gave feeling to extraordi- 
nary conjecture, was calculated to in- 
gross and interest him. The com- 
mander of // Libra dor did both. 



L 4 



2'24 



FLORENCE MACARTHV- 



CHAPTER V. 

Even so, this happy creature, of herself is all 
sufficient. 

Words wo uth. 

There stand — for you are spell. stopp'd. 

Shakespeare, 



It was a bright, warm September 
morning (one of those days so rare in a 
climate impregnated with the vapours 
of the greatest ocean of the earth), that, 
for the first time since his arrival in the 
country, General Fitz waiter entered the 
village of Ballydab. But neither the 
noon-day sun which shone on its views, 
nor the mountain breeze that blew over 
them, rich in the perfumes of plants 
peculiar to the southern mountains of 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 225 

Ireland, could lend a charm to this 
ruinous retreat of indigence and misery. 
Ballydab, the El Dorado of O'Leary ; 
the once fair dependency of its own feu- 
dal castle, an ancient borough, which 
had formerly sent two members to par- 
liament by prescriptive right (for its 
charter was not upon record), Bally- 
dab, once noted in military and eccle- 
siastical history, was now a desolate 
and ruinous village, scarcely less im- 
posing or less miserable in its appear- 
ance than the deserted city of Kilmal- 
lock in the same province (4). The 
remains of a wall which once surrounded 
the town were still visible. The site 
of a Dominican abbey of Black Friars, 
erected in the fifteenth century, by 
" the sovereign, brethren, and com- 
monalty, y * was yet ascertainable ; and 
the ruins of other castles and monas- 
teries afforded shelter to many wretched 
families, who had built their perishable; 

L 5 



226 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



huts against the walls of edifices, whose 
strength had stood the shock of ages. 
Ballydab, which had been founded by 
the Macarthies, had long since been 
transferred to the Dunore family, and 
had been included in the great sale of 
boroughs, which, while it sanctified 
the principle of corruption, by acknow- 
ledging the landlord s pecuniary in- 
terest in the votes of his tenantry, and 
his possession of the borough, had pur- 
chased the transfer of all right in the 
annihilation of the national legislajure. 
Desolate, impoverished, and neglected, 
the surrounding land given up to jobbers > 
it bore all the signs, not only of distress, 
hut of squalid and hopeless pauperism. 
Its inhabitant^ were deemed lawless, 
they were, indeed, occasionally des- 
perate; no natural demand being made 
upon their native activity, their rest- 
lessness had sometimes degenerated to 
mischief : and it was, perhaps, as much 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 227 

their misery that they had few wants, 
as that they had still fewer means of 
supplying them. Their cabins were, 
for the most part, ruined hovels ; and 
in the centre of the town, a swampy 
marsh, where an annual fair was held 
by ancient usage, sent up ordinarily a 
pestilential vapour, though now un- 
usually dry. 

Yet, amidst these symptoms of ge- 
neral wretchedness, evidences of recent 
and progressive improvement were to 
be seen. The mountain which shel- 
tered the town was cultivated and green 
to its summit. Several of the hovels 
were newly whitewashed : and, in a 
few instances, freshly plaistered chim- 
nies emitted the smoke, which more 
commonly found egress at the door. 
In the front of one cabin, a poor man 
was employed in filling up a stagnate 
pool, and an heap of manure was re- 
moving from before another. At the 



228 FLORENCE AIACARTHY. 

door of a barn a number of children 
were employed in making green rush 
matting, and at a little shebeen house, 
a piper sat upon a stone bench playing 
a gay Irish lilt. 

The general as he passed along had 
to return the low bows of all he met, 
for there were strangely mingled with 
the general aspect of misery and wiid- 
ness an air of courtesy, and a civilization 
of manner, which formed a curious con- 
trast. From every point of the village 
the castle was conspicuous, for it stood 
on the brow of a hill that overhung it, 
and upon a precipice which immediately 
arose from a river, formed of many tri- 
butary streams, and flowing into one of 
the many bays, which, a mile further 
on, indented the coast. All that now 
remained of the original edifice of Castle 
Macarthy was a coarse square building, 
rude, inelegant, and wholly destitute 
of the architectural ornament which 



FLORENCE MACARTKY. 22$ 

distinguished the beautiful and perfect 
Castle of Dunore, a building more mo- 
dern by about a century. The ballium, 
the barbican, the parapets, the em- 
brazures and crenelles, described by 
O'Leary, and existing only in the me- 
mory of what he read, or the imagina- 
tion of what he wished, w ere vainly 
sought for in the chapter of realities. 
His castle w as literally " a castle in the 
air. 

As General Fitzw r alter approached 
more closely, and ascended the steep 
and rutted lane, or approach, he per- 
ceived a fosse partly filled up, and a 
flagged causeway crossing it. The stone 
pillars of the gates still remained ; and 
the castle bawn, the demesne of feudal 
recreation, lay to the left, and was still 
fenced round w ith a low wall of mud 
and brambles. It was now, ho w r ever, 
planted with potatoes, rich in their 
bright silver and orange flowers. The 



230 



FLORENCE MACAKTHY. 



mountain rose almost perpendicularly 
above the castle ; and to the left a ro- 
mantic glen, wild, irregular, and rocky, 
afforded a passage to the many moun- 
tain brooks which swelled the greater 
streams and fell into the sea. Two or 
three irregular sashed windows appeared 
scattered over the front of the castle, 
but it was principally lighted bv loop- 
hole casements. The hall door of black 
bog oak lay open, and the crest of the 
Macarthies, alluded toby O'Lcary, the 
moose deer, cut in stone, was raised 
above it, with the date of 1500. A 
knocker would have been vainly sought 
for ; nor was any person visible, ex- 
cept two women, who appeared at a 
distance, weeding a patch of ground at 
the extremity of the potatoe ridges; 
while a venerable greyhound, which 
lay basking in the sun before the 
door, the sole guardian of these ru- 
ined towers, only growled at the 



FLORENCE MAC ART HY. 231 



strangers approach, half raised himself, 
and then lay down again to sleep. 
General Fitzwalter entered the stone- 
roofed hall; and in the hope that some 
one might accidentally appear, occupied 
himself in examining the singular orna- 
ments with which it was decorated. A 
•wolfs head, the last caught in Ireland, 
as was inscribed on a brass plate, bear- 
ing date 17 A °j hung from the centre of 
the ceiling. Beneath it, on an old stone 
table, the enormous fossil horn's of a 
moose deer were extended : a few old 
pictures were dropping from their 
frames; and on either side of the hall, 
two narrow arched ways led to dark, 
damp, stone passages. He was at 
last tempted to proceed through that 
on the left, guided by the sound of 
a voice, which had suddenly raised 
a lilt, and as suddenly stopped it, 
when some one ran forcibly against 
bim, hastily drawing back and exclaim- 



232 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



ing, " The blessed Virgin save us, 
Amen !'* The general followed the per- 
son whose surprise or fears had ex- 
torted this ejaculation, and found him- 
self at the door of an old spacious 
smoakv kitchen. In removing the 
alarm he had just awakened, he in- 
creased the surprise of the intimidated 
person. It was a young woman, who 
courtesied and blushed, with something 
like recognition in her looks ; and put- 
ting back her locks beneath her round- 
eared cap, she remained silent and con- 
fused. On the inquiry whether Lady 
Clancare was at home, she courtesied 
jstill lower, and said, " Is it my lady, Sir? 
Oh yes, to be sure she is, your honor— 
I ax your pardon. This a way, if you 
plaze, Sir. Have a care, there is a 
little stoolcen in your way. I'll but step 
afore your honor a taste," — and still 
engaged in arranging her dress, she led 
the way to the stone passage, on the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 233 

other side the hall, and passing under a 
gothic arched way, she threw open a 
door at the further extremity of the 
passage, and ushered the visitor into a 
low-roofed but spacious room. His 
Conductress having wiped a large arm 
chair, and pulled it near the dying em- 
bers of a turf fire, which she replenished 
from an huge turf-box that stood near 
the hearth (for the room was chill, 
notwithstanding the warmth of the day), 
she was retiring, when he called her 
back, and giving her his card, desired 
her to carry it, with his respectful com- 
pliments, to the Countess of Clancare. 
The girl looked at the card, and then at 
him, and a smile just visible stole over 
her features as she retired. 

The room into which he had been 
shewn occupied his attention during 
the moment of waiting. It was of di- 
mensions disproportionate to its height, 
and from its dark and irregular figure, 



234 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



and the immense width of the wall 
(marked by the deep recess of its only 
window), it appeared to occupy one of 
the towers which flanked the castle 
towards the precipitous glen, and was 
not, therefore, perceptible from the 
front. 

The walls, neither wainscotted nor 
papered, were partially covered with 
faded tapestry, the figures of which 
were antique and grotesque. It was 
the work of Irish nuns, whose looms a 
century and a half ago had contri- 
buted to the decoration of many Irish 
castles. (5) Above the ample and mi- 
grated hearth, a lofty, cumbrous, but 
handsome chimney-piece of grey mar- 
ble, the produce of the adjoining quar- 
ries, arose nearly half way to the ceiling. 
For two feet above the floor, it was 
incrusted with brick, and seemed to 
have been but lately discovered. On 
its entablature was carved the following 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 235 



inscription : Donagh M acarth y Comes 
de Clancare me fecit, 1565. Th% 
floor was cf beaten earth, mixed with 
free-stone sand, and was covered near the 
fire-place with some new rush matting: 
an oak table, a tattered Indian skreen, 
a high ponderous japan chest, and a 
few long-backed curiously carved oak 
chairs, composed the whole furniture of 
this antique and gloomy apartment; a 
spinning wheel stood near the hearth, 
and a Spanish guitar, and a parasol, 
oddly contrasted to it, lay on the table. 
The recess window was evidently de- 
voted to the purposes of a study. The 
view it commanded was enchanting, for 
it hung immediately over a glen ; and a 
river seen sparkling through the rich 
underwood brawled beneath ; and rushed 
through a cleft in the rocks towards the 
distant bay. 

The floor of this recess was covered 
with a piece of old but once rich Turkey 



236 



FLORENCE MAC ART II Y. 



carpet: the table, which nearly oc- 
cupied it (leaving space only for a 
chair), was heaped with books and 
manuscripts ; the latter, however, not 
bearing the stamp of antiquity, but 
fresh written; for the humid pen was 
evidently but just laid down, Two 
books stood open, marked with a pencil 
and a flower. The one was Hanmers 
Chronicle, the other Campions His- 
tory of Ireland ; an Irish and Latin 
Dictionary, and an odd volume of Lopez 
de Vega, Burns poems, and a small 
edition of Shakespeare, with an antique 
missal, bound in crimson velvet, with 
the arms and eoronet of the Clancares, 
formed the whole of this little collec- 
tion. Some flowers, seemingly just 
gathered, in a handsome china vase, 
stood upon the table, and an embroi- 
dered work-bag, such as are worked 
in foreign convents, with a silver cross 
and rosary, hung over the back of the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 23 ? 

chair, and compleated the parapher- 
nalia of this little recess, which might 
have served equally for the retreat of 
the sage or the saint, or as a reposoir 
for the fantastic taste of a petite mai- 
tresse. The flowers and the work- 
bag were at once assignable to the 
gout musque of the timid, but evidently 
affected Lady Clancare — for Lord 
Adelm's epithet of the petite evaporee 
seemed not ill-placed. The rosary 
and the cross, and the missal, were as 
markedly appropriate to the Spanish 
nun, Florence Macarthy, who had 
been so lately an inmate at the castle. 
General Fitzwalter had learned, by 
experience, to distrust the extravagant 
exaggerations of O'Leary, when the 
family of his hereditary Tiernas was 
concerned. He had no doubt that 
the character of Lady Clancare had 
been confounded in his wandering ima- 
gination with that of the celebrated 



238 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



Illen Alacarthy, of Queen Elizabeth's 
days ; and that the learning and po- 
tency, attached to this female Tanaist 
in his descriptions, had no more certain 
existence than the balliums, crenelles, 
and barbican, which he had given to 
her dilapidated castle. Even the exer- 
tions she had made to liberate an op- 
pressed man, through her application 
to Judge Aubrey, while it evinced great 
goodness of heart, was deemed sufficient 
to explain the popularity she so evi- 
dently enjoyed among a people equally 
alive to kindness and neglect. But 
whatever might be the character of 
this fair recluse, her tastes, like her 
appearance, were manifestly delicate 
and feminine : and there was some- 
thing peculiarly touching, and even 
pitiable, in the indigence betrayed in 
this ruinous asylum, of one so young, 
so nobly born, so destitute, and so un- 
protected. Her assumption of a title 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 239 

she had no means of supporting, her 
retirement from the world to a solitude 
so dreary, shewed at least the pride of 
birth ; and pride, from whatever source 
it springs, when at variance with poverty, 
forms one of the most painful contests 
of feeling to which humanity is sub- 
ject. 

As these thoughts passed rapidly 
through the mind of Fitz waiter, he 
almost unconsciously took down an 
antique sword, which hung against the 
wall ; and mused, as he examined its 
curious structure, on the untowardness 
of a fate, in which he found some pa- 
rallel to his own. 

" Man/* he involuntarily exclaimed, 
brandishing the weapon, and clasping it 
with a warrior's grasp; — " man, with 
such an instrument as this, can always 
cut his way to fortune or to death ; and 
rushing forward to meet the evils of 
his destiny, by opposing, end them: 
but woman ! hapless woman ! what is 



540 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

her resource when fortune deserts, 
when adversity assails her ? Desolate 
and unguarded, with scarce one path 
open to her exertions, scarce one stay 
left to her weakness, endangered even 
by her perfections, risked and enfeebled 
by all that makes the delicious excel- 
lence of her nature, — woman!—" 

The door opened, and she, whose des- 
tiny had probably given birth to this 
apostrophe, interrupted its conclusion. 
There was a sort of half start, a sudden 
pause in the approach of Lady Clan- 
care, as if the visit and the visitor were 
equally unexpected, which communi- 
cated something of its brief confusion 
to her guest. He bowed, then stood 
for a moment, slightly embarrassed; and 
still armed with the antique sword of 
Macarthy-More, he not inaptly realized 
to the eyes of his fair descendant the 
picture left on historic record, of that 
magnificent chieftain. (6) Lady Clan- 
care, with that promptitude and pre- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 241 



aunce of mind, which peculiarly belong 
to woman's quick perception, was the 
first to recover herself, and, slightly cour- 
tesying, addressed her guest by name, 
motioned him to a chair, and advanced 
with a light quick step to the centre of 
the room. With a disengaged air, she 
gradually disencumbered herself of a 
deep straw bonnet, a grey cloak, gloves 
incrusted with earth, and a black apron 
full of mountain ash berries, all of 
which articles were deliberately laid 
upon the table. Thus engaged, she 
stood with her profile towards General 
Fitzwalter, who had not taken the chair 
she had pointed out to his notice. He 
remained looking at a person and coun- 
tenance, that seemed to have changed 
much of their character since he had 
last seen them ; but where the change 
had occurred, he could not detect. 

Lady Clancare, as she now stood, was 
the very personification of health, in all 

YOL. III. M 



242 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

its force and freshness, vigour and elas- 
ticity. The crimson of haste and exer- 
cise glowed in her cheek; and there 
was a life palpitating through the whole 
frame, throbbing in every pulse, and 
vibrating in every fibre, that was visible 
to the observers eye. But whether she 
was animated or agitated, breathless 
from hurry, or from emotion, it would 
have been difficult to ascertain. Her 
countenance had lost nothing of its pe- 
culiar modesty; but from her half- 
closed eyes one glance met his, that, to 
him at least, seemed charged with tri- 
umph; a sort of smiling malicious tri- 
umph; the triumph of conscious suc- 
cess, of conscious superiority, and in- 
felt power; such a look as he had seen 
her wear, when, in carrying off Lady 
Dunore, she had bowed her laughing 
and almost insolent salutation to the 
discomfitted Crawley s. This look, whe- 
ther real or fancied, was, however/ 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 245 

transient as lightning ; and now, disen- 
cumbered of her coarse out-of-door gar- 
ments, she turned round a face dimpled 
with a thousand smiles; and, with the 
ease of a woman of the world, but the 
naivete of one beyond its forms and 
formalities, she apologized for having 
so long detained him. " This is," she 
added, pointing again to a chair, and 
throwing herself into an immense old 
fashioned fauteuil, " this is my farming 
season, and farming hour. We are dig- 
ging our potatoes to-day ; for you 
must know, General Fitzwalter, the 
potatoe vintage is to us poor Irish of as 
great moment and interest, though not 
quite so susceptible of picturesque de- 
scription, as the gathering of the rich 
grapes in the luxuriant vineyards of the 
Loire and the Garonne. I always pre- 
side on these occasions myself,'' she 
added, carelessly untying a silk hand- 
kerchief which encircled her neck, 

M2 



244 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

ft for I dare say you will agree with 
me, that no work goes on so lightly a» 
that which is shared by the master." 

To this proposition General Fitz- 
Walter returned no answer. He had 
mechanically taken the chair assigned 
him, and sat with his right arm thrown 
over its back, and his left leaning on 
the old sword. His eves were rivetted 
on Lady Clancare, with that eager, ani- 
mated penetrating gaze natural to them, 
when he sought to discover or dive at 
once into the secret of a character that 
appeared to elude observation. Her s, 
however, as it now equivocally ap- 
peared through her easy, animated, dis- 
engaged manners, opposed to her " out- 
ward seeming'* at the castle of Dunore, 
was all enigma. Her childish shyness, 
her timid and affected carriage, which 
had induced Lord Adelm to give her 
the epithet of a minaudiere, had dis- 
appeared. There was now something 



FLORENCE MCCARTHY, 245 



•f the sybil in her looks ; and her in- 
comprehensible change of manner assi- 
milated with the present character of 
her person and character. Meantime 
his silence, though marked and singular, 
scarcely confused, and seemed not to 
displease her ; and she sat demurely pat- 
ting and caressing the old greyhound 
which had followed her into the room, 
as if she awaited an explanation of the 
visit, which appeared wholly unex- 
pected, and which, it was natural to 
suppose, was not without cause or ex- 
cuse. At last, as if to relieve the awk- 
wardness of the pause, she stretched 
forth a very pretty little hand, and 
asked smilingly — 

" Shall I take that sword from you? 
'tis a cumbrous article." He laid the 
sword upon the table, and she drew it 
towards her. " Have you examined this 
antique weapon, General Fitzwalter ? I 
am told it was found in a bog in 1/4S. 

Mi 



246 FLORENCE. MAC ARTHY. 

It was sent to me the other day by a 
neighbouring farmer, into whose hands 
it fell accidentally, for he was pleased, 
poor man, to consider me as the lady of 
the manor. What makes these brazen 
swords a valuable relic to the Irish anti- 
quarian is, that they serve to corrobo- 
rate the opinion that the Phoenicians co- 
lonised this country ; for they insist that 
the sword-blades found upon the field 
of Cannae were of the same metal and 
construction, and being used by the 
Carthaginians, who were originally Ty- 
rians, they establish the certainty that 
these Irish weapons were Phoenician 
also. Consequently, you know, Ge- 
neral Fitzwalter, something more than 
a mere presumption arises that Ireland 
had her arts and letters from the coun- 
try of Cadmus, as all her traditions af- 
firm, in spite of all Dr. Ledwich has 
said to the contrary." 

All this was uttered with a sort of 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 247 

mock emphasis, that left it very doubt- 
ful whether she believed a word she 
spoke, or whether it was mere ironical 
badinage, or antiquarian credulity — it 
served only to involve General Fitz- 
walter in deeper perplexity. 

" Now, what is your opinion?" she 
added with emphatic gravity. " Do 
you really think we are Tyrians by de- 
scent Then laughing, and resuming 
her gay tone, she added, " O ! I see 
you are no antiquarian, though you are 
the guest of my friend O'Leary. Well 
then, neither am I ; and to confess the 
truth, the present state of this poor 
country interests me more than its 
ancient real or fabled greatness ; and I 
should rather see my neighbours of 
Ballydab succeed in reclaiming and 
cultivating that mountain, to the right 
of the casement (my dear Clotnotty- 
joy), or improve in the rush and straw 
work; I am endeavouring to teach their 
If 4 



248 FLOKJLNCE MACARTHY. 



idle, helpless, naked children, than es- 
tablish, beyond all controversy, that the 
Macarthies are descended from the 
Tyrian Hercules, or that Ireland was 
the seat of arts and letters, when the 
rest of the world was, according to my 
family genealogist, the sage O'Leary, 
buried in utter darkness. Do you 
know — apropos to ancient greatness/' 
she added with a quick transition of 
roice, " that as I entered this room, 
there was something in your appear- 
ance, as you stood brandishing that 
antique weapon, that reminded me of 
a picture I have seen, of our family 
hero, (7) Florence Macarthy; though 
to Miss Crawley's deep-read mind, 
and ready literary associations, I dare 
gay you would have recalled the 
image of Achilles, in the court Qf 
Lycomedes. 

*' In questa mano, 

Lauipeggi H fcrro ah recomineit udesso, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 24$ 

A ravissar me stcsso, ah ! forse a fronte, 
A mille squadre, e mille l" 

" And if I were/' said General Fitz- 
waiter, interrupting her impulsively, 
and borne away by her animation, for 
she had repeated these lines with an 
almost dramatic effect ; ff and if I were 
! a fronte a mille squadre e mille f 
my position, perhaps, would be less 
hazardous than that I at present oc- 
cupy." 

" It would at least be more in your 
w t ay," she replied significantly. 

Cf How do you know that T he asked 
eagerly. 

" Oh ! I know nothing, I merely 
guess it. I have a true woman's mind: 
no judgment, no reflection, no know- 
ledge, but some intelligence, and a 
rapidity of perception,, that goes before 
all experience, and lights upon facts 
by accident, which it would take an 
age for philosophy to puzzle at." 
M 5 



2bO FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



" Then perhaps/' he returned, " you 
are already intuitively aware of the 
cause of this intrusion upon proscribed 
ground^ where the soles of unblessed 
feet are not, I understand, permitted to 
press." 

f€ Oh ! to be sure I am. The cause 
is, — that of most of the untoward 
things men do; — heroes, as well as 
others, — a woman — " 

" That, my visit to your ladyship 
sufficiently indicates. But the pur- 
port of this visit to a woman, whose 
dwelling is forbidden to a stranger's 
steps— to all male intrusion I under- 
stand — " 

" That I confess," returned Lady 
Clancare, laughing, " surpasses my 
oracular divinations. I trust, however, 
it is sufficient to sanction the infringe- 
ment of one of the most strictly ob- 
served laws in the statute book of — 
Ballydab. — But whatever be the pur- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 251 

port of your visit, I honestly confess 
you owe your admission to the sim- 
plicity of my maid — a little Tipperary 
nymph, and a stranger, whom I have 
just brought to this country, and whom 
I have not yet had time to initiate into 
all the mysteries of her vocation. My 
seclusion," she added earnestly, " is no 
affectation, no lure to quicken curiosity, 
or attract attention. It is indispensable 
that I should live much alone ; my pe- 
culiar situation demands it, my cir- 
cumstances enforce it, my avocations re- 
quire it. You, however, have taken me 
by surprise ; may I, therefore, beg to 
know the purport of the visit so un- 
expected?" 

" The purport, Madam," said Gene- 
ral Fitzwalter, " of this visit, which 
certainly demands an apology for 
such unwarranted intrusion, is to re- 
turn this handkerchief to its right 
owner* 



252 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



He arose as he spoke, and drawing 
from his breast the handkerchief, dropped 
by Lord Fitzadelm, presented it to Lady 
Clancare. Her complexion, which had 
varied to hues of every shade of red as 
she spoke, now faded to an unearthly 
paleness. The ardent eyes of General 
Fitzwalter pursued its flight, and con- 
tributed, perhaps, by the intensity of 
their gaze, to recall it to the surface it 
had deserted. 

f( And to whom, then," she asked, 
in a low and unsteady voice, " do 
you suppose this handkerchief be- 
longs r" 

" I did/' he replied, emphatically, 
M suppose this morning, from parti- 
cular circumstances, that it might be- 
long to a lady of the name of Florence 
Macarthy, a kinswoman of your lady- 
ship, a refugee nun from Spanish Ame- 
rica, and now, as I have just acciden- 
tally learned, a resident in a convent in 



FLORENCE MACAETHY. 253 



the neighbourhood of Holy- cross. Her 
father served for a short time in the 
Guerilla war of South America : his 
deaths which was the purchase of my 
life, imposed on me an obligation I 
would have requited to his daughter ; 
but — " he paused in some confusion, then 
rapidly added—" Of the early part of 
this gallant man's story I know little ; 
for he had assumed a Caraquian name, 
having in horror and disgust abandoned 
the royal and persecuting army. It was 
from his death- words only that I ga- 
thered his connexion with the illustrious 
house of Macarthy in this country. 
That he was high-spirited and brave, I 
collected from my own observation; 
that he was unfortunate, and in exile, it 
was natural to suppose, for he was an 
Irishman, and a catholic," 

Lady Clan care had listened to this 
detail with an averted head ; she now 
turned round, with the deep inspiration 



254 FLORENCE MAC ARTHY. 

of one who suddenly recovers from a 
shock in which the mind and body had 
alike participated. She opened the 
handkerchief, ran her eyes rapidly over 
it, and observed, carelessly — " There 
is no doubt this little scarf must be 
Florence Macarthy's : here is the cross, 
the holy device of these fanciful saints, 
who you see, general, must have their 
prettinesses in piety, and are women 
even to the last ; and here are the ini- 
tials of her name, f. m. Now Florence is 
spelled with an F, and Macarthy with 
an M. Here, then, you see arc proofs 
incontrovertible, internal evidences. I 
know the caligraphy of her needle : 
this is her ivork ; there is her favourite 
stitch ; take two threads, drop three, 
and cross over. I remember it well. 
I have seen it thrown over her shoul- 
ders an hundred times in our stolen 
twilight walks ; for these cloistered 
creatures are coy even to the very 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 255 



air; e the chartered libertine/ which 
blows on all alike, the sinner or the 
saint: and yet, to my knowledge, my 
cousin has not been in this part of 
the country since she took up her re- 
sidence with our lady of the Annun- 
ciation ; and though she has not yet 
renewed her vows, I believe she holds 
herself religiously bound 

4 For aye, to be in shady cloister mewed, 
Chaunting faint hymns to the cold fruitless 
moon.' 



Besides, she is so sober, stedfast, and de- 
mure, that she would scarcely step out of 
her way to woo a soul to heaven, much 
less to Jling the handkerchief. Come, 
confess; have you then been besieging 
her convent, opposing your military 
tactics to the whole army of martyrs, 
and has she sent you this appropriate 
device as a flag of defiance or of truce, 



256 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



till further parley, and am I to be the 
herald, the negotiator ?" 

The sudden transition of Lady Clan- 
care's look, the playful ease which 
succeeded to her evident but transient 
consternation, the rapidity of her ut- 
terance, and the directness of her ques- 
tion, confounded General Fitzwalter. 
A new-born surmise, which for a mo- 
ment had arisen out of her confusion, 
was stifled in its birth; and his suspi- 
cions, as to the mysterious and invisible 
mistress of Lord Adelm, were lost, or 
rather no longer remembered, as he 
listened to a rallying pleasantry which 
he was wholly unprepared to answer, 
and unconsciously took up the hand- 
kerchief which Lady Clancare had 
thrown on the table. 

" I have 'only this morning learned/* 
he replied, " that Miss Macarthy was 
in this country : nor do I hold myself 
at liberty to reveal more of the strange 



FLORENCE MAtARTIJY. 25/ 

circumstances connected with this hand- 
kerchief, which your ladyship insists to 
have been hers, than that it came by 
romantic and singular means into th« 
hands of a person who prized it much^ 
who knows not that it is now in mine; 
and that we are both, though from dif- 
ferent motives, interested in discovering 
the real owner." 

" I think the initials sufficiently indi- 
cate," said Lady Clancare, gravely, 
u that it is, or has been, the property 
of Florence Macarthy: but, after all, 
the fact may be that she has bestowed 
it upon some young novice, or convent 
boarder ; some fondled little friend 
de par Veglise. These feminine inter- 
changes of good-will are perpetually 
passing between the ladies and their 
laical companions. It makes a part of 
the occupation of their pious idleness: 
and the young worldlings frequently 
exhibit in a ball-room what has beeE 



258 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

worked in a cell. If the handkerchief, 
therefore, has been thrown at you, 
General Fitzwalter, as you loitered in 
some country town, or reproachfully 
sent to you with the pretty device of 

4 When this )ou sec, 
Remember me, 

Though far asunder we may be,' 

or if you yourself took it, the owner 
nothing loath to wipe away tears worth 
an Hebe's smiles, and now wish to 
return it, with an heart wrapped up in 
it, no longer of any use to the present 

owner; or if you 99 

" To spare your ladyship any further 
conjectures," said General Fitz waiter, 
with a countenance rather expressive of 
annoyance, " I must repeat to you, the 
handkerchief is not mine, was neither 
sent to, nor intended for me; and the 
object of this intrusion goes no further 
than to learn from your ladyship if — 



FLORENCE MACARAHY. 259 

that is, where/or how — *' he paused and 
coloured. The eyes of Lady Clancare 
now archly fixed his, and again con- 
founded him. He threw^himself back 
into his chair, and petulantly, but with 
the naivete of one whose feelings 
goaded him beyond all power of dis- 
guise, added, " The fact is, Madam, I 
scarcely remember what was the object 
of my visit." 

" Pray, do not hurry yourself," said 
Lady Clancare, resuming her serious 
and demure look. " I will await your 
leisure, General Fitzwalter. It is now 
sufficient for me to know that you were 
the friend of the gallant Colonel Ma- 
carthy, that you are interested for his 
daughter. You may, therefore, of 
course, command me. Her interests, 
her happiness, are mine. I might al- 
most say her story is mine; and aud 
with Celia, of her cousin Rosalind, who 
was, like myself, one out of sorts with 
fortune. 



26*0 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

* We still have slept together, 

Rose at an instant, learned, played, cat together, 

Still coupled and inseparable.' 

I would do much to effect the happiness 
of Florence Macarthy : I have done 
much; — too much, perhaps; but hither- 
to I have failed, wholly failed." 

She spoke with a voice of great em- 
phasis, a countenance of great emotion, 
indicating a capability of powerful and 
passionate feelings: then h emmed away a 
sigh, drew forward her spinning wheel, 
and gave up her attention very strenu- 
ously to arranging the cobweb thread 
upon its real : then placing her little 
foot upon the pedal, and turning the 
wheel rapidly round, she gave one sly 
demure look at General Fitzwalter, and 
awaited in patient expectation the nar- 
ration which she anticipated, but which 
he was less than ever enabled to make. 
He had hung earnestly upon her em- 
phatic declaration of friendship fot 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 26 1 

Florence Macarthy ; he had watched the 
arrangements of the primitive and pic- 
turesque task on which she was now 
engaged. The quick motion of the 
prettiest foot he had ever seen, careless- 
ly, but inevitably displayed, the delicate 
fingers which twisted and drew out the 
fine-spun thread, with fairy nimbleness, 
the occasional throwing back of her 
dark divided hair, and the changing 
hues of a complexion which bore tes- 
timony to the consciousness of being 
gazed at, rendered even her silence elo- 
quent, and combined to form a picture 
new, and, therefore, fascinating to her 
sole observer. His modes of existence 
had indeed led him but rarely into 
those walks of society in which woman 
appears with all the superadded at- 
traction of mind, talent, and the graces. 

He now leaned on his arm, with his 
eyes fixed on her figure, silent, intent, 
and yielding to the fascination of an in- 



262 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

fluenee, of which, at the moment, he 
was scarcely conscious. All that he 
heard and saw was new to him ; his 
own position was a novelty ; and his 
fresh unworn feelings, his vehement 
and impetuous passions, took warmly 
and deeply the impressions, which, an 
object to him so extraordinaiy and so 
attractive, was so unsuspectingly mak- 
ing. The conventional tastes of certain 
circles were no indisputable guides to his 
preferences ; his feelings, not his vanity, 
decided his prepossessions : he was a 
man whom the world had not yet spoiled; 
passionate, ardent, energetic. He saw 
before him a woman betraying her 
vocation, to feel and to please in every 
fibre, lineament, feature and motion : 
he beheld her distinguished by spirit, 
feeling, softness, and gaiety ;~ and by 
that talent, so pardonable even in a 
woman, the talent of amusing, by that 
charm so delightful in all, in every thing 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 26S 

that possesses it, the charm of endless 
variety ; the whole guarded by a mo- 
desty which even licentiousness dared 
not violate, and set off with an occasional 
shyness, the lingering habit of seclusion 
sometimes dispelled, but never totally 
overpowered. He saw all this, and 
saw — nought beside. Lord Adelm, the 
handkerchief, Miss Macarthy, the pur- 
port and object of his visit, were all 
alike forgotten; even O'Leary's pro- 
phecy and assurance of the potency of 
his liege lady were no longer remem- 
bered. There was now but one object 
in creation for him, and that was the 
Bhan Tierna. Meantime the wheel 
went merrily round ; many a circling 
thread was spun off, many an impulse 
given to the twirling reel, and its mono- 
tonous hum was alone interrupted by 
Lady Clancare's carelessly adverting to 
the primitiveness of her occupation, 
probably for the purpose of breaking an 
awkward silence. 



264 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

"This is a rude rustic work," she 
observed, " for ladies fingers, but our 
grandmothers of the highest rank in 
Ireland were all spinners. This wheel 
belonged to the last Lady Clancare, 
who had the blood royal of Ireland in 
her veins. My grandfather preserved 
it for me, and he had little else to be- 
queath me. It has already obtained me 
some celebrity. I am reckoned an 
excellent spinner ; and in fact I like 
it beyond all other work. I like it* 
humming noise, which disturbs the 
dreary tranquillity of the long winter 
evenings, which I pass here alone in 
my ' Val chiusa" It relieves my worn- 
out eyes from the dazzle of the paper, 
on which necessity has urged me to 
trace so much nonsense, that I may 
live, and others may laugh ; for pos- 
sibly you have heard, General Fitz- 
walter, that I am, by divine indigna- 
tion, a— a sort of an author un manure 
d'esprit, and it i» quite true. With 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 26 J 

Ireland in my heart, and epitomizing 
something of her humour and her 
sufferings in my own character and 
story, I do trade upon the materials 
she furnishes me ; and turning my pa- 
triotism into pounds, shillings, and 
pence, endeavour, at the same moment, 
to serve her and support myself. Mean- 
time my wheel, like my brain, runs 
round. I spin my story and my flax 
together; draw out a chapter and an 
hank in the same moment ; and fre- 
quently break off the thread of my reel 
and of my narration under the influence 
of the same association ; for facts w ill 
obtrude upon fictions, and the sorrows 
I idly feign are too frequently lost in 
the sufferings I actually endure." 

" The sufferings you endure!" in- 
terrupted Fitzwalter. " You ! gracious 
heaven ! You, who look the very per- 
sonification of health, spirit, and en- 
joyment 

" Enjoyment !" she repeated, shaking 
vol. in. v 



2G6 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



her head, and throwing her eyes sig- 
nificantly from the hare walls of the 
gloomy apartment to its cold earth 
floor. 

" Yes," he said, replying to her 
look, <e if external objects were any 
thing to you, that may be true : but 
with a spirit apparently so buoyant — « 
a spirit that sparkles in your eye, varies 
your complexion, gives life, soul, and 
animation to every feature, and every 
word you utter ; with an imagination 
to create around you a perpetual Para- 
dise, an imagination " 

iQ An imagination, V she interrupted* 
eagerly, " to exalt every anguish, to 
exaggerate every suffering, to embellish 
the distant good, and embitter the pre- 
sent evil, to oppose the dreariness and 
privation of a rude and ungenial soli- 
tude, to all the refined and elegant 
tastes of polished social life, whose 
details passing through the prismatic 
medium of fancy, like the broken and 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 26^ 

worthless particles flung into the kaleido- 
scope, arrange themselves in symmetric 
beauty and harmonic colouring, to 
charm and to deceive, and to assume 
forms, hues, and lustre, beyond their 
own intrinsic qualities." 

"But, good God!" he exclaimed, 
seduced by a frankness so flattering, 
struck by a detail, which in delivery- 
opposed the energy of strong feelings 
to the playfulness of constitutional 
gaiety, " your solitude after all must 
be an act of choice, an election made 
for the noblest purposes— for serving 
your compatriots; for cherishing in 
retreat the enthusiasm, the true source 
of genius, and which is so soon lost in 
the passionless trifling circles of society. 
You have only to appear in the world 
and to " 

" And to be shewn off like a wild 
beast; as the woman that writes the 
books ; to be added to the menagerie 
of such lion leaders as that half ma- 
tt 2 



268 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

niac Lady Dunore ; to ' con wit by 
rote/ and f desennuyer la sottise ; and 
then, having worn out curiosity with 
novelty, to be sent back to my den, 
with an assurance from my keeper 
that I am perfectly harmless, and not 
half so dangerous as might be supposed. 
Oh ! no, better, far better, that I should 
be shut up with my Irish inheritance 
of pride, poverty, and talent ; better 
leave the mind in the spacious circuit 
of its own musing, to feed upon its own 
resources, to associate only with the 
deep loneliness of its own feelings : bet- 
ter remain amidst the scenes of my 
wild, uncultivated childhood, and un- 
known, unseen, steal silently through 
an insignificant life, watch through 
each successive 

— 4 Drizzling day 
Again too trace the wintry brake of snow; 
Or sooth'd by western airs, again surrey 

The self.same hawthorn bud and cowslipi 
blow." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 26*9 

She smiled, paused, and then conti- 
nued : — " Here, at least, I stand aloof 
from debasing protection, from the taunt 
of envy, and the sneer of malignity, 
the overbearing of upstart pride, the 
contumely of self-satisfied ignorance. 
Here, too, I still do some good. I 
thwart the evil genii of the place, the 
ogrish Crawleys ; immortalize the su- 
percilious folly of my neighbours, 
which, even here, would look down upon 
me with that hatred, 6 all blockheads 
bear to wit ; colonize my dear little 
Clotnotty-joy ; encourage the arts, by al- 
lowing two and eightpence halfpenny 
per week to a piper ; and give ( my little 
senate laws — the Cato and Lycurgus 
of the flourishing city of Ballydab. 
Besides, I do much in giving an exam- 
ple of constant ceaseless industry and 
activity to my people. When I am not 
writing, for I write for bread, I am 
planting potatoes, or presiding over turf 
N3 



270 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

bogs; or I am seated with my wheel in a 
barn, in the midst of the would-be loiter- 
ing, lounging, lazy matrons of Clotnotty- 
joy ; and when the Bhan Tierna's wheel 
goes round, every wheel in the parish 
turns with it. For in these remote dis- 
tricts, as all through Ireland, a long 
train of unhappy circumstances, politi- 
cal and local, greatly increased since the 
Union by the absence of our nobility 
and gentry, have reduced the peasantry 
to an indigence only to be estimated by 
being seen ; and from the very inade- 
quate remuneration of labour, have 
introduced inveterate habits of sloth. 
Labour is pain, and idleness must natu- 
rally prevail, wherever the incitements 
to industry are wanting to overpower 
the constant tendency of human nature 
to inertness. A few insulated examples 
of well-meaning individuals are> not 
sufficient to effect a very general refor- 
mation, which will not take place till 



FLORENCE MACAltTHY. 271 

artificial wants become as pressing as 
the natural ones. Yet poor and unas- 
sisted as I am, I think even I could do 
much, could I only persuade the people 
about me to want bacon for their din- 
ner, and shoes for their feet. But as 
long as they are content to subsist on 
potatoes, and are satisfied to go bare- 
footed, there is nothing to be done. 
What must have been the state and go- 
vernment of that land, in which a vi- 
gorous and spirited population, a people 
naturally so acute, so active, and inge- 
nious, are reduced to submit, without 
repining, to privations the most degra- 
ding, and to wretchedness below the 
unaccommodated ambition of beasts of 
the field. With the prejudices which 
run so strongly in favour of the repre- 
sentatives of their ancient chiefs on my 
side, born and reared among them, 
speaking their language, and assimila- 
ting to them in a thousand ways, I 
N4 



273 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

have excited rebellion against my sove 
reign authority, by the innovations of 
erecting chimneys and filling up pools ; 
and all my arguments are answered 
with — 1 Och! long life to you, my 
lady ; sure you 11 lave us our taste of 
smoke, Madam, any how, that keeps the 
heat in us through the long winter, and 
not a skreed to cover us. And mushaf 
sure the pool, why, is the life of ' us, Ma- 
dam, in regard of the little ducks and 
pigs ; for what would we do with them^ 
only for the pool, my lady ? and only 
them to pay the rint, and keep a rag on 
the childre? The worst of it is that it 
is all true,'* she added, shaking her 
head. " But pray, what do you think 
of me, General Fitzwalter, in the 
character of Mrs. Larry Hfloleghan, 
pleading the cause of her pigs and 
poultry ? %i 

As she asked this question, she laid 
her laughing face on her arms, which 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 273 

were now folded on her silent wheel, 
and fixed her dark, round arched eyes 
on those of her auditor. 

" What do I think of you,'' he ex- 
claimed abruptly, and drawing his chair 
closer to hers, yet with an air of eager 
impressiveness, which shewed him un- 
conscious of the act. " To tell you all 
I think of you, would perhaps be as 
impossible as to follow the changes of 
your character and your countenance, 
which have all the brightness and evan- 
escence of a rainbow. What I think 
of vou now is lost in what I think of 
you a moment after. Nor can I, in the 
Lady Clancare of to-day, trace one fea- 
ture, of the Lady Clancare, whom I be- 
held, for the first time, a prisoner in the 
hall of Dunore castle.'* 

u Well," she replied laughing, " I 
sometimes almost lose my own identity.; 
for I am absolutely beyond my own 
control, and the mere creature of eir- 
N 5 



274- FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

cum stances, giving out properties like 
certain plants, according to the region 
in which I am placed ; and resembling 
the blossom of the Chinese shrub, 
which is red in the sunshine and white 
in the shade, and fades and revives un- 
der the influence of the peculiar atmos- 
phere in which it is accidentally placed. 
The strong extremes, and wild vicissi- 
tudes of my life, have perhaps given a 
variegated tone to my character, and a 
versatility to my mind, not its natural 
endowments. Abandoned in my infan- 
cy by my parents, who went to Spain, 
my mothers native land ; left to the 
care of my genuinely Irish, improvi- 
dent, and enthusiastic grandfather; 
brought up with all his Irish pride and 
prepossessions, among his greyhounds 
and finders, on the mountains; left a 
charge upon the rent-roll of Providence; 
forced by poverty, and the prejudice of 
my mother, into a Spanish convent ; 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 2J5 

breaking the thraldom which held me 
in bigotted slavery ; and joyfully fol- 
lowing a widowed father amidst the 
privations of a military life, in a distant 
land, reduced to close his eyes among 
the dying and the dead; helpless, hope- 
less, returning to my native land, to 
seek the protection of my aged grand- 
father — to find it in a jail ; to labour for 
his support and my own ; and, by the 
light which shone through his prison 
bars, to trace scenes of fancied joy 
and ideal happiness; thrown upon life, 
friendless, unprotected, and dependent 
upon my own exertions for subsistence, 
I have continued always before the 
world, yet always in seclusion ; known 
to all in my public capacity, to none in 
my private character ; carrying into 
society the awkwardness of a recluse, 
the susceptibility of sensitive feeling^ 
equally alive to notice or to slight ; but 
in the freedom of intimacy, to the touch 



2/6 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

of sympathy, in communion with kin- 
dred minds, borne away by the ardour 
of my nature, and indulging the easy, 
extravagant playfulness of my constitu- 
tional gaiety ; still loving the world, yet 
unable to live in it ; enduring solitude, 
not enjoying it ; living without hope, 
as without fear; blessed with health, 
and animated by a spirit, that never yet 
struck sail, to vileness, dependence, or 
oppression; noble by chance, an author 

by necessity, and a woman she 

paused for an instant, and then hastily 
added, " I have given you this little 
auto-biography, General Fitzwalter, to 
save you the trouble of guessing at me, 
for I see vou have been conning me 
over, as children do conundrums, be- 
ginning with my first, and getting on to 
my second, but quite in the dark as to 
the strange combination which makes 
my tout. It now lies before you ; and 
I have thus intruded upon the right of 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 2/7 

intimacy, and kidnapped you into an 
unsought confidence, because you have 
been long known to me ; because your 
position, with respect to Florence Ma- 
carthy, is known to me : this is my 
sanction, my excuse. 1 know you are 
going to employ me, and I thus put 
you in possession of my bearings, be- 
fore you instal me in my agency.' ' 

They had now both arisen ; General 
Fitzwalter in amazement, in emotion, 
and admiration, he had no power or in- 
clination to conceal ; Lady Clancare, 
with the colour heightening in her 
cheek, and her manner less collected, 
less easy, less disengaged, than when 
she had first began to speak. There 
was a breathless anxiety in her coun- 
tenance when she paused ; an appre- 
hensiveness thafc seemed relieved by the 
door opening, and entrance of the maid, 
who stepped up and whispered something 
in her ear. Whatever this communi- 



278 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

cation might be, it excited considerable 
confusion ; and when the girl had re- 
ceived her answer, and had hurried out 
of the room, Lady Clancare, turning 
round in great embarrassment, said, 
" General Fitzwalter, you must leave 
me instantly. Whatever you may have 
to say relative to Colonel Macarthy's 
daughter, it must be reserved for another 
moment ; not now — pray go. This may 
seem strange, but it is inevitable ; and 

let me entreat " she clasped her 

hands, and spoke with great earnest- 
ness " let me entreat you will not 

take the road you came — the Dunore 
road. — Turning to your left, you will 
come out upon the beach. My maid 
will conduct you. The tide must be 
out, or in : if out, you can ride along 
the strand ; if in, my boat is moored 
among the rocks. You can paddle it 
easily: I do myself— and your horse 
shall be sent after you to O'Leary's. I 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 2/9 

had it put up as I entered. Now then 
go— farewell." He took the hand she 
extended to him, and holding it firmly, 
though it gently struggled in his grasp, 
he said, " I will go in any way you wish 
me to go ; but tell me as frankly as I 
ask the question, is Lord Adelm Fitz- 
adelm the person you expect ? for I 
perceive I am in somebody's way/' 

Lady Clancare interrupted him with 
the quickness of ligh tning, and haughtily 
liberating her hand, she repeated, "Lord 
Adelm ! — General Fitz waiter, you are 
the first person of your sex and rank 
who ever obtruded upon this solitude, 
where pride and poverty have sought 
an asylum which delicacy and prudence 
should have rendered inviolable." 

She turned away her head ; but not 
before he had perceived her eyes glis- 
tening with tears, prompt as her smiles, 
but infinitely more dangerous. They 
were the first tears he had ever brought 



280 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



to a woman s eye ; and from whatever 
source they sprang, however inadequate 
their cause, and he felt they were in- 
adequate, their effect was electric : they 
left him shocked and confounded, co- 
vered with shame and self-reproach. 
Lady Clancare was moving towards the 
door : he* followed, and prevented her 
exit. 

" Lady Clancare," he said, "you must 
take me as I am, as one under the in- 
fluence of tyrannical feelings, habitually 
but vainly combatted. You have thrown 
me off my guard. I have offended vou 
unwarily: hear me a moment; I will 
explain to you " 

" No, no, not now. You must leave 
me ; you must not be seen here," she 
answered in a hurried voice. 

t€ I will not leave you be the conse- 
quence what it may, till you promise 
me another, an immediate opportunity 
of seeing you. I must see you, for my 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 281 

own sake, for Florence Macarthy's sake, 
for your sake, perhaps." 

Lady Clancare turned aside her head 
as he spoke. Something between a smile 
and a frown struggled on her counte- 
nance, and she replied, 

" I ought not, I cannot receive you 
here by appointment under my own 
roof. You can write to Florence Ma- 
carthy: I will convey your letter: I 
will do every thing to forward her hap- 
piness, short of endangering my own 
character; but leave me now, I entreaty 
I insist." 

" I have written," he said, producing 
a letter, " but — " he hesitated, and still 
held it back, as if unwilling to part with 
it, — " but I know not how far this letter 
may now — *' 

Lady Clancare snatched it eagerly, 
and placed it in her bosom. " There," 
she said, " she shall have it immedi- 
ately : you may depend on me where she 



282 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

is concerned, and I will forward you her 
answer. I told you you would employ 
me : but remember, this visit, so unex- 
pected on my part, so unwarranted on 
your s, is not to be repeated, and never 
to be revealed — remember that.*' 

" Never to he revealed ! I swear so- 
lemnly," he replied with energy : "but 
by all that is sacred, I will not leave 
this country without seeing you again ; 
without seeing you here. Observe me, 
Lady Clancarc, I am a man who has 
fought against a wayward fortune : by 
the force of perseverance, firmness, de- 
cision, and enterprize, success has fol- 
lowed the bias of these natural im- 
pulsions. I have no other guides, and 
I shall still obey them. If you are the 
owner of that handkerchief ; if you are 
the person who — M He paused, and then 
added in a hurried tone, " that ascer- 
tained, I shall then eome once more, and 
bid you an eternal farewell. If Florence 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 283 

Macarthy, on the contrary, is the in- 
visible demon or angel who follows, or 
rather leads the steps of Lord Adelm, 
then—" 

" The marchioness is walking up the 
court, my lady, and has left her coach 
at the gates below," said the maid, put- 
ting in her wild head with a fluttered 
look. JLady Clancare stamped her little 
foot with impatience. se Go now, for 
God's sake," she cried. 

" Do you then," he said, seizing her 
hand, and with a countenance which 
had undergone a rapid change- since the 
maid had announced Lady Dunore as 
the expected visitor, " do you return to 
the castle with her — with Lady Dunore 
to-day ?" 

u Yes, yes, I dine there; but if you 
notice me there, or any where, without 
my special permission, you lose me for 
ever — that is, you lose the benefit of 
my agency with Florence Macarthy. 



284 



FLORENCE M ACARTH V. 



Now then, pray follow the servant, she 
will conduct you to the beach." 

Pie had half raised her hand to his 
lips while she was speaking, but he 
suddenly dropped it and followed the 
maid, who led him through the stone 
passage to a little door that opened on 
the strand. There he found his horse 
fastened by the bridle to an iron an- 
chorage ring in the rocks. The tide 
was coming in, but he out-galloped its 
stealing progress, and arrived with in- 
credible celerity at Monaster-ny-Oriel. 

He found O'Leary before the door of 
the chauntry, exposing to the air a large 
open deal box, lined with pictures of 
saints and devils, sacrifices and canoni- 
zations, his countenance full of bustling 
importance, and his voice raised to the 
highest pitch, singing Carolan's famous 
" Receipt for Drinking." 

" I was just, plaze your honor," said 
O'Leary, coming forward to take the 



FLORENCE MACARTHW 285 

neral's horse as he alighted, " I was just 
airing my chest, Sir, in respect of getting 
ready for our journey, and was conning 
in my own mind, when your honor gal- 
loped up, whether it would contain my 
Genealogical History of the Macarthies, 
or whether I'd divide them into two 
turf kishes, just to make a shew tra- 
velling through the country ; for when 
Carte got lave to take the Ormonde 
papers out of the evidence chamber at 
Kilkenny castle, to compose the life of 
the great Duke of Ormonde, he filled 
three Irish cars with them; and I'd be 
sorry, troth, but the documents of the 
real Irish Macarthies-More, Kings of 
Munster, would be of less bulk than 
the papers of them Saxon churls, the 
Butlers." 

u I am afraid, however," said the 
general, smiling, " we must dispense 
with their honourable burthen in our 
immediate journey, O'Leary." 



286 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" We must, gineral?" replied O'Leary, 
in a tone of mortification, 66 and there 
being mixed through the Macarthy 
papers many notes and codices/' he 
added, in a whispering voice, " that 
might be sarvicable on the trial ; for 
they'll fight a great fight afore they 
give up, Sir, and right vanquisheth 
might." 

" I am not so certain of that," said 
General Fitzwaltcr, " but at all events, 
O'Leary, I shall not leave this country 
so soon as I expected. ** 

u You wont, gineral?" he replied, 
with a countenance expressive of curio- 
sity and surprise; then, after a pause, 
he added, " och, then I'll have my do- 
cuments home from the lord-deputy 
before we start. And thinks Moriagh 
will plaze you the day in regard of a 
dinner, Sir, and ordered a bottle of 
Portugal wine from the Dunore Arms 
for myself, your honor, just in honor 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 28/ 

of the day/' and he looked at the ge- 
neral significantly. 

" I'm glad of it" said the general ; 
<c but I shall not dine here ; I dine at 
Dunore castle." 

O'Leary started, put his hand under 
his wig, with a look of perplexity, but 
only repeated " at Dunore Castle!*' 
then giving the horse to one of his 
scholars, who was waiting about the 
ruins, he followed the general to his 
tower, observing, ec Well, gineral, so 
you didn't see the Bhan Tierna after 
all, I'll ingage." 

<c Why should you think that i? 

" Because, plaze your honor, I heard 
she was in the mountains the morning, 
seeing the praties got in, and sorrow a 
foot she'd lave that for the King of 
England if he was to come to see her. 
Och ! she's a great farmer, and has done 
more for Clotnotty-joy in a year and 
a half than the Crawleys ever could, in 



288 FLORENCE MACARTHY* 



respect of the hearts and hands of the 
whole country being with her, and her 
giving every man his own little lasc." 

To this observation the general made 
no reply ; and they ascended the stairs 
together; the guest to dress, and the 
host, under pretence of assisting him, to 
loiter about his person. 



NOTES. 



(1) Page 121. — It ie natural that the natives 
of an oppressed country should sympathize with 
the oppressed wherever they may exist. Many 
Irish names are to be found among the gallant 
advocates of liberty in South America. 

Colonel O'Higgens was appointed commander- 
in-chief of the patriot army in 1813, and after- 
wards was made supreme director of Chili. Co- 
lonel DPKenna was appointed second in com- 
mand; and Mr. Brown, with the title of admi- 
ral, took command of a flotilla, and blockaded 
Montevidio. 



(2) Page 170. — 44 Though the number of monks 
and nuns now recited is by no means to be de- 
pended on, yet it suggested to their presidents 
the necessity of stone inclosures or classes ; 
these in the east were called mandrae. The 
word originally imported a sheep-fold, and was 
applied to those monastic buildings, wherein the 
archimandrite presided over his disciples, as the 
shepherd superintended his flock in the fold. 
TOL. III. O 



290 



NOTES. 



There are many of these mandrae dispersed oyer 
this kingdom, hitherto unnoticed. One remark, 
able is Dun Aengus. This is in the greater Isle 
of Arran, on the coast of Galway, situated on 
a high cliff over the sea, and is a circle of mon- 
strous stones, without cement, and capable of 
containing two hundred cows. The tradition 
relative to it is, that Aengus, King of Cashel, 
about 490, granted this isle, called Arrannaomh, 
or Arran of the Saints, to Saint Enna or Endeus, 
to build ten churches on." 

Ledzzich. 



(3) Page211. — u These tiernas were what Da- 
vis calls confinnes, canfimies, con finnie— the 
heads of clans. We had our Clanbrcasil, Clan- 
carty, Clanaboy, Clancolman, Clanfergal, and 
many more. In most cases the ticrna's slrname 
was that of his clan. Macarthy was Riagh, or 
King of Desmond ; his tiernas were the clans 
O'Kecfe, O'Donaughu, O'Callaghan, O'Sulli- 
van, and the last by his tenure was obliged — 
First — To aid Macarthy with all his strength, 
and to be marshal of his army. Second— He was 
to pay for every arable plough-land five gallo- 
glasses or kerns, or six shillings and eightpence, 
or a beef for each, at the option of Macarthy. 
Third — Macarthy was to receive half-a-crown 
for every Ship that came to fish or trade in O'Sul- 

fat 



NOTES. §91 

Uvan's harbour. Fourth— O'Sullivan was to give 
Macarthy merchandize at the rate he purchased 
it. Fifth — O'Sullivan was to entertain Macarthy 
and all his train two nights at Dunbay, and when- 
ever he travelled that way. Sixth — O'Sullivan 
was to send horse-meat to Paillice for Macarthy's 
saddle horses, and pay the groom three shillings 
and fourpence out of every arable plough-land. 
Seventh — O'Sullivan was to find hounds, grey- 
hounds, and spaniels for Macarthy, whenever he 
came, and one shilling and eightpence annually 
to his huntsman out of every plough-land. " 

Ledwicfts Antiquities of Ireland. 

The first head of O'Sullivan's tenure proves 
that a military association and subordination 
universally prevailed, and these were the essen- 
tials of the feudal system. His being marshal of 
Macarthy clearly evinces ihat grand serjeautry 
was in use. As this is a tenure in capite, and 
could only be held from a sovereign prince, if 
this was a feudal tenure, as it must be allowed it 
was, then there can be no doubt but the other 
services were likewise feudal. Through all the 
subinfeudation, there was the same obligation of 
military duty. If any from neglect or perfidy 
disobeyed the call of their lord, he compelled 
them by force of arms, or expelled them from 
their possessions, for they owed military service 
o2 



292 



KOTES; 



by their tenures. An ancient poet thus cxpressei 
the feudal call and penalty. 

u The original exactions of the Irish kings were: 

Bonaht — a tax for the maintenance of the gal- 
loglasscs, kerns, and other military. 

Scrohen — a tax on freeholders for the enter- 
tainment of soldiers. 

Coshery — a custom of exacting entertainment 
for the king and his followers from those under 
his jurisdiction. 

Cuddy, or suppers. 

Shragh and mart — imposed at the will of the 
lord, and levied partly in cattle or food." 



(4) Page 225.— Kilmallock, in the County 
of Limerick, a city of conspicuous figure in 
the military history of Ireland, and still ex- 
hibiting one of the most curious monuments of 
antiquity, being a desolate and nearly unin- 
habited town, with castles, antique mansions, 
ruinous indeed, but preserving extant the pecu- 
liar features of domestic architecture in Ireland 
as it existed many centuries back. 



(5) Page 234. — Specimens still remain of this 
manufacture in many ancient Irish mansions. 



KOTES. 



293 



The author believes that some of the tapestry in 
Kilkenney Castle was done by Irish nuns. 



(6) Page 240.— 4 4 When Florence Macarthy 
mbmitted to the queen, in the midst of a troop 
of forty of his clan, himself, like Saul, higher by 
an head and 6houldcrs than his followers, the 
president entertained him greatly, hoping by his 
submission that the wars were ended in Mun- 
ster. Florence left two hostages, his base-bro- 
ther and his foster-brother, both of whom he 
held in precious esteem. 

44 Among all the Irish septs in Desmond, or 
South Munster, the Macarthys, before the ar- 
rival of the English, were by far the most emi- 
nent, being sovereigns of the whole country; 
but after their best lands were subdued by the 
English adventurers, the chief of this potent clan 
retired into Kerry, as to a place of security, the 
southern part of the country being then almost 
inaccessible, because of its mountains, woods, 
and fastnesses. His successor, Daniel Ma, 
earthy. More-ni-Carra, so named from the river 
Carra in this country, concluded a peace with 
the English in 1196. Their posterity were very 
eminent people, and great disturbers of the En- 
glish, particularly the Fitzgerald family, who 
dispossessed them of a considerable part of their 



294 



NOTES. 



country. In these contests great numbers were 
slain; and at Callon, in this country, the Ma- 
carthys gained a complete victory, anno 1261, 
over the Fitzgerahls ; but at length dissen- 
sions arising among the followers of Macarthy, 
the Fitzgeralds (or Geraldines) prevailed in 
their turn, and kept them under for many years. 
However, a great rpganl was always paid to th« 
chiefs af this family, who retained the title of 
Macarthy-More, one of whom, named Donald, 
was ennobled by Queen Elizabeth, who, in 1565, 
created him carl of Glencare, a tract of land 
in this country between the Bay of Dingle and 
the River of Kinmare. This earl having re- 
signed his estates to the queen, had it restored 
and se-granted by letters-patent, to hold it of 
the crown after the English manner. She also 
conferred many ample privileges on him, and 
paid the expense of his journey into England; 
but by the advice of O'Neil, who rebelled in 
Ulster, Macarthy pursued his example in the 
south, and even assumed the title of king of 
Munster. These chiefs joined their forces toge. 
ther in 1560, but before the expiration of the 
year Macarthy was forced to submit to the lord- 
deputy, and craved the queen's pardon. Thii 
earl afterwards sat in a parliament held at Dublin 
on the 26th of April, 1584, by Sir John Perrat, 
who, from the presidency of Munster, was ap- 



NOTES. 



293 



pointed lord deputy of Ireland. He gave the 
government of the county of Desmond to this 
earl of Glencare, who died soon after, leaving 
behind him an only daughter, Ilin or Ellen, and 
an illegitimate son, called Daniel, who assumed 
the title of earl, but was dispossessed of it by 
Florence Macarthy, son to Sir Donough Ma- 
carthy, Keagh of Carberry, in the county of 
Cork, who marrying Ellen, took possession of 
the estate, and assumed the title of Macarthy- 
More, which was confirmed to him by O'Neil, 
who called himself king of Ireland. Florence 
and his followers joined O'Neil, who, by the 
queen, was created Earl of Tyrone, and also the 
Earl of Desmond, in their rebellion, as may be 
seen in the annals of this country.'* 

See Smith's Cork and Kerry 



END OF VOL. III. 



B. Clarke, Printer, Well Street, London. 



ft 



BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY 




3 9999 05468 9516 



