THE 



SKETCH BOOK OF FASHION 



BY THE AUTHOR OF 
''MOTHERS AND DAUGHTERS." 



Invest me in my motley ; give me leave 

To speak my mind, and I will through and through 

Cleanse the foul body of th' infected world. 

AS YOU LIKE IT.. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. III. 

THE OLD AND THE YOUNG BACHELOR. 

A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED ; OR, 
RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 

THE INTRIGANTE. 



LONDON: 

RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET, 

(successor to henry colburn.) 

1833. 






THE OLD 



AND 



THE YOUNG BACHELOR, 



CONTINUED. 



VOL. III. 



CHAPTER IX. 



Ma veritable profession, dans cette vie, est de vivre 
mollement plutot qu' afFaireusement. 

Montaigne. 

The privilege so much coveted by Sir Fran- 
cis Norton of flying over to Paris, en gar^on, for 
the purpose of trying a new cutlet, or laughing 
at a new vaudeville, seems to have been equally 
appreciated by his brother-in-law Lord Glen- 
dyne ; and still more so by the fastidious Farnley ; 
who, already verging on confirmed old bachelor- 
hood, had possessed himself of a suite of apart- 
ments in the Place Vendome, to which he had re- 
course whenever London w^as supremely dull, or 
Farnley Castle menaced with an arrival of unwel- 
come visitors. This was his city of refuge against 
the ennui which, like the mists and fogs of the 

B 2 



4 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

earth, is apt to infest the surface of a life varied 
by too marked an alternation of mountain and 
valley. 

Excess of prosperity had produced in Lord 
Farnley's mind a degree of enervation the 
natural result of Epicurean philosophy and 
practise. He was beginning to shrink from the 
rumpling of the rose leaf, to despise the sun for 
its spots, and fancy the moonshine less bright 
and silvery than of yore. To have seen, heard, 
tasted, smelt, touched, nothing but what is 
fairest, sweetest, softest, brightest, best, for the 
space of five-and-forty years, is sufficient 
to render a man fastidious. But Lord Farn- 
ley possessed considerable refinement of mind ; 
was capable of appreciating the objects ten- 
dered by eminence of birth and fortune, to 
his enjoyment ; and the unfortunate result of 
this excess of delicacy and festidiousness was 
an overweening contempt of men and things; 
not amounting to misanthropy (his lordship's 
digestion was still too good to admit of his hating 
mankind), but an involuntary adoption of the 
Horatian precept of " Nihil admirari," and a 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 5 

sense of satiety worse than actual suffering. In 
early youth, a man has the consciousness of 
strength and dexterity to encourage him in pur- 
suing a slippery path, or clinging to hollow and 
unsound objects for support. But after a time 
the effort becomes painful or tedious. The mind 
yearns after realities, the heart demands some 
solid ground on which to anchor its affections. 
The past affords no tangible treasury of cheering 
reminiscences ; the future no prospect, save that 
of new exertions in climbing up the steep and 
slippery rock which bases the Temple of 
Pleasure. ♦ 

Lord Farnley had already discovered that the 
orgies of intemperance nay, even the illumi- 
nated halls of pleasure, brought head-ache and 
nausea on the morrow; and to wake for no 
other occupation than that of considering what 
he should eat, or what he should drink, or what 
raiment he should put on, — was to make too lit- 
tle account of the glol*ies of the sunshine and 
the freshness of the shade. He wanted com- 
panionship ; he wanted sympathy both in his 
enjoyments and disgusts. As they advance in 



6 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

life, men require an ear into which to pour their 
murmurs and complaints, quite as much as in 
their youth they ever desired a partner for their 
joys and enjoyments. 

It was this mood of mind which rendered 
Paris so satisfactory a residence to the old 
bachelor. Paris has been pronounced, till the 
assertion is become commonplace, " the spot of 
earth where we may best dispense with happi- 
ness." The elasticity of its atmosphere, the 
buoyancy of the French character, and the fac- 
titious vivacity of the Parisian frame of society 
and manUre d'etre, intoxicate where they do not 
console, and create a pleasing confusion of ideas, 
preventing the vexations of life from obtain- 
ing a permanent influence. In Paris any one 
with money in his pocket may be amused ; and 
if happiness be not equably attainable, in what 
quarter of the globe is it more susceptible of 
purchase, with mere coin of the realm ? 

As his lordship sat one morning enjoying his 
breakfast, — rognons a V Epernay, and petit 
poulet a la Sotibise, with a bottle of light 
chablis, — he was amused by a flying visit from 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 7 

Lord Glendyne, who was returning to England 
after a winter at Nice. 

" What could possibly induce you to bury 
yourself en province during the Carnival ? " 
cried Farnley to his young friend ; while the 
mincing valet de chambre, in his snow-white 
jacket and apron, placed another cover at the 
table. 

" I hate the hurry of a metropolis ! " replied 
the votary of eccentricity, " One has never 
leisure to distinguish and do justice to the luxury 
of one's own sensations. When I lay down my 
head to sleep at night, I like to be certairf 
which of the seventeen dear creatures with whom 
I have been flirting in the course of the day, is 
the ruling goddess of my dreams ; and whether 
it is to Nourrit's voice, Tortoni's Macedoine, or 
my Chateau Margoux at the Rocher, I am 
indebted for my happy frame of mind and 
body." 

" And at Nice, I suppose, you found the stream 
of amusement flow so soberly that you were en- 
abled to discriminate its ingredients drop by 
drop ? " 



8 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

" Almost. Besides, I have a predilection for 
a die-away style of beauty. A woman is never 
so lovely in my eyes as when advanced into at 
least the second stage of a decline. There is so 
deep an interest blended with every smile, 
every blush, every change of the countenance ! 
I doat upon their long dark silken lashes lying 
on the transparent cheek; and the mildness of 
the feeble voice thrills through my very soul. 
Were I to choose a wife in England, it would 
be at Clifton ; but at Nice, one has the advantage 
of selecting one's helle languissante from all the 
kingdoms in Europe. I was in love seven 
several times between October and March. But 
one after the other, all my Lauras died and 
left me a widower ; so that, exhausted by my 
grief, I chose my eighth goddess of a somewhat 
more robust texture." 

" Some comely Provenc^ale, fed on olive oil 
and millet gruel ? *' — 

" I humbly ask your pardon, my dear lord, 
and a wing of your chicken ! The produc- 
tions of la belle France agree better with my epi- 
gastric region than with the region of my heart. 
Never was in love with a Frenchwoman in my 



i. 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 9 

life, except Margery's French governess, who 
was born in Birmingham and bred at Turnham 
Green. The eighth lady of my thoughts, like 
all the rest of them, was my countrywoman, — the 
charming Sybella Woodford." 

" To go as far as Nice only to fall in love 
with a little Yorkshire dowdy ! " cried Lord 
Farnley, finishing his dejeuner with a glass of 
iced water. " That is the very girl I prevented 
Frank Norton from marrying, before he be- 
came acquainted with your sister." 

« Sybel Woodford ? " 

" Exactly. A country neighbour of poof 
Methuselah Cheveley's." 

" Exactly, indeed ! — for old Cheveley lately 
bequeathed my idol a considerable legacy. And 
you positively forbad the banns between her 
and Norton ? " — 

" Not exactly ; but a peu pris" 

" That accounts for Mrs. Woodford's so sted- 
fastly declining my offer of presenting her and 
her daughter to dear Lady Madelina, when she 
passed through Nice on her way from Italy. I 
fancied at the time that her reluctance arose 

s 5 



10 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

from the virulence of English prudery; for 
Lady Mad., you know, has contrived to make 
herself as much talked of, though with as little 
cause, on the Continent, as she did in England ; 
oil elle assuroit faire des folies a force qiCelle 
s'ennuyoiV 

" And these people testified positive resent- 
ment against my sister ? " — 

" By no means. Mrs. Woodford merely said 
that ' living out of the world, her acquaintance 
would be no acquisition to Lady Madelina 
Rower ton ;' and so bowed herself civilly out of 
the scrape, as graciously as possible." 

" And is your friend Miss Sybella one of the 
die-aways ? — Has she pined her fair self into a 
consumption for the love of my friend Frank ? " 

" Au contraire, she is a most lovely creature, 
all beauty and vivacity. They have been living 
in Italy these two or three years past; and Sy- 
bel has acquired that nobleness of gesture, that 
dignified and intellectual air, which is only at- 
tained by an extensive intercourse with eminent 
and enlightened society, and which sits so well 
upon an English brow." 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 11 

" And pray do you intend engrafting all these 
excellencies on the Earldom of Kingcombe?" 
inquired Lord Farnley, with a sneer. 

" I fear not. My lady is unapproachable as 
the Lady of Comus. She wo'nt have me." 

" Have you tried, then ? " — 

" By proxy. She has refused half a dozen 
English lords ; and, well aware that my sole 
merit with the fair consists in my power of 
entitling them to embroider a coronet in the 
corner of their pocket-handkerchiefs, I feel as if 
my addresses had been already frowned away by 
Sybella. She would not have Lord Latimer^ 
I am no better than Lord Latimer; ergo^ she 
will not have wie." 

" The gentlewoman has grown difficult ! " 
cried Farnley, as Wittenham, who was now 
prime minister in his service, loitered in the 
task of removing his lordship's dressing-gown, 
for the purpose of amazing himself with the re- 
port of the prodigious rise of the Thorngrove 
people. ^' She would have given her head to 
marry Norton." 

" Ay, poor soul ! she was a child then, and 



12 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

knew no better. How can one expect a girl, 
raw from netting bead-purses and scribbling 
Italian exercises, to possess the instinct of ma- 
trimonial discrimination ? '' 

" Pass a week or two with us at Paris," cried 
Lord Farnley, now equipped for his morning's 
ride, " and I will go over with you to town for 
the season. You will find better diversion here 
than in courting English misses. The dejeuners 
dansans are beginning. We had one yesterday 
at the embassy ; — a perfect thing, except that 
there were no nectarines in the macedoine." 

" And what women ? "— 

" Oh several delightful creatures ! There was 
Lady Mary Rowley, in the first place, looking 
like an oriental idol, composed of pearls and 
turquoises— her teeth so white, her eyes so blue ! 
Then Madame de LeitenstofF, exquisite as Her- 
bault could make her ; and several new Eng* 
lish women — very beautiful, very graceful. The 
old Prince de Chambord had me by the button 
half the morning, (talking reminiscences about 
the reign of Louis XIV. I fancy, for he did not 
mention a single individual who has lived in my 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. IS 

time,) — or I should have liked to inquire about 
them. — They did us honour." 

" I dare say," cried Glendyne, " they are the 
wife and daughters of an eminent blacking-ma- 
ker, who, I understand, are just now at Paris. 
It is wonderful what the march of luxury is do- 
ing for us. Formerly we were idle or arro- 
gant enough to imagine that well-mannered, 
well-educated, well-dressed women were con- 
fined to the circles of what we take the liberty of 
calling ' good society.* But we are now com- 
pelled to admit that we have mistaken ourselves 
and them. Last year at Ascot I lost my heart 
to the most elegant and graceful creature on the 
course ; and after bestowing a sovereign on her 
footman, with a view to ascertain the exact num- 
ber of her residence in Grosvenor or Berkeley- 
square, I had the satisfaction of learning that 
she was daughter to my father's fishmonger." 

" I fancy she would have found it difficult to 
deceive me in a similar manner,*' cried Farnley, 
in a tone of self-complacency. " A long habit 
of watchfulness over female character and man- 
ners, has so thoroughly initiated me into the 



14 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

lights and shadows and mysteries of woman- 
kind, that 1 will venture to determine, after a 
second interview, the exact rank and station of 
any woman in Europe. The person I observed 
dancing last night at the embassy, for instance, 
is one of the most distinguished -looking girls I 
ever beheld. A ten minutes' interview would 
enable me to tell you au juste whether she is 
really des notres, or only merits to be so." 

Glendyne bowed with mock humility to this 
assertion ; and willingly accepted the invitation 
of his father's friend to take a turn with him in 
the Bois de Boulogne. 

" Perhaps we shall see the pretty blacking- 
maker," cried he. 

" Perhaps we may meet my lovely English- 
woman," rejoined Lord Farnley. 

Both, however, were disappointed. They 
encountered only the usual allotment of Com- 
tesses en Berime, dowagering with their lap- 
dogs; young merveilleux, looking and caracol- 
ing after the melodramatic fashion of Ast- 
ley's Amphitheatre ; and agens de change and 
men of substance, airing en hoguey, for the esta- 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 15 

blishment of a breakfast digestion and dinner 
appetite. They were soon obliged to hurry 
home ; Lord Farnley being engaged to a formal 
dinner at the hotel of the fashionable Madame 
Girardeau. 

Notwithstanding this curtailment of his morn- 
ing's enjoyment, the bachelor lord contrived 
(as Englishmen usually do on the Continent) to 
keep dinner waiting; to the utter discomfiture of 
the maitre d^hotel, who was compelled to an- 
nounce that Madame etoit servie, just as his 
lordship's carriage entered the porte cochere. 
In the confusion of this late arrival, Lord" 
Farnley lost the place allotted to him at the 
dinner table; but he had no reason to find 
fault with the Fates, on discovering that a lucky 
chance had seated him next to the younger of 
the two ladies who had attracted his notice at 
the embassy ball the preceding evening. Before 
he had effected a third spoonful of the excellent 
printanniere placed before him, his lordship de- 
cided that Glendyne's suggestion respecting the 
blacking-maker was wholly unworthy of credit. 



16 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR* 



CHAPTER X. 



In a vain man, the smallest spark may kindle into the 
greatest flame ; because the materials are always pre- 
pared, and on the spot. Hume. 

Various are the orders of cognoscenti abouucl- 
ing in the civilized world ; — some, whose im- 
pressible senses allow their souls to be " im- 
prisoned and lapt in Elysium" by a symphony 
or a bravura ; some, whose ears tingle and whose 
colour flies like those of Cymon, at the sight 
of an editio princeps in all its purity of virtue ; 
some, under whose death- like ribs the spectacle' 
of the Phidian goddess on her marble pe- 
destal, creates a soul ; and some, who are ready 
to bend the knee before a Virgin Mother of Ra- 
phael's imagining ! — Others (we are willing to 
rank them a grade lower in the scale of ama- 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 17 

teurs) fire up at the sight of a " high mettled 
racer," full-bred hunter, or hound of notable 
pedigree ; some put their trust in chariots, and 
some in horsemen ; some grow philanthropic 
on sitting down to a well-dressed dinner ; some 
sympathise more heartily with the costliness of 
the plate upon which it is served ; some adore 
a case of champagne ; and others resign them- 
selves to ecstasies between the glasses of a good 
bottle of hermitage. 

But of all the sights or sounds which tend 
to harmonize the emotions of man, smoothing 
the raven down of misanthropy till it smileSf 
there is perhaps none more effective than the 
sweet voice, and sweeter presence of a young, 
lovely, intelligent, and well-bred woman ; who, 
without exhibiting herself a passive slave to the 
vagaries of fashion, is sufficiently submissive to 
the tastes and prejudices of the day to escape 
the charge of self-sufficiency ; who, without 
affecting the blue or the precieuse, displays the 
stores of a rich and cultivated mind; who is 
gentle and simple as well as animated and re- 
fined,* who shows like some exquisite object 



18 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

intended for the adornment and enchantment 
of human life, even while betraying impulses 
of humanity that convict her as a mere mortal ! 
Lord Farnley could not contemplate the 
exquisite form and features of the person by his 
side, without a touch of the enthusiasm he had 
often experienced at the sight of a fine statue 
or beautiful picture; nor listen to the ex- 
pression of her noble sentiments and grace- 
ful phraseology, without feeling that, among 
the most intellectual of his male associates, 
he had seldom met with so agreeable a 
companion. Himself in the truest sense an 
epicure (a practical votary of every art and 
science tending towards physical enjoyment), 
he became almost insensible to the merit of 
some exquisite entrees, and forgot to distin- 
guish between the first and second glass of 
a flask of Steinberger, while he questioned 
and questioned, with a view to elicit those 
graceful rejoinders that never flow with such 
felicity as from the lips of a really beautiful 
woman. He had not caught the name of his 
lovely neighbour. He knew not whether 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 19 

to enshrine her for his future idolatry, as maid, 
wife, or widow ; — but at present he saw only 
one drawback on the perfection of her perfect- 
ness. Although her mode of accepting his ad- 
vances towards conversation was strictly cour- 
teous — nay ! even more — conciliating in the 
extreme, there was nothing in look, tone, or 
gesture, which implied the ardour to please, 
the eagerness to subdue, which he was univer- 
sally accustomed to meet in the other sex. 
Instead of forestalling his words by anxiousness 
of attention, — instead of bending her eyes upon 
his, as if to drink up his merest glance of admi-. 
ration, — she looked oftener at her plate or on 
the ornaments of the plateau before her, than 
into his face ; and was quite as well pleased to 
listen to the niaiseries of Count Hagelhorn, a 
handsome Danish attache, seated at her left 
hand, or to mix in the general conversation 
circulating around them. She spoke French, 
German, English, with equal grace; and, un- 
like the generality of her countrymen, could 
enter into the genius of the French, English, or 
German character, with equal spirit and versa- 



20 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

tility. Lord Farnley was startled. He would 
have been better pleased to find her more 
exclusively devoted to himself. Accustomed to 
see his female victims at his feet, and to hear 
their chains rattle after half an hour's attempt 
to render himself agreeable, he had no patience 
for long and difficult conquests. 

He talked of Italy and the arts, with the 
air of having mastered that comprehensive 
subject : — but he was soon convicted of utter- 
ing commonplaces, by the superiority of tact 
with which the fairy wing of woman's fancy 
flitted over its ancient monuments, and mo- 
dern, ancient, and ever-enduring magnifi- 
cence of Nature ! He spoke of France ; of 
its refinements, — its unceasing variety of no- 
velties and diversions; — and the nimbleness 
of woman's wit touched the sounding brass and 
tinkhng cymbals of Parisian conventionality 
till their hollowness rang beneath her hand ! 
He spoke of England, — and the eloquence of a 
noble spirit soon proved to him that he had 
never justly appreciated the magnitude of its 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 21 

institutions, or the sacredness of its domestic 
purity. On every point where he had been 
accustomed to give the law and fix the stand- 
ard, he found the quick agility of Ariel before 
him ; — that he had only to admit, " hitherto I 
have thought thus,*' — " till now I have always 
supposed ; " — and then lower his colours and 
beat a retreat. 

This admission, to every human being a mor- 
tification, and to a man peculiarly irritating, 
was to Lord Farnley (accustomed as he was 
to incense and adulation) provoking in the 
extreme. He was first surprised, — then ruffled,, 
— then piqued, — then interested; and, lastly, 
irrecoverably and inexplicably enchanted ! — 
There must be witchcraft in it! — How else 
could she, whose hair was glossy, — whose lips 
so red,— whose teeth so pearly, so small, so 
radiant, — possess the judgment of a sage, and 
the imagination of a poet ? — 

And, above all, that lovely, elegant, distin- 
guished, and accomplished as she was — the fair 
stranger should make so light of the lord of 
Farnley Castle !— " She shall repent it," thought 



22 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

the bachelor lord. Alas ! he little dreamed that 
his own command over the future imperative 
was at an end. In spite of the peerlessness of 
the lovely incognita who sat beside him, the 
dinner could not be prolonged beyond its al- 
lotted length of entrees, relevees, hors-d'oeuvres, 
—its three courses and dessert. The last praline 
was eaten ; but, unlike the orgies of England, 
the tranquil murmur of dmner conversation was 
not destined, by a sudden separation of the male 
and female guests, to deepen into a roar of 
obscene mirth. Lord Farnley found himself 
obliged to swallow his coffee, and devote him- 
self to a card-table, before he had been able 
to question his host relative to his elegant 
guest. On taking leave for the night, the object 
of his curiosity was so placed as to overhear 
his adieux ; and he was once more condemned 
to the vexation of retiring to wonder, con- 
sider, and re-consider the case. There is not 
a more decided symptom of an incipient love- 
fever than that sleepless tossing of an unquiet 
night, which not only "murders sleep," but 
renders the waking hours of the patient in- 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 23 

tolerable; and Lord Farnley's position was 
rendered doubly painful by a Sort of sober con- 
sciousness of his malady, as well as by a convic- 
tion that he was growing too old to fall in love ; 
— that he might possibly prove an unthriving 
wooer; or, if accepted, that the favour of the 
fair unknown would be conceded to his co- 
ronet, estates, and, sovereignty in the world of 
fashion. 

It is surprising how hollow-hearted and 
empty-headed people who are naturally nei- 
ther knavish nor foolish may become, from the 
mere habit of dwelling exclusively upon the, 
surface of things, — of considering the reflection 
instead of the reality. Lord Farnley was not 
deficient by nature in qualities of head or 
heart; but he had now so long accustomed 
himself to see with the eyes of the world, and 
judge with the judgment of the majority, that 
even the indulgence of his own selfishness had 
become a secondary consideration. He was wil- 
ling, indeed, to sacrifice all ordinary enjoyments 
to the dictates of Fashion ; but Love is a poli- 
tician who enlists the egotism of human nature 



24» OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

Strongly on his side, and Lord Farnley, (who 
had so urgently represented to Sir Francis 
Norton the impossibihty of marrying a woman 
undistinguished by rank or fashion, and who 
lived and moved only in the sunshine of the 
world's approval,) never for a moment permitted 
himself to deliberate whether Madame Girar- 
deau's guest belonged to the Order, or whether 
he should stand excused in St. James's-street 
for the folly of enchaining himself to her feet. 

" See ! " cried Lord Glendyne, as they en- 
tered the Theatre de Madame together, the fol- 
lowing night. " Look at the Ambassadress's 
box. Is she not lovely ? " 

" Lovely indeed ! " ejaculated Farnley, rais- 
ing his glass for a second survey of his own par- 
ticular goddess. " And, by the way, who is she ? 
I never saw a more distinguished woman ! " 

" Norton and I are infinitely indebted to 
you for so disinterested a confirmation of our 
opinion," exclaimed the young lord. " I knew 
I should soon hear you recant your heresy 
touching the lovely Sybella." And instantly 
quitting the box, Lord Farnley perceived him 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 25 

a few minutes afterwards, seated by the side 
of one. 

Too early seen unknown, and known too late. 

They were laughing heartily. Little reason 
had the bachelor lord to doubt that it was 
at his expense. But he had at least the sa- 
tisfaction of seeing Miss Woodford raise her 
lorgnette to examine the neighbourhood where 
he was sitting ; and though he suspected that 
her attention had been directed towards him 
by her companion, she looked and looked again 
with an air of peculiar interest. It did not 
much signify ! A mere Miss Woodford could 
be nothing to him ; and why should he desire . 
to become any thing to her? 

Perhaps it was this self-security which in- 
duced him to solicit a formal introduction to 
Mrs. Woodford on the following day ; and 
get himself included, morning after morning, 
in different parties of pleasure projected by the 
Girardeaus for the amusement of their friends. 
He saw plainly that he had nothing to fear from 

VOL. III. c 



26 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

the designs of either Sybella or her mother ; — 
they did not like him. They were in all proba- 
bility aware of the part he had acted towards 
them in the Norton affair ; and regarded him 
as an acquaintance whom they could never make 
a friend. Still it was pleasant to be even the 
acquaintance of so charming a person as Sy- 
bella. There was something in the sound of 
her voice, — the turn of her head, — the ba- 
lance of her steps, — as graceful, as feminine, 
as even he (so wild a dreamer of perfection) had 
never imagined. Lord Farnley, who held the 
sex so cheap, — who had been of opinion that 
attractive as they were, there was not one, and 
never could be one among them worthy to share 
his eminence, was forced to admit that his most 
poetical imaginings had conjectured nothing 
lovelier than the woman whom he had authori- 
tatively pronounced undeserving to become the 
wife of a Yorkshire baronet ! — 

What Sybella thought of all this it might be 
difficult to determine. Although she had tho- 
roughly overcome her predilection and even the 
influence of her predilection for Sir Francis 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 27 

Norton, — although from the period of knowing 
him united to another, she had firmly, sted- 
fastly, and successfully banished him from her 
thoughts, she had found it more difficult to for- 
get and forgive an individual (a stranger to 
her mother and herself) who, for the gratification 
of his own vain prejudices, had exercised so cruel 

an influence over her destinies She had long 

accustomed herself to fancy Lord Farnley a 
cold, hard, arrogant, unbending man ; and even 
now that she had seen him, — graceful, cour- 
teous, cordial, — she could not overcome her pre- 
judice that he was shallow, vain, and artificial. ' 
There was no one among her gay Parisian asso- 
ciates she did not prefer ; the young she believed 
to be more true and candid, — the old, more 
appropriately sober in their enjoyments, — the 
middle-aged, more solid in their tastes and feel- 
ings. It was impossible to deny the superiority 
of his manners, or the refinement of his con- 
ventional tact ; but she assured herself that 
had they been thrice as eminent they would 
have been equally insignificant in her estimation. 
Never, indeed, had Lord Farnley's power 

c 2 



28 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

been taxed to so great an extent as in the so- 
ciety of Sybella. In her lie found a companion 
capable of distinguishing and appreciating the 
piquancy of his sallies, the originality and cul- 
tivation of his mind. In her, a being refined as 
the utmost suggestions of his own fastidious fancy 
could devise ; in her, a friend in whom he could 
confide — an associate to whom he could turn for 
sympathy and counsel. Already he was begin- 
ning to renounce his heresies touching the sex ; — 
to fancy that a woman might really love and be 
beloved beyond the limitation of a passing fancy : 
that the wife might be "dearer than the bride;" 
— and the mother of his children more lovely 
in his eyes than the fantastic nymph of his 
momentary idolatry. Sometimes he regretted 
that he had so scornfully delayed till the 
eleventh hour the epoch of graver gallantry, — 
of wife-seeking and home-adorning. Some- 
times he congratulated himself on the excess of 
coldness or precaution, which still left him 
free to address the highly-gifted woman whom 
his better genius had placed in his way. 
Sometimes he perceived the impossibility of re- 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 29 

appearing in English society (but particularly 
in Sir Francis Norton's presence) as the hus- 
band of Sybella ;— but oftener far, he felt and 
admitted only that Miss Woodford was the 
loveliest and most accomplished of her sex, and 
himself the most infatuated of lovers ! 

Mrs. Woodford looked calmly on, — knew 
that she could trust her daughter, — and con- 
tented herself with calculating that an earldom 
with fifty thousand per annum is a better thing 
than a baronetcy with six; — that his lordship 
was a man of unimpugnable honour and re- 
spectability ; — and that if the worldly Farnley 
were unlikely to render Sybella a happy wife, the 
case would not have been mended by her union 
with the fickle Norton. She argued to the 
best of her capacity; and in the tone that 
out of sixty women, of her age and condition 
fifty-five in life, adopt when thinking or speak- 
ing of their children. 



--j^-< 



30 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 



CHAPTER XI. 



Happiness is a thing that lies out of the way ; and is 

only to be found by wandering. 

Shaftesbury. 

Since the epoch* of the green drawing-room 
at Thorngrove, Miss Woodford (as may be 
gathered from the preference and homage of so 
distinguishing a judge as Lord Farnley) had not 
been idhng away her time. Till a certain age 
indeed, till the happy moment of emancipation 
when a woman oversteps the fearful threshold 
of society, lessons of deportment and the cul- 
tivation of the fine arts, leave little leisure for 
study ; and Sybella, at the time she was really 
in love with Frank Norton and was accused 
of having coquetted with Mr. Loring, was as 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 31 

ignorant as young ladies of eighteen usually 
are. She was tolerably versed in ancient and 
modern history, — had pretty accurate notions 
of geography, — and was suifficently stored with 
the beauties of English poetry, to have the ne- 
cessary number of cut and dry quotations at 
her fingers' end. But of any thing really worth 
knowing, she was as guiltless as an infant or a 
public-school boy. 

Now, however, the case was widely different. 
Affliction teaches humility; and humility is the 
best instructor in every other art or science. 
While smarting under the mortification of hav-* 
ing been deserted by Mr. Cheveley's ward and 
commiserated by Mr. Cheveley's neighbours, 
Sybella had turned to books for consolation ; 
had read with a persevering eye and candid 
spirit ; — ^had enriched her mind with wise saws 
and modern instances, with all that the expe- 
rience of ages and the speculations of millions 
can unfold. She had learned, in the first place, 
the most useful lesson ever imparted by know- 
ledge, — that of her own insignificance ; and in 
the second, one scarcely less valuable, — the ne- 



32 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

cessity of forming her own character and 
strengthening her own soul, by self-examination, 
by comparison, by lessons of divine precept and 
human experience. 

In a great degree, indeed, the romance of 
youth had disappeared. The wild gusts of the 
equinox had subsided ; and nothing remained 
but the mild tranquillity of a still autumn, and 
preparation for the dreariness of winter. Sy- 
bella was scarcely twenty-four; but the joy and 
anguish of a first passionate attachment had 
done much towards sobering her fancy and 
maturing her character. She had no longer any 
thought of love or lovers. But she still hoped 
she might be happy as a wife ; and that some 
klnd^ indulgent, and congenial companion, would 
one day or other supply the place of the parent 
whom a sense of increasing infirmities rendered 
eager to see her settled in life. 

" How is this, my dear Mrs. Woodford?" 
cried Mrs. Homerton Frobishyre, who happened 
to be laying in her annual store of frivolity at 
Parisj for the purpose of astounding her country 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 33 

neighbours on her return into Yorkshire. " I 
saw your daughter (I think it was your daugh- 
ter? — ) last night in the Ambassadress's box;— 
sitting as composedly, whispering and flirting 
with Lord Farnley, as if his character were not 
universally known." 

" In what respect?" — 

" As a man who coquets in succession with 
every pretty or fashionable girl that comes 
out ; endowing them with a week's goddess-ship, 
and then bowing them out with the cold super- 
ciliousness of a Lord-in-waiting. Depend on 
it, he will behave to poor Sybella exactly as 
young Norton did ! — For my part, I have no 
patience with the men ! " — 

" I do not know that I have much more 
with the women ! " replied Mrs. Woodford, 
trying to repress the bitterness of maternal 
pique. " Between the sayings of the one, and 
the doings of the other, the world has a sorry 
time of it. However, my dear Mrs. Frobishyre, 
if you will promise to be as generous in your 
mode of talking of my daughter, as Lord Farn- 
lev is noble in his of conducting himself to- 

c5 



34 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR* 

wards her, I fancy Sybel will have very little 
cause to complain." 

Mrs. Homerton F. regarded it as a very 
unhandsome thing of Mrs. Woodford, con- 
sidering they had been neighbours in the 
country (a circumstance which had enabled her 
to descant upon and calumniate the Thorngrove 
family for a dozen years of their lives), that 
she could not be moved to speak more explicitly 
on the subject. In spite of taunts, insinuations, 
and imputations, not a word would she add. 
Mrs. H, F. assured her it was currently re- 
ported that " Lady Madelina Rowerton (and 
Heaven knows poor Lady Madelina, spoken of 
as she was, had no longer any great right to be 
fastidious !) had declined making the Woodfords' 
acquaintance the preceding winter at Nice ; — 
that it was more than hinted in the circle of the 
embassy Lord Farnley was making a fool of 
his pretty little countrywoman ; — and that his 
lordship might be considered as a banished man, 
as it was well understood the state of his affairs 
made it convenient to him to visit the con- 
tinent." Mrs. Woodford listened, and smiled 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 35 

with the most provoking security. She knew 
every word that fell from her Yorkshire neigh- 
bour's lips to be no less false than malicious ; 
and all the comfort that eventually befel the 
gossipmonger, was the duty of hastening to 
Norton Park immediately on her return to 
England, to congratulate Sir Francis and Lady 
Margaret on the approaching marriage of their 
friend Lord Farnley vv^ith the daughter of their 
late friend old Cheveley's Thorngrove neigh- 
bour ! — It was delightful to her to witness the 
air of blank amazement with which the young 
Baronet and his wife listened to the announce- 
ment. The bachelor — the old bachelor — about 
to sink into the commonplace of wedlock ! 
The lord of Farnley Castle married, — and 
married to an obscure country girl, — without 
fashion or distinction of any kind ; — the iden- 
tical Sybella from whom he had considered it 
his duty to separate his ward ! — ^How unac- 
countable ! — how unpardonable ! — 

It was very plain to most persons present 
that all this was passing in the mind of Sir 
Francis ; but it passed even the lips of Lady 



36 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

Margaret, who cherished a jealous dislike of the 
very name of Woodford. 

" We are to conclude then," cried she, " that 
poor Lord Farnley is getting into his dotage ? 
He who has escaped so many snares, and re- 
sisted the attraction of all the most distinguished 
women of the day, to be caught at last by a 
nameless adventurer, who has never been even 
heard of in the world which he inhabits." 

'* Oh ! pardon me ; — she was a good deal 
talked about in Yorkshire a few years ago — at 
the time, you may remember, she refused the 
present Lord Loring." Sir Francis started. 
" He was desperately in love with poor Sybel ; 
but she never gave him the least encourage- 
ment; nor did the Lorings ever forgive the 
cool contempt with which she treated his pre- 
tensions. Miss Woodford at least proved her 
disinterestedness by that rejection." 

" Lord Loring is a nonentity, who has existed 
only to advance from boy boorhood to man 
boorhood," said Lady Margaret, haughtily. "No 
woman in her senses would have married an 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 3*7 

obstinate fool, merely because it was in his 
power to cause her to be dubbed Right Honour- 
able.'' 

" But your brother is neither obstinate nor 
foolish," said the spiteful Mrs. Homerton Fro- 
bishyre, deliglited to have ruffled the lordly 
brow of her aristocratic neighbour ; " and I 
have it from the best authority that Miss 
Woodford refused him two months ago." 

" Probably because she knew Lord Farnley 
boasted a fortune doubling that of my father,'* 
exclaimed Lady Margaret Norton. " Nay, 
Glendyne's having proposed to the girl suffi-' 
ciently justifies the opinion I have always formed 
of her. I have often heard him protest that 
nothing ever attracted him but an actress, moun- 
tebank, rope-dancer, or adventurer of some 
sort or description. He was in love for three 
whole years with the beau ideal of Gothe's Mig- 
non ; and was very near drowning himself in a 
helle passion for the Invisible Girl." 

" Your theory is at fault ! There is nothing 
of the adventurer in Miss Woodford's situation 
or character," observed Sir Francis firmly, ral- 



S8 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

lying to join in the conversation ; " and since 
she was disinclined to form the happiness of 
Glendyne, I am sincerely glad she is so for^ 
tunate as to have secured the regard of an ho- 
nourable man like Farnley." 

" Well, we shall soon have her here," cried 
Mrs. Homerton F. rising to take leave, and 
crossing the room with a view to the display of 
Mademoiselle Celiane's last capote; "and I, 
for one, am already prepared to mould myself 
after her precepts and example. The new 
Lady Farnley will lay down the law to us all, 
aud regulate the code of the whole shire." 

" Pardon me," said Lady Margaret, haugh- 
tily, — more haughtily than her husband had ever 
yet heard her speak, " there is one house in 
the county where Lady Farnley will neither 
be welcome as a guest nor endured as a legisla- 
tress. In mine she will be admitted, at the ut- 
most, as a formal acquaintance." 

" We shall see," said, or looked, her spiteful 
country neighbour, as Sir Francis offered her 
his arm across the hall; and she jumped into 
her carriage, leaving the young baronet to take 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 39 

his dog and gun, and saunter across a park 
which had never before looked so cheerless in 
his eyes. It was in vain the officious butler de- 
manded whether Sir Francis wished for the 
keeper's attendance. He replied by whistling 
to his dog, and walking off towards his favourite 
warren, unconscious that the world contained 
any other human beings than Lord and Lady 
Farnley, Sir Francis and Lady Margaret Nor- 
ton. 

" And this is the destiny I have chosen for 
myself ! " thought he, as he meditated over the 
menacing attitude of his wife and his affairs. 
" I, who was so thoroughly independent of the 
world — 1, who had no one to consult, no one to 
thwart, no one to overrule me — who might have 
chosen where I pleased ; and who, having 
chosen, was defeated in my purpose by the idle 
babbling of a woman's tongue and deference to 
the anathemas of fashionable life ! — I cannot 
forgive myself, — I cannot forgive Farnley ! It 
is absurd to attribute to accident this dereliction 
from the principles he imposed upon my boy- 
hood. — misguiding my mind and misgoverning 



40 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

my conduct. Farnley has robbed me of that 
which he nefariously represented as unworthy 
my possession ; and fettered me with ties and 
connections unsuitable to my condition. The 
Kingcombes look upon me as their minion ; 
Lady Margaret as her slave ; my children, in- 
stead of being taught to turn to the respecta- 
bility of my forefathers as their noblest endow- 
ment, are instructed only that they had Earls 
and Dukes among their ancestors. Why, why, 
did I not follow my best friend, my kind old 
guardian's advice ! What a home have I re- 
nounced — what a blessed equality of tastes 
and condition ! Sybella loved me — I am sure 
she loved me ! How she used to run panting 
to the garden gate at Thorngrove, when she 
heard my horse's steps approaching ! — Long 
enough will it be before Lady Margaret 
discomposes her dignity by such a mark of 
attachment. Never was there a woman so 
cold — so heartless — so infected by the artifi- 
ciality of her education. Lady Kingcombe 
thinks of nothing but forms and appearances; 
and Ponto ! you poaching cur — here ! — Sir 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 41 

back — back !" and a hasty cut with the whip, 
rendered his unhappy pointer conscious at once 
of the extent of the enormities of the Enville 
family, and of his master's irritation of mind. 



42 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 



CHAPTER XII. 



God's universal law 

Gave to the man despotic power 
Over his female in due awe ; 

Nor from that right to part an hour — 

Smile she or lour ; 
So shall he least confusion draw 
On his whole life, not sway'd 
By female usurpation, or dismay'd. Milton. 

Could it have afforded consolation to the 
young bachelor among the disturbances of his 
married life, to become aware that the feel- 
ings of the old bachelor were scarcely less har- 
assed by the result of his union with Sybella, 
Sir Francis Norton might have been amply 
comforted, before the expiration of a year from 
the arrival of Lord and Lady Farnley in their 
native country. Nature keeps a vigilant watch 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 43 

over the maintenance of her rights; and when 
she finds her prerogative derided, as in the in- 
stance of Farnley's interference in the honest 
passion of his ward, and of Norton's tame 
resignation of the blessings tendered to his 
acceptance, she is apt to avenge herself by 
silently sprinkling the germ of tares among their 
golden grain, and calling up thistles in their 
vineyard. She had rendered Sir Francis a dis- 
contented man ; was it fitting that Lord Farn- 
ley — the original instigator of the mischief, — 
should live secure from retribution ? 

Ah ! little think the gay, licentious, proud, ' 

or even the sour, licentious, and lowly, what 
innumerable whips and scorns, w^hat trivial 
yet potent vexations, haunt those temples of 
granite or freestone, (with their carvings, tra- 
cery, and sculpture, — their hangings of velvet 
or damask, — their Persian carpets, Parian mar- 
ble, paintings, chalices, vases, porcelain, con- 
servatories, fountains, — their dumb obsequious- 
ness of menial attendance, — their measured re- 
gularity of form and order,) — the aristocratic 
palaces of Great Britain ! The flag waves on 



44 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

the tower; "my lord and lady are arrived;*' 
the music sounds ; — the flowers are forced into 
blossom; — the velvet lawn extends its timely 
verdure ; — the neighbourhood sends forth its 
crowds of guests ; — the spoil of many a poetic 
fancy, the results of much wearisome philoso- 
phical research, is poured into the library ; — new 
changes of harmony are introduced into the 
music room ; — plants from the ends of the 
earth (uprooted among foreign deserts by some 
enterprizing botanist) display their exotic glories 
in the Dresden vase on the marble slab. — The eye 
gloats upon a thousand graceful combinations; 
the lip, the ear, the foot, the hand, rest only 
upon exquisite objects : — but my lord is chewing 
the cud of sweet and bitter fancies in his library ; 
and my lady is lying on the luxurious divan of 
her Alhambrian boudoir, watching the swallows 
as they flit by the painted windows, and wishing 
that, like them, she could make unto herself 
wings and flee away ! — 

Lady Farnley had not, however, even at the 
expiration of the twelvemonth we have suffered 
to pass without examination, arrived at this 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 45 

freezing point of the winter of human discon- 
tent. She was not yet weary of the gorgeous 
saloons, marble halls, or Oriental balconies of 
her magnificent residence ; she found its gar- 
dens as sweet, as refreshing as ever ; its marble 
tanks, with their springing fountains as cool ; its 
lawn as green, its shrubberies as calm and con- 
templative. But she did find — and find with 
surprise, regret, and self-condemnation, that, 
though captivated by the courteous breeding 
and air de grand Seigneur of her lord, there 
was something in the artificial dignity of his 
address incapable of giving way, even in the* 
intimate communion of wedded life. He often 
seemed to examine her with a curious eve : 
to be trying to assure himself that he bad not 
made too great a sacrifice in yielding up his 
liberty in favour of so obscure a person ; to fear 
that, by becoming too familiar or allowing her 
to make too free with him, he might encourage 
her into ungraceful ease of deportment ; that she 
might possibly grow too gay and free for a 
presiding divinity of his lordly temple. 

It is surprising how soon a woman makes up 



46 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

her mind to any new or unusual position. Sy- 
bella, in accepting the hand of Lord Farnley, 
and deciding that as his wife she should obtain 
a position calculated to secure her own happi- 
ness and enable her to minister to that of 
others, had not been without hope that the 
favourable impression she had conceived of the 
great man who was humbling himself at her 
feet, would grow with matrimonial intimacy 
into a more cordial feeling ; — nothing re- 
sembling indeed her foolish Thorngrove emo- 
tions in favour of old Cheveley's ward, but 
accordant rather with the grateful and reve- 
rential affection she cherished towards her mo- 
ther. The young wife soon found that this 
was far from the case ; — that her husband 
occurred to her oftener as the Lord Farnley 
by whom she had been despised and con- 
temned, than was at all desirable. But no 
sooner was she satisfied in her own mind that 
she had miscalculated in looking for the intense 
communion of a domestic fireside, than she set 
about remedying the evil. The Lord Farnley 
she had pictured to herself had, it was true, 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 47 

crumbled away into an apparition ; but Farnley 
Castle and Farnley House,— the parks, gardens, 
libraries, and saloons, — were there still ; and 
these she would not only enjoy at her own best 
leisure, but adorn and enliven for the gratifica- 
tion of her husband and the satisfaction of 
society. She had an extensive duty to perform ; 
she would rest her ambition on performing it 
with skill, — her immortal hopes on performing 
it without offence. 

According to the line thus chalked out 
for herself, Sybella now assumed towards her 
husband a sociable but dignified deportment. ' 
She was at all times, in all places, the Lady 
Farnley in velvet robe and golden carcanet, 
whose beauty shone so bright on the canvas of 
Lawrence. There was no fault to be found, 
nothing to suggest, nothing to regret. The 
bachelor lord's lady was as noble, accomplished, 
and refined, as all the rest of his possessions. 
The whole world united in praise of her ; royalty 
itself assured him that nothing was ever half so 
beautiful ; — artists spoke of her loveliness, — 
/t^era^i of her intelligence,— men of her powers 



48 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

of fascination, women of her accomplishments. 
Never before, even amid the triumph of its po- 
pularity, had Farnley House been so crowded 
with devotees. Foreigners rushed from the con- 
tinent to admire la belle Angloise in the exercise 
of her new dignities ; his lordship's political 
party aifected to regard her superiority of mind 
as a plea for including her in their discussions ; 
— the young spoke of her elegance in the dance, 
in the display of their private theatricals, in all 
that was gay and graceful ; — the old, of her skill 
and courtesy as a hostess, of her tact and high- 
breeding as a countess. 

This was not to be borne ! Lord Farnley, 
who had been for twenty years deliberating whe- 
ther there existed a woman worthy to unloose 
the latchets of his shoes, and be entrusted with 
the keeping of his honour (as a man of fashion) 
or the guardianship of his fame (as a dilettante 
and courtier) — who doubted whether any female 
in the world boasted sufficient delicacy of refine- 
ment to enter into his enjoyment (of a scien- 
tific dinner, fine bottle of Boundeaux, and new 
opera), to play the hostess with an ease and 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 49 

dignity in keeping with the nobleness of his 
establishment, — Lord Farnley now discovered 
that he was eclipsed, — lost in the splendour of a 
new gloriole, — overlooked, — forgotten ! — His 
wife had the advantage of youth in conciliating 
the suffrages of the young and gay. She was 
more active, more easy, more animated, more 
supple, more prone to bend and accommodate 
her views and feelings to those of the contem- 
porary generation. Lord Farnley's notions, 
elegant as they were, were growing obsolete. 
His taste was of yesterday; /i/5 projects savoured 
of the indolent inactivity of a middle-aged man. 
He was willing to 

Dotf the world aside and let it pass ; 
and had no idea of being at the trouble of out- 
stripping the speed of time, or even of attempt- 
ing to keep up with other competitors intent 
upon such a superfluous race. In consequence 
of all this apathy of egotism, he was soon left 
behind in the throng. The beautiful Atalanta 
sped onward and onward, with an applauding 
crowd still following in her wake;— while he, — 

VOL. III. D 



50 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

the proud man, — the proud defeated man, — the 
man who had so doated on the golden opinions 
of the world till he found them unanimously 
transferred to another, — sat himself down de- 
serted by the way side, to hear the shouts of the 
multitude growing fainter and fainter in the 
distance ! 

It was not that Sybella had the bad taste to 
interfere in his projects or rectify his designs. 
But she made no secret of her own ; the supe- 
riority of which was so evident, that Lord Farn- 
ley was wise enough to see the ridicule to which 
he should expose himself in so unequal a con- 
test. Sybella spoke openly, before a large dinner 
party assembled at his table, of the advantage to 
be produced in the Farnley Statue Gallery, by- 
removing certain semi-columns of green scag- 
liola intended to support Etruscan vases, and im- 
parting a mean and broken character to the coup- 
d^osil; — Sybella sketched in the Farnley Album 
lying on the library-table, a design for a new 
flower garden, in a specified spot of the grounds, 
boasting all the romantic wildness of an oriental 
scene ; Sybella composed a proverhe ; Sybella 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 51 

devised a charade, which the amateur performers 
of the neighbourhood lauded as superior to the 
cleverest productions of Scribe. To have pro- 
tested against the merit of these performances, 
would have been to render himself ridiculous; 
and, at the archery meetings where her per- 
sonal graces shone so conspicuous, and the races 
where all that was distinguished in the county 
crowded round her equipage to catch a smiling 
bow or one of the kind and courteous phrases 
with which she had managed to conciliate the 
whole neighbourhood (even including Mrs. 
Homer ton Frobishyre and her crew of frondeurs J, 
— he had only to admit with the rest of the 
world that there was nothing in it equal to Lady 
Farnley. 

" On what are you meditating so deeply ? " 
inquired Lady Madelina Rowerton of Lord 
Glendyne, one evening when a circle of the 
choicest society in the kingdom was assembled 
in, or rather dispersed through, the splendid sa- 
loons of Farnley Castle. " On Sybella's beauty, 
I hope. Look at her, as she sits yonder in all 
the glory of loveliness ! Did you ever see the 

D 2 



SSvrroMUiHO^ 



5^ OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

air noble more unexceptionably developed ; — or 
did you ever observe such rapt attention as waits 
upon all her moods and movements ? Where 
is my brother ? " 

" Asleep as usual in the library, half buried in 
his pamphlets ! " replied Lord Glendyne more 
gravely than was his wont ; " and it was of him 
that I was thinking.'' 

" Not disparagingly, I trust ? " cried Lady 
Madelina; who, with all her giddiness, was 
tenderly attached to her brother. 

"No! — I was only considering the weakness 
and wickedness of interfering in other people's 
affairs, and the blunders we commit in too 
tender a solicitude for our own ! That ape 
in the fable who struck her foot against a stone 
and killed the darling apeling in her arms, — 
how ill did I interpret the apologue when it 
was flogged into me at school ! How little did I 
understand the moral of letting one's little apes 
and little projects, take their chance in the world 
" with Providence their guide ! " 

" Oh ! par exemple ; vous faites de la phi- 
losophie!^' said Lady Madelina, seizing a tiny 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 53 

cup and ball of steel-studied ivory, and tossing it 
as if her existence depended on the exhibition of 
her dexterity. " What has gone wrong with 
you ?■ — For, while things go rights one never 
puzzles one-self with examination into the nature 
of the machinery." 

"Things go right enough with me," cried 
Lord Glendyne ; " because, like the jolly miller 
of the Dee, ' I care for nobody,' and not much 
even for myself. I was simply reflecting how 
much mischief my friend Farnley has pro- 
duced in his own household and mine, by too 
overweening a reliance on his capacity to in- 
terfere with the designs of Providence. He 
would not allow Frank Norton to marry Sybella, 
but chose to make a match for him with my 
sister ; and now be has ended by making Miss 
Woodford his own wife ! — To say nothing of 
the inconsistency of these proceedings, pray 
admire what two ill-assorted couples are the re- 
sult of his despotism ! " 

" Surely Sir Francis and Lady Margaret do 
very well together?" said Lady Madelina, 
watching him with the keen glance of female 
curiosity. 



54 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

"They would do better apart !" said Glendyne 
frankly. " Madge is very unfit for the bread- 
and-butter details of a limited establishment. 
She would have been far better placed here at 
Farnley, to stalk majestically througli life with 
her head in the air, without casting a look 
at those little nothings which it is Farnley's 
delight ta manage in his own way. She would 
have been too indolent to encroach upon his 
cares of state ; but have done honour to his 
rank in life, and been contented to share a po- 
pularity of his own creation. 

" And so she would ! " exclaimed Lady 
Madelina. " Lady Margaret really would have 
been the very wife for my brother. They are 
quite congenial spirits ! " 

" And Frank Norton ! " continued Lord 
Glendyne. " How much happier would he 
have been with a glowing, ardent spirit, like 
Sybel's, — with one who did not snatch him up 
like Glumdalclitch, by the hair of his head, to 
elevate him to a station in life out of keeping 
with his proportions. Miss Woodford and 
he would have made the happiest couple in the 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 55 

world: young, gay, energetic, — enjoying all 
things, a credit to themselves, a blessing to 
their neighbourhood. Sybella would have 
found the sunshine of his approving eyes 
sufficient for happiness ; and Margery my 
sister, of a calmer temperament and loftier 
frame of mind, have experienced sufficient 
enjoyment in the splendours and glories of 
Farnley Castle. Well — well ! — I trust no- 
body will attempt to make me a happy man in 
spite of myself You, dear Lady Mad. who 
have legislated the choice of my horses, dogs, 
carriages, politics, and tailors, for the last two. 
years, pray don't take it into your head to in- 
terfere with my selection of a wife. Farnley and 
Frank are nailed up like scarecrows before my 
eyes. What happy dogs might they have been 
had they followed the course of their own in- 
clinations ; — or remained, in spite of advisers 
and advice,-— The Old and the Young 
Bachelor ! " 



A MANffiUVRER OUTWITTED 

OR, 

RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 



Polonius. — What Jo you read, my lord r 

Hamlet. — Words ! words ! words ! 

Pol. — What is the matter, my lord ? 

Ham. — Between who ? 

Pol. — I mean the matter that ycu read, my lord ? 

Ham. — Slanders, Sir ! Hamlet. 



D 5 



CHAPTER I. 



Scar'd at the spectre of pale Poverty, 
To either India see the merchant fly ; 
See him with pains of body, pangs of soul. 
Burn through the tropic, — freeze beneath the pole. 

Pope, imit. Horace. 



The difficulty of trimming our course be- 
tween duties and interests, has been pointed 
out on so many a serious page, that the theme 
may have become somewhat trite to the inditers 
of homilies. But the moral (or as it is, alas ! 
our destiny to be written down), the satirical 
novelist, is permitted to seek new features in 
the reverse of the tapestry; and, while the age 
in which we live continues to furnish such edi- 
fying examples of worldliness, we have no 



60 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

reason to fancy our lesson superfluous, or its 
details obsolete. It does not need to be 

A pagan, nurtured in a creed out-worn, 

to bow the knee to that worst of idols — the Mam- 
mon of Unrighteousness. — Christians, and, ac- 
cording to the verdict of society, very good 
Christians, rather boast than disavow their ser- 
vice in his temple. — May we be excused for 
dragging forth a single member of the congre- 
gation for warning and example? — 

Mrs. Bentham had two children, a son and 
a daughter. It is to be inferred that she prized 
them highly ; for they were all that remained of 
a family of ten meagre little urchins, succes- 
sively despatched to their relations in England 
from an unhealthy settlement in Bengal, where 
her husband resided as District Judge (and as his 
European letters styled him, &c. &c. &c.) — 
to perish on a homeward voyage, or shortly 
after their arrival in the Downs. Four of these 
predestined victims were consigned to the vasty 
deep ; two laid in a sandy grave in Mr. Bent- 
ham's garden at Ghaucapore ; and two more 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 61 

had just time to show their tanned wliite heads 
and tanned brown faces at the dessert table of 
Mr. Gregory Bentham's rus-in-urbe at Edmon- 
ton Wash, ere they were gathered to his and 
their own forefathers. In short, poor Mrs. 
B.'s efforts towards augmenting the population 
of the earth, seemed fated to be infructuous ; 
when, just as her ninth son, Henry, jun. began 
to nod his little mandarin-like head in the lap 
of his Ayah, Henry, sen. her husband, was 
pleased to deposit his own in the lap of earth ; 
and considering that he had weathered the pes- 
tiferous climate of Ghaucapore for twelve whole * 
years, the event, although his illness was but of 
half as many hour's duration, can scarcely be 
called a sudden dispensation. 

After a few weeks of affliction and conster- 
nation, the v/idow sailed for England, bearing 
with her, in addition to her sallow infant already 
born, the promise of a tenth ; whicli she con- 
trived should make its appearance in time to 
be added to the list of unwelcome nephews and 
nieces imposed upon the hospitality of uncle 
Gregory. She also managed that her own 
weak state of health, arising from the recent loss 



62 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

of a husband, and the recent acquisition of a 
daughter, should afford an apology for spunging 
upon the Edmonton establishment for several 
subsequent months ; and it required all the 
obstinacy and all the coolness of Mrs. Gregory 
her sister-in-law, to dislodge her at length from 
the comfortable quarters she chose to consider 
her home. 

It is the mistaken custom of most families 
blest with an uncle or brother holding an ap- 
pointment in India, to talk of him and feel to- 
wards him as " the nabob ;" and, so long as he 
remains unmarried, to constitute him godfather 
to one or more of their superfluous olive- 
branches, and cultivate his testamentary favour 
by annual letters — boxes of eau de Cologne or 
Smyth's lavender water, — a modicum of gold- 
wired tooth-brushes, — and a copious supply of 
old newspapers. Even after the oriental kins- 
man has ceased to administer justice to his 
dingy subjects in single blessedness (having ^ 
fallen a prey to the pink cheeks and blue 
bonnet of the last Miss Smith or Miss 
Brown, forming part of the exports of Great 
Britain to her favoured colonies in the East), 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 63 

his loving kindred continue to pay their an- 
nual devoirs to his cashmere shawls and atar 
of roses; — nay, even to hear of an annual in- 
crease to his family by twelve successive fleets, 
without any misgivings for the future. John 
Company is supposed to be as tender over his 
beloved sons as the ogres of old ; — grinding the 
bones of all other people's children to make 
their bread, and filling them plenteously with 
good things. 

But the fallacy of this vulgar error is becoming 
disagreeably apparent. Thanks to the march 
of luxury, which, like Hannibal, has eaten its 
way through mountains, it is now as easy to 
spend a fortune in India as to make one. 
People are as liable to receive a consignment 
of poor relations from Elephantaradabad as from 
Berwick-upon-Tweed; and pensions and sub- 
scriptions are as frequently claimed in Leaden- 
hall-street as at the Horse- Guards or Treasury. 
Henry Bentham, for instance, had expended an 
income of five thousand per annum at Ghau- 
capore, in keeping himself, his wife, and claret 
cool-; and his salary having amounted only to 



64 A MANOEUVRE R OUTWITTED; 

five thousand five hundred, it is clear that his 
agent could not have a larger balance than 
twelve thousand pounds to produce as the future 
patrimony of his orphans, little Henry and 
Emma. For this sum, which the administratrix 
was tempted by the flattering sound of " five 
per cent." to leave in India, she received six 
hundred per annum; which, with her pension 
of two, and an odd hundred scrambled to2:ether 
by the sale of his effects, produced her some- 
what under a thousand a year, to starve upon in 
her native country. — No wonder she found it 
convenient to deposit her sorrows so long in the 
bosom of the family of her beloved Henry ! — 

There is no tie of human affection more 
powerful than that between a mother and the 
posthumous child of a beloved husband. As 
the sea-bird which lights upon the waves 
during a storm, the new-born brings hope 
and healing upon its wings. Like a messenger 
from the grave, — like Paraclete, the comforter, — 
adorned with a smile or a glance that had faded 
from the earth as if for ever, — the first office of 
its little life is to dry the tears amid which it 



OK, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 65 

springs to existence. But Mrs. Bentham knew 
none of these womanly tendernesses. She had 
been excessively and successively sorry for the 
eight little victims, so long as she had five thou- 
sand five hundred pounds a-year to maintain 
them, and nothing more amusing to do than to 
cry; but she was almost as much afflicted by 
the arrival of little Emma, who .came to claim 
her share of the scanty sixth of that sum ; and 
instead of exercising her fine sentiment in look- 
ing after her beloved Henry's features in her 
daughter's tiny face, persisted in declaring that 
the luckless baby had just its uncle Gregory's 
nose. Altogether the poor little girl was a de- 
cided superfluity in the family. 

The Edmonton sister-in-law, who had never 
forgiven Mrs. Bentham for marrying the 
nabob-uncle of her own children, did not even 
withdraw her enmity when, by dint of hints and 
provocations of every sort and kind, she suc- 
ceeded in driving her to form an establishment of 
her own. Not content with quoting her to 
every morning visitor, in the strictest confidence, 
as a dawdle and a slattern, who by her want of 



66 A MANCEUVREll OUTWITTED ; 

providence had prevented their poor dear bro- 
ther from reaHzing a fine fortune out of his fine 
appointment, — she hinted that the widow was 
Wind enough to overlook the circumstance of 
having been twelve times a mother, and to 
anticipate a father-in-law for the two survivors 
of her patriarchal family. But even if cor- 
rect in this malicious assertion, the widow 
Bentham was in some degree justified in her 
speculations : for the whole dozen had in fact 
made its appearance between the ages of seven- 
teen and thirty ; and though somewhat ex- 
panded by pale ale and lax lacing, she was still 
a handsome woman ; particularly when seen by 
candlelight, in her shawl turban and Bird of Pa- 
radise feather. 

It is certain that she was careful to be very 
often seen by candlelight. When a year and a 
half had expired from the period of her arrival 
in England, and two from the demise of the 
unthrifty Judge of Ghaucapore, it was observed 
by Mrs. Gregory, of Edmonton, that "consi- 
dering Mrs. Henry of Mortimer-street had a 
bare thousand per annum for the maintenance 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 67 

of herself and her two babes, she must expend a 
most unprofitable portion of her revenues in car- 
riage-hire ; that many mothers would consider 
it their duty to dispose of the relics of their more 
prosperous days — their India shawls and pearls 
and turquoises — for the benefit of their family. 
But it was plain to be seen that the widow was 
looking out for an establishment ; and she only 
hoped, for her part, that the labour would pros- 
per : — for who could say how soon Master 
Henry and Miss Emma might become a burthen 
to their uncle Gregory ? She was sure the whole 
Bentham family had reason to wish she might 
get comfortably settled. As to Mrs. Henry's 
own relations, their coolness on her arrival in 
England was a pretty plain proof that they 
cared nothing at all about the matter." 

In point of fact, they knew as little as they 
cared. The Judge of Ghaucapore was not of 
the number of martyrs to the exported Miss 
Browns and Smiths peculiar to the Indian 
market. He had married the only daughter of 
a hazy-headed Colonel Ogylvie, the commandant 
of a neighbouring fort ; who, being the younger 



68 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED ; 

son of a laird connected with the Caledonian 
aristocracy and deficient in personal, mental, and 
temporal advantages, was packed off to India 
per favour of his grand-uncle the Director, and 
stationed in a district under the peculiar juris- 
diction of the cholera morbus. The lumpish 
boy grew, however, in despite both of kindred 
and epidemic, into a loutish youth and stupid 
man ; — became proprietor of a wife and daugh- 
ter ; — buried the one, and married the other, and 
finally disappeared from the terrestrial globe, 
without leaving any more important trace of his 
existence than that of his name in his daughter's 
family Bible, the only inheritance in his power 
to bequeath her. He had somewhat exceeded 
his means in bestowing upon her a good Eu- 
ropean education ; but it was thc'Sole dowry she 
carried with her into the arms of the Judge of 
Ghaucapore. 

But no sooner did Mrs. Henry Bentham find 
herself fairly hunted out of the great square red 
brick built house at Edmonton, and driven to 
earth in a small square brick house in Mortimer- 
street, Cavendish-square, than she commenced 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 69 

a careful enumeration in her own mind, of all 
her appliances and means of keeping her foot- 
ing in the world, and even rising above it. 
Notwithstanding the temporary offuscation of 
her faculties as a daughter at Futtygherry, and 
a mother at Ghaucapore, notwithstanding the 
fifteen monotonous years of inaction which had 
brought her from girlhood to the sober half way 
station of two-and- thirty, she was still a woman 
of stirring mind — - the powers of which were 
exclusively absorbed in the doctrines and prac- 
tice of worldly wisdom. To her sprightly ima- 
gination and keen providence, a thousand pro- 
jects presented themselves which would never 
have entered the hazy head of Colonel Ogylvie, 
or the indolent, taking-for-granted mind of the 
defunct judge. The directorial grand-uncle 
had long ago gone out in rotation from the 
muster-roll of the human kind ; but there were 
still a vast variety of Ogylvies extant, many of 
them " well to do in the world," most of them 
better than herself: and above all, there was 
the representative of the consanguineous peer- 
age, the Earl of Cairngraeme ; who, although at 



70 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

present unconscious of affinity to the handsome 
widow in the shawl turban and bird of paradise 
feather, might at any time be forced into an ac- 
knowledgment of Henry Bentham's widow as 
his second cousin. In her own opinion this was 
equivalent to an addition of one hundred per 
annum to her narrow income. 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 71 



CHAPTER II. 



Pride in the great, is hateful; — in the wise, ridiculous; 
— but beggarly pride is a rational vanity which I am in- 
clined to applaud and excuse. 

Goldsmith's Essays. 

Interested people are generally free from 
the over-weening influence of self-conceit. They 
are aware that too strong a reliance on their 
own judgment and too fond a confidence in 
their own merits, may lead to the defeature of 
the darling projects of their cupidity. 

Many women, after vegetating thirteen years 
at Ghaucapore, where they presented the only 
fair copy of the Venus de Medicis to the wonder 
of some thousands of currie-coloured heathens, 
might have been induced to dream themselves 
into supremacy of mind, body, and estate. 
But Mrs. Henry Bentham knew better. 



72 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED ; 

Having proportioned her pretensions to the 
small dimensions of her house in Mortimer- 
street, she laid the first foundations of be- 
coming somebody by the self-conviciton of 
being nobody. But many avowals are highly 
expedient to make to ourselves, which it is by 
no means necessary to confide to other people ; 
and with all her boarding-school ignorance, the 
lady was wise enough to be aware that humility 
is a virtue in the great, and a blunder in the 
little. To have gone about the world making 
professions of personal insignificance, would have 
been an impertinence as well as a social suicide. 
Her immediate object was to effect an entrance 
into the Ogylvie family ; and whether compassed 
by storm or stratagem, — en echelon, or by scaling- 
ladders, — there could be no occasion to lower 
her colours previous to the onset. Judging the 
world after her own nature, — and few persons 
adopt any other standard of comparison, — 
she felt satisfied that she had a far better chance 
of being recognized by her lofty kindred, as the 
handsome widow of "the late eminent Judge 
Bentham of Ghaucapore, a daughter of the late 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 73 

distinguished Colonel Ogylvie, of the Honoura- 
ble East India Company's Bengal Establish- 
ment," than as poor Mrs. Henry Bentham 
struggling through life with two small children, 
and one small pension, in a small lodging-house 
at the west end of the town. Her ulterior ob- 
jects must in either case remain for gradual de- 
velopment; the main point, at present, was to be 
permitted to call cousins with the Earl of Cairn- 
graeme. 

Now, in addition to this highly ornamental 
head of the family, there resided in the metro- 
polis a certain old Mrs. Mac Winnepeg, a wi- 
dowed sister of her 'father ; and a very fashion- 
able Sir Colin and Lady Ogylvie, cousins to 
them all ; — and (as the hazy Colonel would have 
expressed himself, had he survived to witness 
his daughter's manoeuvres) Mrs. Henry deter- 
mined to commence her attack by a skirmish 
with the outposts. Aware that no intercourse 
had subsisted between Futtygherry and the 
Mac Winnepeg family since the commandant's 
union with her mother deprived him of his cog- 

VOL. III. E 



74} A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

nomen of " the Nabob,'' she indited a very pleas- 
ing amiable reading letter to her aunt, to ac- 
company a brown cachemere not much the worse 
for wear, and a Trichinopoly chain, from the ir- 
ritation of which she had been accustomed to 
shrink every time she put it on, as from the wiry 
legs of a cock-chaffer. Both were tendered 
to Mrs. Mac Winnepeg's acceptance, as pledges 
of the regard of a deceased brother, who had 
departed this life in the midst of projects of re- 
union with his beloved family. 

The scheme succeeded a merveille. Mrs. 
Mac, although of opinion that ten years was a 
long time for the peace offerings to have been 
on the road to her residence in Gower-street, 
did justice to Mrs. Bentham's prudence in secur- 
ing her from the outlay of King's duties and 
Company's duties, by being the bearer of her 
father's legacy; and, without exactly understand- 
ing whether her " affectionate niece Margaret 
Bentham," were widow or wife, a visitor or a 
resident in her native country — she directed her 
purple chariot with its fubsy coach-horses, globu- 
lar coachman, and rubicund footman, to Morti- 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 75 

mer-street on the following morning; — the whole 
equipage looking like the triumphal car of 
Apoplexy. 

Mrs. Mac Winnepeg was a stirring, meddling, 
talking, managing body, at all times oppressed 
with a multiplicity of business which was no 
business at all, or at least no business of hers ; 
who, conceiving that sensible people have no lei- 
sure to be sick or sorry, found at seventy-eight 
her engagements in this world so numerous that 
she should have no time to die for many 
years to come. As she was more wealthy than 
wise, many of her relatives thought it better 
to submit to her interference in their affairs, 
than to leave her to seek among strangers a 
butt for her mania for management, and an 
heir for her property. The notion of a new 
niece to be fidgeted by her officiousness was 
very delightful ; and when, after a quarter of an 
hour passed in Mortimer-street in shaking her 
head over the long-forgotten demise of "my 
brother the kernel,'* while her eyes were busily 
employed in a survey of every article of furni- 
ture in the room, and her mind in forming in- 

E 2 



76 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

ferences respecting the pecuniary condition of 
their proprietess, she discovered that the new 
niece was quite in circumstances to be advised 
and patronized, and pushed here and prontd 
there, without the absolute ignominy of indigence, 
— she became quite affectionate. 

" And pray, my dear ma'am, how comes it 
that you have not waited upon your father's 
fashionable cousin in Portman-square ? — Quite 
a great man, Sir Colin, — quite a fashionable, my 
Lady Ogylvie ; — wax candles in the steward's 
room, and all sorts of profligacy." 

" I know nothing of the Ogylvies. I con- 
sidered it my duty, madam, in the first instance 
to pay my respects to the beloved sister of my 
late lamented father." 

" My dear Mrs. Benson, I'm sure you do me 
much honour," said Mrs. Mac, rolling about in 
a gratified manner on her chair, with her eyes 
peering at a pair of carved bamboo matchpots. 

" Those things are thought curious, I find, in 
this country," observed Mrs. Bentham in reply 
to her investigating looks. " Perhaps you will 
allow me to order them put into your carriage ? " 



OR, RELATIONS PROM INDIA. 77 

" Ma'am I'm sure you're very good ; — it would 
be quite a robbery. Thank you, thank you, 
my dear niece, — no need to put them in paper ; 
— with your leave I will take them in my mufF. 
I 'm sure I 'm quite — But as I was saying 
ma'am, Lady Ogylvie, although one of your 
fal-lal fine ladies, is a person made much of in 
the great world ; and it would be as well per- 
haps, considering the near connexion, not to say 
relationship, that you were at least on what may 
be called visiting terms in Portman-square." 

" I am aware of having so little to offer as a 
temptation, to any person not influenced by the 
same benevolent kindness as yourself," said 
Mrs. Henry with an air of proud humility, 
" that nothing would induce me to seek the ac- 
quaintance of a fine lady, such as you describe 
the wife of my father's cousin." 

" Oh ! pray, my dear ma'am, don't mention 
it ! — Inducement, indeed ! — Who was her lady- 
ship, I should like to know, before her marriage 
with Sir Colin, that she should presume to think 
disparagingly of any member of the Ogylvie 
family ? No, no ! my dear Mrs. Benson, — 



78 A MANCEUVKER OUTWITTED; 

blood is thicker than water; and when /take 
you with me to call on Sir Colin's fashionable 
wife, I should very much like to see her turn up 
her nose (though that, by the way, poor thing ! 
is a thing nature's done for her, — nose like an 
inverted comma !) — at any person whom /choose 
to bring forward as the daughter of my brother 
the kernel,*' 

" Oh ! my dear madam — under your pro- 
tection — " 

" Well then, the business may as well be set- 
tled at once. I'll call for you the day after 
to-morrow on my way to Portman-square ; I 
meet the Ogylvies at dinner to day at our cousin 
Lady Macrurie's, and will take an opportunity 
for the explanation. And now, ma'am, I fear I 
must be running away ; for I have seen a spot 
or two on the window, and heard a little 
spitting on the fire, which makes me appre- 
hend a rainy afternoon; and, thank God, even 
in the flighty age we live in, I am enough 
of a Christian to consider the poor dumb brutes 
committed to my mercy. Ma'am, I would not 
take my horses out in the rain to please the 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 79 

Emperor. Thank you, Mrs. Benson, thank 

you, — don't trouble yourself to ring again 

At the door, /warrant them — my servants know 
better than to keep me waiting. Mrs. Benson, 
good morning '/' 

"Thus far all succeeds to admiration," mused 
Mrs. Henry, as she stood before the fire and the 
looking-glass above, whose reflections satisfied 
the doubt she had risen to determine, whether 
her dress was likely to confirm the impressions 
she had been desirous of making on her aunt. 
" An introduction to the Ogylvies secured, 
I have little doubt that an acquaintance with 
the family of Cairngraeme" — 

"I beg pardon, ma'am,'* said the squeaking 
voice of Mrs. Mac Winnepeg, who had re- 
ascended the stairs and re-entered the half- 
open drawing-room door, " but I quite forgot 
to mention to you what I always consider 
it a suitable suggestion to make to my friends 
arriving from Indy, that you can't get those 
two little creatures you spoke of just now vac- 
cinated too soon. Done already in Calcutta? — 
Yes, ma'am, I don't doubt it. But recollect 
the difference between the operation performed 



80 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

in England by an English practitioner with 
the assistance of a healthy Enghsh subject, 
and"— 

"You are right, my dear madam, I had 
not thought of all these things; but be as- 
sured your friendly suggestions are not thrown 
away. Have you any practitioner immedi- 
ately under your patronage, whom you re- 
commend on such occasions ? — or do you think 
I may safely confide in a very excellent apothe- 
cary of the name of Green, whom I am in the 
habit of employing ? '* 

" I should advise you to confide in the very 
excellent apothecary of the name of Green," 
said Mrs. Mac Winnepeg sharply, as she once 
more commenced her descent of the narrow 
staircase. It struck her that there was an air 
of poor relationship about the altitude, both of 
the hall and footman, to render a prudent aunt 
scrupulous about recommending tradesmen, and 
becoming security for family expenses. 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 81 



CHAPTER TIL 



Tell those who brave it most 
They beg for more by spending. 

And, in their greatest cost. 
Seek nothing but commending. 

The Soul's Errand. Sylvester^. 

There was nothing, however, of poor rela- 
tionship, — nothing but what was flattering to 
the vanity of all parties, — in the aspect of the 
mansion to which Mi's. Henry Bentham was 
pompously escorted by Mrs. Mac on the follow- 
ing day. Sir Colin Ogylvie's residence in 
Portman-square, might have been pointed out 
to the admiration of a foreigner, as one of 
those temples of English luxury where the 
progress of effeminacy is daily storing up its 
superfluous treasures ; where the baubles of yes- 
terday are rendered obsolete by the trinkets of 

£ 5 



82 A MANOEUVRE R OUTWITTED 



J 



to-day; where the labours of life are super- 
seded by a waste of mechanical effort; where 
ease is made a toil, and enjoyment an ex- 
ercise; where the useful and ornamental arts 
are incessantly devoted to the task of raising 
trophies to the golden idleness of some very 
ordinary specimen of the dust of the earth. 

The lady from Ghaucapore, accustomed at 
best to the semi-barbarian magnificence of 
Indostan, was more struck than was commonly 
the case with Lady Ogylvie's visitors, b}' the 
hall of Portland stone far whiter than marble, 
the well carpeted vestibule, the winding stair- 
case, with its gilt balustrade and cable of crim- 
son silk ;— the doors of varnished mahogany, 
with handles of Mont Cenis crystal turning 
silently on their patent hinges,— the drawing- 
rooms hung with draperies of pale green 
damask and muslin, — the luxurious divans and 
ottomans of cashmere, — the fauteuils with gilt 
frames, — the stoves of resplendent steel, — the 
vases of Sevres, Dresden, and alabaster; — of 
vermeil from Paris, and malachite from St. 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 83 

Petersburgh; — the cabinets of porcelain, and 
tables of mosaic ; — the chests of lacquer, and 
candelabra of or-moulu. But she was al- 
most equally impressed by the loveliness of 
the idol enshrined amid all this gorgeous mag- 
nificence, and by the courtesy with which she 
welcomed Mrs. Mac Winnepeg's announce- 
ment of " Mrs. Benson, our new relative from 
Indy." Had she not, indeed, been a woman of 
some discernment, she might have been deceived 
into a notion that the blandishments so readily 
lavished upon her by Lady Ogylvie, — her expres- 
sions of delight at the unexpected discovery of so* 
interesting a relative, and declarations of anx- 
iety that the little Bensons should become the 
chosen playmates and associates of her own 
little Colin and Clara, — were, as they affected 
to be, tributes to her personal merits and at- 
tractions. But Mrs. Henry was herself too 
cunning a poacher not to be vigilantly on the 
look out for springes in the grass ; and had no 
difficulty in discovering that her fair and fashion- 
able ladyship was most suspiciously eager to 



84 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED J 

conciliate Mrs. Mac Winnepeg by this ex- 
uberant graciousness towards her protegee. 
She saw that Lady Ogylvie, in spite of 
her bright blue eyes, Hly- white hands, tiny 
feet, and silvery accents,— in spite of the 
mechlin and cambric and silk in which she 
was enfolded, — in spite of the Sevres and 
Dresden, — bronze and alabaster, — morocco and 
tabby, — exotics and trinkets, — with \\hich she 
was surrounded,-— was by no means above the 
meanness of paying court to a maundering old 
woman, who never opened her mouth but to 
find fault or give advice. 

The truth was, that Lady Ogylvie was one 
of those prodigal daughters of the earth who 
occupy their idleness with seeing every thing, 
and wanting every thing they see; and who 
regard the desire of acquisition as a sufficient 
demonstration of their right of possession. 
The beautiful and spoiled daughter of very 
silly parents, she had fancied that her conquest 
of a man of six thousand a year, would place 
six thousand a year at her disposal for the 
gratification of those luxurious whims and fan- 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 85' 

cies which she had been assured, as a girl, she 
should be able to realize as a married woman ; 
and, on discovering how exactly Sir Colin 
Ogylvie's income was appropriated to the main- 
tenance of his establishment, and how very 
small a portion of it remained applicable to the 
acquisition of new lace and old china, she felt 
and showed herself somewhat inclined to 

Pout upon her fortune and her love ! 
But, having scrupulously specified the amount 
of her pin-money, and allotted, on the birth of 
her two children, the additional sum he consi- 
dered adequate to their expenditure. Sir Co- 
lin, or Sir Colin's agent, thought he had 
done enough. Too busy with his clubs, his 
stud, his constituents, and his parliamentary 
duties, to give much heed to her proceedings, 
the fashionable husband gloried in seeing his 
wife so well dressed, and her boudoir so ele- 
gantly furnished, without inquiring whether the 
quarterly balance of revenue and expenditure 
were in favour of his lady or her creditors ; and 
Lady Ogylvie, who had already begun to disco- 
ver that to be in debt is to be in danger, and 



66 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

that the existing claims of Albemarle-street 
and Hanway-yard on her exchequer, forbad the 
addition of any more josses, mandarins or 
dragon incense pots, to her collection for some 
time to come, chose to submit to the degrada- 
tion of toadying a disagreeable old woman, in 
the view of cajoling herself into her last will 
and testament, rather than renounce her passion 
for the toys and gewgaws so much admired by 
her female visitors, so much lauded by the deal- 
ers in curiosities, — miscalled objects of virtii. 
She well knew that Mrs. MacWinnepeg was the 
strangest old woman in the world ; a hoarder of 
backs of letters, — stray pins, — strings of parcels, 
— packing cases, — and all the unaccountable 
treasures of penny wisdom. But she also knew 
that, if not "pound foolish," her penny- wise 
relative was pound generous; had presented 
little Clara, her godchild, with a bag of one 
hundred guineas on each of her succeedinj? 
birthdays ; inducing an expectation in the mind 
of little Clara's father and mother, that a large 
share, at least of her fifty thousand pounds, would 
follow in the same direction at her death ; and 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 87 

this expectation having once taken possession of 
Lady Ogylvie, she spared no sacrifice of pride 
or comfort to secure its realization. Heedless 
prodigality had made her mercenary ; and, by 
squandering her own money without measure or 
discretion, she had placed herself under the 
necessity of becoming a mean and craving cal- 
culator on the generosity of other people. 

" And so Sir Colin has been making a ninny 
of himself in the House?" said Mrs. Mac Win- 
nepeg, suddenly interrupting Lady Ogylvie*s 
redundant civilities to the cousin from India. 
" I see by the Morning Post, that his speech 
on the currency question was the most absurd 
exposure of ignorance and presumption ever 
heard within the walls of Parliament ; and the 

John Bull goes so far as to call him have vou 

heard my dear Lady Ogylvie, what ihe John 
Bull calls him ? *'— 

" It is not very important," replied her lady- 
ship, colouring to the very roots of her glossy 
ringlets. " The abuse of a party-paper proves 
nothing." 

" Why what should he know about the cur- 



88 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

rency question ? *' persisted Mrs. Mac. " Sir 
Golin is not a monied man, — has never lived 
among monied people, — has no notion of busi- 
ness ; — if he were to talk politics, even at his 
own dinner-table, nobody would listen to him ; 
and what can induce him to get on his legs for 
the pleasure of exposing himself before three or 
four hundred people, all wiser than himself, is 
more than I can take upon me to guess." 

" I have no doubt, my dear madam, that Sir 
Colin has very good reasons for what he does, 
however bad you may adjudge those for what 
he says. At all events. Lord Cairngraeme, for 
whose borough he sits, is perfectly satisfied." 

" I dare say he is ! — My Lord Cairngraeme 
is blockhead enough to fancy that the world is 
as fond of the' name of Ogylvie, and as proud 
of seeing it in print as himself; and provided 
the public journals make frequent mention of 
Sir Colin, if only to make game of him, our 
noble cousin fancies it a proof of his importance 
in the eyes of the public ! — I wish poor Sir 
Colin had a better adviser, for I really know no 
one who stands more in need of counsel." 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 89 

" You should favour him more frequently 
with your kind advice," said Lady Ogylvie, 
soothingly, although she was bursting with in- 
dignation, at finding herself so hectored before 
her new cousin. When will you come and dine 
with us Mrs. MacWinnepeg, and try to convert 
Ogylvie to your side of the question ? " — 

" When you can manage to eat your dinner 
at a rational hour. The last time I came here 
it was at three weeks' notice ; and with the plea- 
sant announcement on your card that 1 was to 
be kept starving till half past seven o'clock. —(/ 
remember, by the way, when it was thought a 
heinous thing in the Prince of Wales to post- 
pone his dinner hour so late as six fj But lucky 
indeed might I have thought myself if I could 
have got a morsel of dinner at half past seven ! 
At eight, if you'll believe me, my dear Mrs. 
Benson, only one out of a dozen guests had ar- 
rived; and when we sat down, at a quarter be- 
fore nine (a quarter before nine, ma'am !) the 
soup tasted as if it had been iced, — the turbot as 
if cooked in cold water ; and the ice and jellies 
were in a state of dissolution ! " 



-J: 



90 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

'' My friend Lady Sycamore is so very uncer- 
tain in her hours ! " pleaded Lady Ogylvie. 

" Then, my dear ma'am, let me beg you will 
either pay me the respect of not inviting me to 
meet her, or of sitting down to table at the invi- 
tation hour. I am not a Countess, like my 
Lady Sycamore, — nor a fine lady, like my Lady 
Ogylvie, — but I have seen a little good society in 
the course of my life ; and my notion of high- 
breeding is — ' Sit down to table as soon as one 
lady is arrived after the hour at which you invite 
your company ! ' T'kat was the late Lord Aber- 
corn's rule ; — a nobleman of nobler tone and 
manners than we are likely to see again in a 
hurry." 

" Well, my dear Mrs. Mac Winnepeg, if you 
will dine with us on Wednesday next, I pro- 
mise you to sit down to table at seven o'clock 
precisely ; provided I can prevail on our friend 
Mrs. Henry Bentham (our relative I should ra- 
ther say) to be the first lady arriving after that 
hour?" 

" With all my heart ! " cried the fussy Mrs. 
Mac, delighted to show her importance with 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 91 

persons of such fashion as the Ogylvies, to a per- 
son of such unimportance as her relation from 
India. " I will bring Mrs. Henry Benson with 
me. 

She did not think it necessary to wait for 
an affirmative of acceptance from an individual 
having so very narrow a staircase and a veil of 
imitation lace ; and the visit terminated with as 
superfluous an expenditure of congees and salu- 
tations, as a private audience between his ma- 
jesty the King of Bantam and the viceroy of 
one of his provinces. 



92 A mAnoeuvrer outwitted; 



CHAPTER IV. 



But when some one peculiar quality 
Doth so possess a man that it doth draw. 
All his effects, his spirits, and his powers 
In their confluctions, all to run one way. 
This may he truly said to be a humour. 

Ben Jonson. 

*' Thus far into the bowels of the land *' of 
promise, — thus far into the midst of her ances- 
tral tribe, did Mrs. Henry march without check 
or mischance. It was a very satisfactory cir- 
cumstance to her, when next Mrs. Gregory of 
Edmonton, made her appearance in Mortimer- 
street (with a carriage full of snub-nosed chil- 
dren on their way to the dentist's) to state that 
she was going to dine the following day in Port- 
man-square with her cousin Sir Colin Ogilvie ; 
and that she was just returned from an airing 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 93 

with her aunt Mrs. Mac Winnepeg ; the ple- 
beianism of whose name she contrived to slur 
into something resembling MacWyndham. The 
sister-in-law coloured with vexation, but said 
nothing ; — nothing, at least, till she arrived at 
Edmonton, and favoured poor Gregory with a 
furious lecture on the superfluous generosity of 
his proceedings towards his brother's widow and 
brother's children ; " since it now appeared that 
Mrs. Henry was related to all the lords and la- 
dies in the land, and could find plenty of friends 
when it suited her purpose to be doing well in 
the world. Pray why had she not consigned 
over little Dick, Tom, Bob, and Alfred, Miss 
Sophy, Miss Maria, and Charlotte, and Lucy, to 
this rich Mrs. Maquindane ; instead of burden- 
ing poor Henry Bentham's poor brother, who 
was already overwhelmed with poor little inno- 
cents of his own ? And what thanks had Gre- 
gory ever got, she should like to know, for all 
the trouble and expense he had been at with his 
sister-in-law ?" Mrs. Gregory would have readily 
made up her mind never to go near Mortimer- 
street again, but that being an inquisitive and 



94 A MANGEUVRER OUTWITTED ; 

gossipping woman she was already curious to 
know how the dinners of the fashionable Lady 
Ogylvie were served, and how her sister-in-law 
got on among so many fine people. 

Curiosity, indeed, is the vice of most idle 
people, whether fashionable or unfashionable. 
Even Lord and Lady Cairngraeme, on learning 
from Lady Ogylvie that their eccentric kins- 
woman Mrs. Mac Winnepeg had discovered a 
new branch of the Ogylvie family in the shape 
of a handsome cousin from India, expressed 
themselves anxious for a sight of this unexpected 
pretendant to a share of tlie old lady's pro- 
perty ; and the Earl and Countess were ac- 
cordingly, as Mrs. Henry earnestly desired they 
might bcj among the expected guests at the 
approaching dinner party. Lady Ogylvie, in- 
deed, hung too closely upon them as her pass- 
port into the great world, to disregard any wish 
of theirs within her means of gratification. 

The Earl of Cairngraeme, a very narrow 
shouldered, narrow minded man, whose physical 
and moral qualifications were cast in the meanest 
mould of mortal nature, had been occupied for 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA, 95 

sixty-five years with the effort of striving to re- 
flect on himself the lustre of his earldom, and to 
dignify his earldom with the greatness of his per- 
sonal importance. In his own subservient circle, 
he was apt to refer to the houses of Hapsburg 
and Guelph as mere mushrooms of the middle 
ages, and to speak of majesty itself in a tone of 
condescension and patronage; regarding the 
throne and constitution of the country as safe, 
so long as the clan of Ogylvie kept its place, 
maintained its dignity, and extended its connec- 
tions. Although a fierce aristocrat, he was not 
by any means a blind advocate of aristocratiza- 
tion; had no objection to the commercial con- 
signment of one member of his tribe to India, 
or the union of another with a Mr. Jonathan 
MacWinnepeg, byway of refreshing and re-invi- 
gorating those sources of importance with which 
the Ogylvies were somewhat scantily furnished. 
Provided they proved victorious in the end, it 
was indifferent to Lord Cairngraeme that his 
kinsmen stooped to conquer. He exacted only 
that each should severally display some tri- 
umphant pretension to public respect ; — either 



96 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED J 

Station, wealth, beauty, or talent. What his 
lordship chiefly hated, was the notion of a cypher 
in the family ; and no sooner did he learn the 
existence of a new Ogylvie, however collateral, 
than he was all eagerness to ascertain whether 
he, she, or it, were calculated in anyway to aug- 
ment the family consequence ; and if not, to 
find out some method by which they could be 
redeemed from insignificance, and set to work in 
the Ogylvie factory. 

It was therefore a real comfort to his feelings 
on entering his cousin Sir Colin's drawing-room, 
to ascertain that the protegee of Mrs. Mac (who 
although vulgar and obscure, possessed due im- 
portance in his eyes as the unshackled pro- 
prietress of fifty thousand pounds) was a per- 
fectly presentable person ; handsome, agreeable, 
ladylike, and willing to be patronized. He saw 
too, with a single glance that she considered him 
a very great man ; which was a tolerable argu- 
ment towards his considering her a very sensible 
woman. 

" I am happy to perceive," said he, aside to 
his Countess, " that this scion of the family is a 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 97 

person it will be no degradation to us to bring 
forward. You must find an opportunity of an- 
nouncing to her that we have no objection to 
make her acquaintance." And in exact con- 
formity with these instructions (for the lady was 
a mere shadow or echo of the lord) Lady 
Cairngraeme did actually take occasion to in- 
form Mrs. Henry that, in consideration of her 
having a few drops of Ogylvie blood in her veins, 
it was the intention of their high mightinesses to 
raise her from the dust by their notice and pro- 
tection. 

It is seldom, indeed, that an union, whether in 
noble, gentle, or simple life, is so equally assorted 
as that which linked the tumid Earl to the empty 
Countess of Cairngraeme. Her ladyship was a 
woman of the most frigid equanimity of mind and 
temperament ; — walked slow, — talked slow; — her 
actions were calm and deliberate, — her words 
measured and low-voiced. The world, mistaking 
the absence of human passion for the wisdom of 
self-government, pronounced her to be a most 
amiable woman ; and as her apathetic indiffer- 
ence toward men and things, secured her from 

VOL. III. F 



98 A MAN(EUVRER OUTWITTED; 

overt demonstrations of any kind, she made no 
enemies, provoked no misrepresentation, and 
glided through Hfe with as much ease and dig- 
nity as a frigate shding from the stocks. There 
was not a single prominent angle or feature 
on which cavillers could hang an objection : — 
her coldness was accounted moderation, her si- 
lence humility. 

There exists, indeed, a certain sect of persons 
in society, for whom, in default of higher qua- 
lities, regularity replaces a multitude of virtues. 
The Cairngraemes, for instance, were a couple 
personally incapacitated to contribute either to 
the advantage or gratification of their fellow 
creatures. But it was the system of their house 
to execute all the minor duties of life with re- 
ligious punctuality; to take their annual de- 
parture from Cairngraeme House on the same 
day of the same month; and to re-commence their 
pilgrimage from Hill-street back to Scotland 
with the same exactness. Let parliament, Swing, 
or cholera, rule the hour and misgovern the 
times, their moments were regulated by the same 
patent chronometer, and their movements ad- 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 99 

justed by the same calendar by which they had 
been measured for thirty years past. The pay- 
ment of their bills, the distribution of their 
amusements, the admeasurement of their devo- 
tions, all was done and executed with the same 
sober and systematical decorum ; and Lord and 
Lady Cairngraeme were accordingly pro- 
nounced to be the most excellent people in the 
world. They were at least the most harmless ; 
— and if incapable of rising to the nobler virtues 
of human nature, did as little mischief in their 
generation as the two leopards rampant that 
guarded their armorial escutcheon. 

Mrs. Bentham had thus three several chan- 
nels opened to her ambition, either of which 
would have singly answered her utmost aspira- 
tions. She perceived that the favour of Mrs. 
MacWinnepeg might lead to fortune ; the notice 
of Sir Colin and Lady Ogylvie to fashion ; the 
patronage of Lord and Lady Cairngraeme to 
distinction. But the worldliness of the fair 
Oriental was of no common order. With her, 
an object to be compassed was a source of real 

F 2 



100 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED ; 

enjoyment; and the extent and variety of ma- 
noeuvres promised by her plan of uniting in a 
single point her designs upon her three relatives, 
caused her very heart to thrill with anticipation. 
She knew that Mrs. Mac was as techy as a 
Turk ; Lady Ogj^lvie, jealous of the partialities 
of her wealthy kinswoman as of those of a 
lover ; and Lord Cairngrseme, from the summit 
of his high Olympus, sovereignly tenacious of 
the unlimited devotion of his worshippers. A 
less enterprising spirit might perhaps have 
shrunk from the task of propitiating even one 
of these three humoursome, wayward divinities. 
But Mrs. Bentham, in the fulness of her joy, 
could not be sufficiently thankful for such an 
opportunity of plotting, caballing, cajoling, 
smiling, smoothing, and deluding. The quarry 
to be hunted down was almost a secondary con- 
sideration to so staunch a sportsman; but still 
the prospect of achieving independence, — of 
visiting Mrs. Gregory in a showy equipage of 
her own, and oppressing her with details of the 
fashionable world, upon which she had managed 
to engraft herself, — were not without their attrac- 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 101 

tion. Like a prudent general, meanwhile, she 
resolved to make her attack on the two extremi- 
ties of the line (Mrs. Mac and the Earl), no- 
thing doubting but that the centre (the Ogyl- 
vies) who were busily employed in paying their 
court to both, would surrender at discretion. 

Now between the Thane of Cairngraeme and 
Mrs. Mac there existed a natural antipathy. 
It required all the force of his Ogylvian predi- 
lections, and sense of the duty of keeping on 
good terms with any member of his family en- 
joying the respectability of two thousand per an- 
num, to overcome his Lordship's horror of her 
undauntable audacity — her loud volubility — her 
red face — her rotund outline. The Earl him- 
self, — tall, spare, sallow, — drony in his enun- 
ciation, and measured in his movements, — 
held as flagrant enormities the moral and 
physical activity of Jonathan Mac Winnepeg's 
widow. It was amazing to Lord Cairngraeme 
how any person, not an Ogylvie, could endure 
either the sight or sound of her ; while Mrs. 
Mac, in her conferences with her familiars (and 
the distinction was neither rare nor difficult of 



102 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

attainment), was apt to declare, that had not 
that prig of a body Lord Cairngraeme been an 
Earl, he would have found it difficult to earn a 
meal by his wits, or a friend to share it with by 
his virtues. The Countess, moreover, was 
scarcely admitted by the old lady to the distinc- 
tions of a sentient entity. 

Hitherto the two cousins had found a com- 
mon ear into which to pour the secret of their 
mutual contempt, gracing the fair head of Lady 
Ogylvie. Sir Colin, indeed, was too statesman- 
like to lay himself open to the charge of being 
an accessory to the fact, by even listening to 
their mutual abuse; but his wife had fanned 
the flame by incessantly complaining to 
Mrs. Mac of the Earl's stifFnecked prejudices 
and shallow egotism ; and to the Earl, of Mrs. 
Mac's vulgar virulence of tongue, and un- 
reasonable prejudices against himself and the 
Countess. But the new General commenced an 
entirely new system of tactics: — on her very 
first visit to the Cairngraemes, she took occasion 
to hint the reverence with which her aunt had 
inspired her for the head of the house of Ogylvie, 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 103 

as the most distinguished subject in the realm ; — 
and on the following day, walked in her most 
submissive-looking gowij^ and bonnet to Gower- 
street, to assure Mrs. Mac that nothing but the 
strong family affection and respect professed 
towards herself by Lord and Lady C. — had 
induced her to profit by their overtures of ac- 
quaintance. 

'' Lord Cairngraeme was saying to me, my 
dear madam, the other day, at that dinner to 
which you were so good as to take me in 
Portman-square, that there was not a person 
in the metropolis, — in the very kingdom, — 
whose opinion he preferred to your own on 
any point not jiurely professional. Politics for 
instance ! — Lord Cairngraeme declares that if 
there were only half a dozen heads like yours 
in the House of Lords — '* 

" Ay ay ! — Cairngraeme knows well enough 
that is no discovery of his ! His lordship is as 
well aware as I am, that Charles Fox, Whit- 
bread, and Ponsonby, and half a dozen other 
eminent men of that day, used always to say to 
my poor dear Mr. Mac Winnepeg, * Mac, my 



104 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED ; 

fine fellow, ' they used to say, * Why don't you 
get that wife of yours into Parliament? By 
Jove, she has more jaw and more judgment than 
all of us put together !' " 

" He certainly hinted that his opinion on the 
subject was backed by those of several very dis- 
tinguished individuals : — and Lady Cairngraeme 
immediately observed — " 

'* Pho ! don't tell me what that poor parrot 
of a creature observed ; — a woman as devoid of 
mind and energy as a leather doll !" — 

" That^ I conclude, is the reason of her lady- 
ship's looking up to your activity of mind with 
so much veneration." 

" Poor thing ! I believe after all she is an 
inoffensive well-meaning fool." 

" She has at least the sense to be conscious of 
her deficiency, and to keep in the background ; 
and it is really lamentable to observe how her 

weakness is practised upon by but I beg your 

pardon, — I forgot I was speaking to one of the 
family." 

" Well, my dear ma'am — and if you are 
speaking to one of the family — you don't sup- 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 105 

pose that I am sufficiently interested in them or 
their proceedings, to make it dangerous for a 
daughter of my brother the kernel to speak her 
mind concerning them?— MasterBenson, my love, 
come off that rug ; you wear away all the fringe 
by fidgeting the corner in with your foot. — 
Pray, ma'am, speak out." — 

" I was indiscreet to allude to the subject ; 
but you, who are so observant and so penetrating, 
cannot fail to have noticed that Lady Ogylvie 
(a very sweet creature she is, — and I should be 
vexed to say a word against her) makes a com- 
plete prey of poor dear Lady Cairngraeme, by 
the influence of her barefaced flatteries to the 
Earl." 

" Umph !— I never perceived any remarkable 
civilities on the part of my cousins in Portman- 
square towards that man and woman in buck- 
ram."' 

" I dare say not, my dearest madam — (Henry, 
my darling, did you not hear Mrs. Mac Winne- 
peg speak to you? — Go and sit on that little 
stool, and touch nothing while you are in the 
room.)— Lady Ogylvie is too much in awe of 

F 5 



106 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED ; 

your discernment to fasten herself as she does 
on Lady Cairngragme in your presence. But 
to my certain knowledge, half a dozen notes pass 
every morning between Portman-square and 
Hill-street ; and by persuading the Earl that 
she and Sir Colin are completely at his beck, 
she manages to hold both Lord and Lady Cairn- 
graeme in leading strings. His lordship fancies 
the Ogylvies do a great deal in upholding the 
family consequence in the eye of the world ; and 
consequently his interest with the administration, 

— his church preferments, his opera box, his 

May I venture to inquire, my dear madam, 
whether you did not yourself solicit, and without 
success, from Lord Cairngraeme last year, a pre- 
sentation to — " 

" The Wimpole Charity for decayed School- 
masters ? — I did, ma'am, I did ; but his lordship 
my kinsman's interest was already engaged/' 

"Not already — but readily; for Sir Colin 
Ogylvie no sooner discovered that you had a 
protege among the candidates, than he secured 
Lord Cairngraem^'s interest for his butler's 
brother." 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 107 

" I don't believe a word of it !'* — cried Mrs. 
Mac Winnepeg, inflating into the shape of one 
of Sadler's balloons ; " Lady Ogylvie knew very 
well that the poor man for whom I was interest- 
ing myself, had been private tutor to the late 
Mr. Mac Winnepeg, and that I was moving hea- 
ven and earth to bring him in." 

" The successful pretendant, if you remember, 
was named David Dunstan," said Mrs. Henry 
mildly, " and you must surely have heard Sir Co- 
lin call the maitre d'hotel at Portman- square, by 
the same name ? — However, it is only very natural 
that Sir Colin should exert himself to confeK 
some little obligation on his domestics ; for when 
people go on year after year promising to pay, — 
instead of paying their servants' wages, — they — " 

"I don't believe a word of it !" — interrupted 
Mrs. Mac Winnepeg, scorning the enjoyment of 
a bit of domestic scandal which she had not her- 
self ferreted out. 

" Surely, my dearest madam, you must have 
observed the flippant manner in which our lovely 
friend is addressed by that very fine lady of a 
lady's maid of hers ; — that individual whose cap 



108 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

you pointed out to me as trimmed with rich 
Mechlin lace ? — For my part, I am so little 
versed in such matters, that I fancied the crea- 
ture had made herself smart with some of Ur- 
ling's trumpery ; but your quick eye soon dis- 
cerned the difference. We all know, that when 
ladies are unable to acquit themselves of their 
just obligations to their servants, they are com- 
pelled to keep the peace by the occasional sacri- 
fice of a piece of finery, such as they must be 
well aware — " 

" I don't believe a word of it !" again ejacu- 
lated Mrs. Mac, — cutting short the moralities of 
the case, for which she cared not a straw in any 
one's mouth but her own. 

" And then that impertinent nurse, who pre- 
sumed to laugh in your face, the other day, 
when you suggested the Canadian liniment for 
strengthening little Colin Ogylvie's distorted 
spine ! " — 

" And so she did ! " — cried Mrs. Mac, in the 
earnest accent of Kean's Othello. 

" The fact is, my dear madam, I should be 
the last person to make a remark on the conduct 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 109 

and character of any person bearing the name 
of my late father, but that I consider it 
a derogation to the family that the Ogylvies 
and their embarrassed circumstances should af- 
ford an universal topic for animadversion ; while 
Lord Cairngraeme, by his excessive partiality, is 
supposed to countenance their proceedings. I 
own it hurts my feelings to hear the Ogylvies 
spoken of with disrespect in every shop I enter; 
and spoken to by their domestics in a tone so 
different from that employed towards yourself 
by that excellent creature Larkins and your maid 
Pumpkinson. I must admit, however, that 
they are servants not to be met with every day 
in times like these." 

" And who made them what vou see them, 
I should like to know ? " — cried Mrs. Mac, her 
countenance relaxing at this allusion to her fa- 
vourite theme. " I have no objection to tell 
you, ma'am, what I have told to many others, 
that Larkins came to me a niw red- headed cow- 
boy ; and that the first thing the late Mr. Mac 
Winnepeg did when he entered our establish- 
ment, was to knock him down for dipping his 



110 A MANOEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

dirty fingers into the silver cream ewer to catch 
a fly. From a fustian jacket the creature grew 
into a footboy's coatee ; till, at length, ma'am, 
his jacket was prolonged into a tail coat. But 
as I often observe to Larkins to this very day, 
what would have been the use of a tail coat, if 
/ had not at the same time taught him to clean 
plate, deliver a message, and stand behind the 
carriage ? — The truth is, I saw the making of a 
good servant in Jack Larkins, and a good sei'- 
vant I determined to make him, or know why. 
For, as the late Commander-in-chief used to say 
to the late Mr. Mac Winnepeg, ' Mac, my 
fine fellow,' his Royal Highness used to say, 
' why don't you get that wife of yours into the 
service ? — Faith, she would do more for us as a 
drill-serjeant than it would be in my power to 
repay.' No — no ! my dear niece, Larkins may 
be a tolerable butler now, and I don't deny it, 
but he may thank me for all he knows ; and if 
I did help him to set up his son in a smart shop 
in Regent-street last year, God knows it was 
not that I felt I had any obligation to him for 
his services." 



on, RELATIOI^S i'ROM INDIA. Ill 

" It will be a long time I fear," sighed Mrs. 
Henry, " before the poor Ogylvies are enabled 
to reward an old servant of theirs with such dis- 
tinguished liberality; which is the reason, 1 
suppose, they are so rapacious of the patronage 
of Lord Cairngraeme. But I must now wish 
you good morning; I have a long walk before 
me ; — and " 

** No — no ! — ma'am, I can do myself the 
pleasure of setting you down without any par- 
ticular inconvenience." 

" By no means : I must guard against the 
acquirement of habits of luxury for 7ny children. 
Little Henry must learn to walk, or he will 
never deserve to ride. Eh ! Henry ? — was not 
that the lesson Mrs. Mac Winnepeg was so 
kind as to teach you the other day when you 
complained of being tired ? — But since you are 
so very kind, my dear madam, as to offer me 
your services, if you happen to go near 
Grafton House, will you procure me three 
skeins of lilac sewing silk ? So much imposi- 
tion is going on at the fashionable shops at 
our end of the town, that I really seldom trust 



112 A MANGEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

myself to enter them. Will you pardon my 
troubling you with this sixpenny commission?" 
" Guineas are made up of sixpences, as poor 
Richard says," was Mrs. Mac Winnepeg's 
reply; coaxed back into good humour by the 
prospect of being busy and useful at no expense 
to herself or trouble to her horses ; and she 
hastened to Flint's on her thrifty errand, while 
Mrs. Henry made her way home slyly in a 
hackney coach, to be in time for Lady Ogylvie, 
who had promised to call and take her to 
Howell and James's. She had no fear of be- 
traying her duplicity by a chance encounter 
with Mrs. Mac Winnepeg in any such quarter. 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 113 



CHAPTER V. 



O ye douce folk, who live by rule. 
Grave, tideless-blooded, calm and cool. 
Your hearts are just a standing pool. 

Your lives, a dyke. Burns. 

A MAN encased in the cold and unapproach- 
able self-conceit which characterised the Earl 
of Cairngrseme, is predestined to become a 
dupe. The adulation of mankind appearing 
no more than his just due, it never for a 
moment occurred to his lordship to mistrust 
the devoted homage with which his fair re- 
lation from India sat listening to hear his 
nothings monstered ; or the lady-of-the-bed- 
chamber air of deference with which she watched 
the solemn movements of his stately countess. 
He saw in her only a woman of high principles 
and low fortunes, for whom it was his duty to 



114 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED ; 

seek a suitable establishment; and was per- 
suaded that a widow possessed of five-and- thirty 
years, and only one thousand per annum, ought 
to rank as endowed with an income of three 
thousand pounds and an incumbrance of only 
five-and-twenty years, in consideration of being 
by the grace of God an Ogylvie and his lordship's 
kinswoman. It w^as the first project that had 
entered his leaden head for some time; and Lord 
Cairngrseme was disturbed in his rest for several 
consecutive nights, by the task of turning and 
returnino; in his mind from whom amonof all his 
friends and acquaintances, the tribe of Ogylvie 
would derive most aggrandizement, by means of 
an alliance with the daughter of the late dis- 
tinguished Colonel Ogylvie of Futtygherry. 

He was not hopeless (during the excite- 
ment of the first four-and-twenty hours of de- 
liberation) of beholding the turban and bird of 
paradise feather exchanged for a coronet. He 
was acquainted widi several gouty old lords, to 
either of whom the handsome widow would 
form an invaluable wife ; and the first morning 
visit he paid in Portman- square after the con- 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 113 

ception of his plan, his lordship actually twisted 
his grim features into an expression more nearly 
resembling waggery than Lady Ogylvie had con- 
ceived to be within their reach, in confiding to her 
the glorious campaign he had chalked out for the 
left wing of the family. Mrs. Henry herself would 
have been scarcely more amazed to learn that the 
Magog Earl, so great in her conceit and his own, 
was bent on marrying her to a lord, than was the 
dainty lady-proprietess of the labyrinth of 
Sevres-tables and buhl cabinets, on whom he 
had fixed for his confidante ! —But although 
startled. Lady Ogylvie was by no means so in- 
clined to oppose the elevation of a woman whom 
she disliked and despised, as might have been 
inferred from the heartless egotism of her dis- 
position. She was too eager to get Mrs. Henry 
out of her way, to care much whether so desir- 
able a measure were effected by a decided rise 
or decided fall. Ever since her unexpected 
debut on the London boards, Mrs. Mac Win- 
nepeg had been so cunningly cruel in inflicting 
her on all occasions upon Lady Ogylvie when 



116 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

she was out of humour, as " my niece from 
Indy," by way of holding out a menace of dis^ 
inheritance to little Clara, that her ladyship 
was no less eager than Lord Cairngraeme to 
have her so advantageously settled in life as 
to leave no pretext for pathos touching, " my 
poor brother the kernel's widowed daughter 
who is so slenderly provided for ! " After 
the first few moments of irritation at the no- 
tion of seeing the poor relation in Morti- 
mer-street obtain precedency over herself, 
self-interest suggested to Lady O. that she 
might be a considerable gainer by the loss. 
Moreover, although by nature almost as artful 
as Mrs. Bentham herself, her genius for cabal 
had not been half so much cultivated by colli- 
sion with the harsh necessities of life. Her 
mercenary views were generated only by the 
wantonness of prodigality, — while those of the 
widow arose from the exigencies of a narrow 
income; and while the daughter of the Com- 
mandant of Futtygherry had no single object or 
diversion in life to contend with the one grand 
design of obtaining Mrs. Mac Winnepeg's for- 



OR, R^ATIONS FROM INDIA. 1 IT 

tunes and Lord Cairngraeme's favour, the fine 
lady of Portman-square had her balls, parties, 
and dinner-parties — her rides in the Park, her 
flirtations, her new capote and old point to 
divide her attention. 

" And pray, my dear lord, may I inquire 
to what happy man you have allotted the hand 
of our charming relative?" she inquired of the 
Earl, in the most fustian phrase she could com- 
mand. " Before you say a word more on the 
subject, however, I venture to pronounce her a 
very fortunate woman ; for I am onlj^ too well 
aware of the severity of principle and shrewd- 
ness of foresight which characterise your no- 
tions respecting the eligibilities of the marriage 
state.'*' 

" Why — a — yes — a — It is not every man on 
whom I could wish to confer the privilege of 
matching into the Ogylvie family ; and really 
Mrs. Bentham is so estimable a woman, and — 
a — by candlelight a so — very handsome a woman, 
that I shall think my friend Lord Dotterel a 
lucky man, should he succeed in gaining her 
affections." 



118 A MAN(EUVRER OUTWITTED; 

" Dotterel ?'' exclaimed the lady, startled into 
her natural train of feeling. " That tiresome 
old creature, who talks of nothing but * my 
seat in Sussex ' — and has devoted his last half- 
century to improving the breed of his game 
and venison, — the construction of his forcing- 
houses and fish-ponds, — his ovens and hot 
plates ; v^^ho enters the House once a year to 
give his vote in favour of a Brighton railroad, to 
secure him a live turbot, or a — " 

" / allude to Lord Dotterel of Dotterel Park, 
whom your ladyship may or must have met at 
my dinner-table," said Lord Cairngraeme drily. 
" Of his lordship's predilection for the superio- 
rity of his own, I know nothing; conceiving 
that, from the moment I distinguish an indivi- 
dual with my notice, it is no longer time to 
dwell on any deteriorating peculiarities of his 
character." 

" A most excellent choice ! " cried Lady 
Ogylvie, for a moment subdued by the dignity 
of her lordly kinsman's reproof " Doubtless 
Mrs. Bentham, who in India had an opportu- 
nity of presiding over a large establishment, will 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 119 

be the very person to do justice to his^ and to 
contribute to the comfort of his declinins: years." 

" Declining years ? — Dear madam, you must 
be dreaming!" exclaimed Lord Cairngraeme, 
trying to catch a glimpse of his own puckered 
Denner-like visage in one of the splendid mir- 
rors ornamenting the apartment. " Dotterel 
is, comparatively speaking, a young man. He 
came to his title, I remember, at the time of the 
Duke of York's expedition, and was then a 
mere boy ; not more than three or four and 
thirty. At this very time, Dotterel cannot be 
more than sixty-eight, or so. Declining years ! 
^ — my dear Lady Ogylvie, let me entreat that 
you will not talk in that heedless way, on the 
subject, before Mrs. Bentham. It is impossible 
to say what absurd prejudice you might excite 
in her mind !" 

" 1 dare say I have mistaken Lord Dotterel 
for some other person," cried Lady Ogylvie, 
anxious to escape a second reprimand, and en- 
chanted to find at how dear a rate Mrs. Bent- 
ham would be made to purchase her accession 



120 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

to the peerage. " And pray when will the 
match take place ?" — 

"Take place ? " — ejaculated Lord Cairngraeme, 
aghast at the undignified vivacity of Lady Ogyl- 
vie's conclusions. " Is it to be supposed that 
the marriage of a man of my friend Dotterel's 
importance can be hurried on like the match of 
some low-bred country squire ? — No ! my dear 
Lady Ogylvie, a moment's consideration will 
suffice to prove to you that time is required for 
the adjustment of so weighty an affair ; and be- 
sides, to own the truth, the project at present 
is exclusively of my own devising, and I have 
not so much as suggested it to the two persons 
principally concerned." 

" Indeed ! " said Lady Ogylvie, not daring to 
show how much she was amused at the more 
than Escurial-like pomposity of the head of the 
family ; " I ought to be infinitely grateful for 
the confidence you have evinced in my discre- 
tion, by entrusting me with the secret." 

" I am now on my way to break the ice to 
my friend Mrs. Henry. But I have no reason to 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 121 

believe she will show herself implacable to my 
friend, or evince an unbecoming want of de- 
ference to any counsel of mine." — 

Meanwhile Mrs. Bentham, with all her love 
of lords and lordliness, all her submission to 
the ukases of the Hill-street autocrat, all her 
eagerness to get free from the vile trammels 
of her vidual insignificance, was not the more 
passive in the hands of her noble kinsman 
from offering no overt opposition to his plans. 
She had cogent reasons of her own for seek- 
ing fortune elsewhere. From the period of 
her familiar admission into the family, she 
had been in the habit of meeting, at the tables 
of Lord Cairngraeme and Sir Colin Ogylvie, 
a certain Sir Richard Bayntun ; a man of 
a certain age, with a certain standing in society, 
and a certain air of fashion, only too well cal- 
culated to dazzle the imagination of a woman 
whose days had melted away under a Pun- 
kah. Thanks to a coat of George the Fourthian 
fit and cut,— to a wig of the most artful artifi- 
ciality, — and an extensive commerce with the 
Bond-street Civet cat, — it required a more dis- 

VOL. III. G 



122 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED 



J 



cerning eye than the widow's, to fix a date to 
this very choice specimen of mature dandyism ; 
and as he was secure from the inquisition of the 
Baronetage, (a mere knight of the Dragon and 
the Sun, or some other barbaric order acquired 
while touring among Sultans and Pachas in 
some part of the eighteenth century,) not a soul 
in London was able to say more of Sir Richard 
than that he was a very good-looking and 
vounff-iookino; man. No one was better ac- 
cepted in society ; no one lived on better terms 
with all the best houses at the West-end ; and 
no one was gifted with such imperturbable good 
humour — such a ready flow of spirits: — no one 
knew every thing about every body so well as 
Sir Richard Bayntun ; and no one, either 
through calculation or principle, said so little 
that was unsatisfactory of foe or friend. As it 
was his cue to carve out for himself an agreeable 
existence, and to multiply rather than select his 
dining and country- visiting houses, he was wise 
enough to eschew the reputation of a hel esprit^ 
which necessitates so many spiteful sayings and 
perilous doings; and to rest contented with the 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 123 

minor renown of being au courant du jour — an 
accurate echo of fashionable gossip, — not to be 
put out of spirits by an encounter with a dull 
party, or out of humour by a bad dinner. A 
mere wit is by no means a person to be relied 
on for the enlivenment of a circle; while a 
man like Bayntun, possessed only of good ani- 
mal courage, and a cheerful temperament, is an 
acceptable companion to all the world. 

To two dull persons like the Cairngraemes, 
such a friend was invaluable. His voluble ani- 
mation was a screen to their cold taciturnity ; 
his popular currency supplied the vacuum cre- 
ated by their exclusivism, — an exclusivism not 
the less rigid from being wholly distinct from 
that of fashion. He was always ready to eat 
their dinners asid drink their claret when good, 
and to praise them when bad ; — to set on foot 
inquiries "on points where they desired infor- 
mation, — to appear interested in the dull vicis- 
situdes of their monotonous existence, — to talk 
politics with the favourite cousin Sir Colin, — • 
and, in process of time, to talk sentiment with 
the favourite cousin Mrs. Bentham. 

G 2 



124 A MANGEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

The accession of this last-named personage 
to the familiar circle of the Cairngraemes, 
was in fact a considerable relief to a person so 
much in the habit of gracing their dinner-table 
as Sir Richard Bayntun. Lady Ogylvie was 
herself too young, fair, and fashionable, to be 
imposed upon by his airs of youth and fashion. 
Mrs. Mac Winnepeg he regarded as a sort of 
wild Indian squaw, brandishing her tomahawk 
against all civilized individuals without regard to 
the decencies of society ; but when the handsome 
woman, in the turban and bird of paradise fea- ^ 
ther,— urbane, chatty, and tolerably well bred, — 
made her appearance in the Ogylvie menagerie, 
he certainly found the task of helping the Coun- 
tess's turbot or salmon far less tiresome than 
before. To have met her at the Gregorian villa 
at Edmonton, or indeed in almost any other 
mansion of the metropolis, might have consi- 
derably altered his view of her attractions. But 
Lord Cairngraeme's line of policy having sug- 
gested that any person presented by himself to 
the world, as a member of his own family, — of 
tJie family, — the mighty tribe of Ogylvie, — must 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 125 

be put forward under flying colours, — Mrs. 
Bentham was introduced in the Hill - street 
coterie as " my amiable relative from India," 
and descanted upon , during her absence, as 
" a very charming creature, daughter of the 
late distinguished Colonel Ogylvie of Futty- 
gherry, and widow of the late eminent Judge 
Bentham of Ghaucapore.'* As there was 
no one to contradict the distinction or emi- 
nence of either party by a statement of their 
personal and official insignificancy, Mrs. Ben- 
tham soon passed current as a rich widow of 
high connexions. Her diamond ear-rings, and 
set of turquoises, said wonders in her favour. 

Such was the man in whom Lord Dotterel 
was destined to find a rival ; such the woman 
in whom Sir Richard Bayntun was likely to find 
a lady of the Dragon and the Sun. 



126 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 



CHAPTER VI. 



On peut etre plus fin qu*un autre : mais pas que tous 
les autres. Rochefoucault. 

" I can't think, my dear ma'am," cried Mrs. 
Mac Winnepeg to Mrs. Bentham, whom she 
thought proper to drag one morning from Mor- 
timer-street to Blackwall, under pretence of 
an airing, but in reality to look for bargains of 
shaddocks, guava-jelly, and averdivats — "I 
really can't possibly imagine what those foolish 
people, the Cairngraemes,mean by inviting you, — 
day after day and week after week, — to meet that 
pudding-headed and pudding-shaped old num- 
skull. Lord Dotterel ; — a man who has been living 
with his housekeeper till he is scarcely fit for the 
society of females of refinement ! I take it 
vastly ill of Lady Ogylvie that she took the 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 12*7 

liberty of placing him next me at dinner the 
Other day." 

" I am surprised she should have done so, 
knowing your antipathy to him. But poor 
Lady O. has no leisure to think of any thing 
but her own rings and ringlets." 

" If you'll believe me, ma'am, the man ac- 
tually had his plate changed seventeen times ; 
and made up the sauce for his turbot of as many 
ingredients as an apothecary's apprentice mixing 
a fever draught. I protest he made me sick at 
heart." 

"Lord Dotterel seems a favourite with the 
Cairngrasmes ? " 

"Of course; his head is as empty, and his 
stomach as craving as their own. They sit to- 
gether, talking of bills of fare and new dishes, 
with their mouths watering just like so many 
hounds round the boiler in a kennel kitchen. 
Idleness, ma'am, is the parent of gluttony, — 
which brutalizes mind and body, and ruins an 
estate. I would undertake to educate a China 
pig, to make just as useful and intellectual a 
member of society, as my Lord Dotterel. A 



128 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED ; 

pretty specimen of a legislator ! — It is enough to 
turn one Radical to see the creature at feed ; — 
his eyes glistening, and his lips quivering !" 

" Why dear, dear madam, pray take pity 
on me, if not on him ! — Remember I shall pro- 
bably meet him at dinner to-day; and you can- 
not expect me to look at him, and keep my 
countenance, after listening to your humourous 
sketch." 

" Your countenance ? — Pm much mistaken, 
if my Lord Cairngraeme thinks you will be able 
to keep your heart. It strikes me that he has 
taken it into his head to make a match between 
you." 

" Impossible ! In my situation,— two chil- 
dren scantily provided for, — a victim to a hot 
climate ! No, my dear Mrs. Mac Winnepeg, 
you must be aware that such a thing is wholly 
out of the question." 

" I tell you I am sure of it. And when they 
have prevailed upon the silly old goose to be of 
opinion that a wife would keep him a better 
table than a housekeeper, he will make his pro- 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 129 

ppsals, like a fool as he is ; and you will accept 
them—" 

" Like a fool as I am ? — At least, not without 
referring myself to your advice.*' 

" Oh, ma'am ! — my advice is of very little va- 
lue. I say, live respectably on a respectable 
competence, without being either a finesser or a 
dupe. But ask Lady Ogylvie, who is a fine lady, 
— ask Lady Cairngraeme, who is a great lady ; — 
don't ask an old insignificant Yankee merchant's 
widow. What should she know about lordships 
and ladyships, — or care about them either?" 

" 1 trust the sister of my late father would 
not withhold her valuable counsel from me at 
such a crisis ! " cried Mrs. Bentham, trying to 
look solemn, and hoping for an opportunity of 
affecting to reject Lord Dotterel in compliment 
to Mrs. Mac Winnepeg's antipathy. " Rely 
upon it, madam, I have too implicit a confidence 
in yow knowledge of the world, to prefer the 
advice of any other person on a point of so 
much moment." 

" And then there's that tailorized fine figure 
of a man, who spunges on the Cairngraemes," 

G 5 



130 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

observed Mrs. Mac Winnepeg, watching the 
countenance of her niece; but her niece was 
just then sedulously watching the countenance 
of the Duke of Wellington, as it frowned over 
the door of a Whitechapel ale-house. " What 
is the man's name, my dear?" — 

" Do you mean Sir Richard Bayntun?" 
" Ay, ay ! Sir Richard Bayntun ; Lady 
Ogylvie tells me he gives excellent dinners. — 
Eh ? " " 

" 1 never dined with him." 
" And that he has a handsome country seat 
somewhere near Cheltenham?" — 
" I never was there." 

" He plays the best game at whist of any one 
I ever played against, since poor Mac Winne- 
peg's time?" — 

" I never played with him." 

He seems a chatty conversible man?" 
' I never converse with him except on the 
general topics of the dinner table." 

" Humph ! " thought Mrs. Mac, — as she de- 
posited the widow in Mortimer-street. " It is 
as I thought. She would not have taken such 



£( 



O 



* 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 131 

care to conceal her face and her opinion, if she 
had not some particular interest in the sub- 
ject. Perhaps my niece may find out, some day 
or other, that it would have been as well to take 
me into her confidence." 

Mrs. Bentham, however, took no one into 
her confidence. Experience had already taught 
her, that whenever an affair, whether important 
or unimportant, comes to be discussed by the 
scattered members of a family who have more 
leisure than wit, it is turned over and over, 
-inside and out, round and round, till, like 
some shop- worn article on a haberdasher'!^ 
counter, all its defects and deficiencies be- 
come disagreeably apparent. She had taken 
private cognitions which satisfied her mind that 
even had she been inclined to second the pro- 
jects of Lord Cairngraeme, insurmountable ob- 
stacles existed to her union with Lord Dotterel ; 
and she had formed, on premises equally valid, 
a notion that the bird of paradise feather had 
not been ineffective on the well-padded breast 
of Sir Richard ; that not all the wadding with 
which his heart was guarded by the aid of Berg- 



132 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

holt or Nugee, had been efficient to ward oft' 
the arrows of Cupid ! — Yet not one word did 
she breathe to Lord Cairngraeme, not a syllable 
did she reply to Lady Ogylvie, when the one 
suggested his desire that she should be promoted 
into Lady Dotterel, or the other strongly ad- 
vised her to content herself with becoming Lady 
Bayntun. She was resolved that neither of 
the two family gossips should be enabled 
to give authenticity to the rumours of society 
by "thus said the widow," — "thus hath the 
widow implied 1 " — making her concerns the 
town talk, and justifying the flagitious inquiry, 
" and pray, if it were to come to any thing, what 
would they be able to make up between them?" 
— " How are the poor dear children provided 
for?" — " Has the widow a pension from the 
East Lidia Company?"—" Are those people at 
Edmonton likely to do any thing for the little 
Benthams?" &c. &c. &c. Against the incur- 
rence of all such perils Mrs. Bentham was fore- 
warned. 

Active as an armadillo, but like that rapid 
quadruped entrenched in an armour of mail, 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 133 

her feelings were intangible, ber movements, 
not to be forestalled. Born among slaves 
and heathens, — educated with a view to the 
subjugation of some soulless taskmaster of 
slaves and heathens, — not a particle of chris- 
tianly or womanly feeling had been fostered in 
her heart. It mattered not whetlier a second 
marriage would import the interests of her 
children : — all she cared was to achieve for her 
selfish self a more luxurious position in the 
world. Without vice or criminality, according 
to the canons of human or divine law, she 
presented that fearful object, — an immortal* 
being chained to the sensualities and empti- 
nesses of conventional life, — heartless, Godless, 
virtueless; — rejecting all feeling of gratitude for 
gifts bestowed,— despising the ample means of 
happiness and usefulness within her reach, she 
became (and there are many such) a worship- 
per of shadows. Was it not fitting she should 
be taught, in many a bitter lesson, that Mam- 
mon, — her sole deity, — is, after all, a mocking 
and unclean spirit ? — 

Meanwhile had not the empty tribe by which 



134 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

this ancient pair of turtle doves were surrounded, 
been absorbed by theirs everal vanities, — Lord 
Cairnojrasme by his personal importance, — Lady 
Cairngraeme by her superior decorum, — Mrs. 
Mac by her pride of purse, — Sir Colin by his 
imaginary political influence, and his lady by the 
glory of her egg-shell tea-cups and Chantilly 
mantilla, they could not but have observed that 
Sir Richard was assuming as many Lovelace- 
like airs as his gout would admit, — and that 
Mrs. Bentham listened to his whispers with a 
blush as ingenuous as vegetable bloom could sup- 
ply : both were melting away before their eyes 
with the slippery chilliness of ice. Both were 
bent on the same line of policy. Each was 
eager to entangle the other without a previous 
scrutiny into their own ways and means. Sir 
Richard wanted to be taken for granted as a 
man of fortune ; Mrs. Bentham trusted that 
Lord Cairngraeme's vague sketches of her 
prosperity would answer her purpose. She 
was incessantly striving to make the gallant 
knight commit himself; and he always cross- 
questioning, with a view to elicit the exact ^j^ 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 135 

amount of her income. Each was persuaded 
that the other was a godsend and a dupe ; — 
and their mutual manoeuvres, were severally 
performed with the exactitude of partners in a 
minuet. 

" Mrs. Bentham's handsome fortune," mu- 
sed Sir Richard, " will enable me to take a 
lease of that cottage near Cheltenham I occu- 
pied last year, and keep a hunter or two into 
the bargain." 

" Sir Richard's family-place in Gloucester- 
shire," thought the widow, " will supersede all 
expenses of house-rent." 

" People from India are generally pretty 
liberal," said the lover to himself. 

" People who live in the first society," whis- 
pered Mrs. B. to Mrs. B. " have no time to 
think of petty economies." 

" I will wait," thought he, " till I can ex- 
actly ascertain the nature of her property." 

"I ought to find out," thought she, "whether 
it is in his power to make a settlement on his 
estate." 

" It will be very easy to go on in our present 



136 A MANCEUVREB OUTWITTED; 

shill-I-shall-I way, till I have inquired what 
pledge Mrs. Mac Winnepeg will give of her 
mten lions." 

" It will be safer to avoid affording decided 
encouragement till I have heard an authentic 
quotation of the Bayntun rentrolL" 

And thus, they went on sighing and smiling, — 
speaking small, and looking insinuating. Both 
boasted loudly of independence, — loudly of dis- 
interestedness; and whispering as if by involun- 
tary sympathy, that " ingenuousness of nature 
had rendered them dupes through life to the 
arts and artifices of other people." 

In the midst of this inconclusive diplomacy, 
Sir Richard's watchful ear was startled one night 
at his club at Charing-cross, by whispers that 
" poor Colin Ogylvie was cleaned out, — done 
up; and that his place on the Treasury bench 
alone secured him from a place in that of the 

King's ! " He trembled ! — Who could say to 

what base uses Mrs, Mac Winnepeg's property 
might come at last, in redemption of the family 
honour, unless things were brought to the im- 
mediate crisis of a marriage settlement? — 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 137 

Not even Mrs. Bentham herself could have 
penned a more exquisite specimen of inexplicit 
rigmarole than that which Sir Richard, instantly 
seating himself in the heau window facing the 
lustrous warehouse of Hancock, indited in ex- 
planation of his hopes and fears, — his views and 
projects. He alluded to nothing but the rapture 
of calling her his ; and in appealing to her per- 
sonal tenderness, seemed to forget that a Lea- 
denhall or a Threadneedle street existed in our 
polite metropolis. — His propositions were as 
vague and as wide of the purpose as the clauses 
of a new bill in Parliament ! 

"1 don't half like this!" cried Mrs. B. ;— 
examining the document with the scrutinizing 
eye of a lawyer searching out flaws in a deed. 
" Three pages of mere phrases, without one 
figure or cypher from first to last ! — I detest 
fustian attempts at eloquence. — A dry but accu- 
rate estimate is to me far more acceptable. I 
will answer him in the same Pythonic style. 
A few fine sentiments and hard words wrap 
up an intention, whether in politics or court- 
ship." 



138 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED ; 

She was actually in process of composing her 
oracular response, when the Edmonton carriage 
made its appearance at her door ; no longer con- 
veyingeither the bustling mother or the snub-nosed 
progeny — but the tall, gaunt, uncompromising 
debtor and creditor person of Gregory himself. 
The visit was strictly confidential ; — the children 
were kept up in the nursery;— and half an hour 
after their uncle's departure, Mrs. Bentham, 
with a flushed cheek and tremulous hand, deli- 
vered to her servant a thick letter bearing the 
superscription of " Sir Richard Baynton." She 
had scarcely time to put on her last new cap 
with pink ribands before, in reply to the dis- 
patch, the comely figure of her friend was seated 
by her side on the sofa in Mortimer- street : — 
her cheek of a still deeper crimson, and her 
hand (the hand she had just promised to bestow 
upon him for life) more tremulous than ever. 
However interesting or interested the confer- 
ence, it was terminated by the widow's declara- 
tion that she must lose not a moment in ap- 
prizing Mrs. MacWinnepeg of the approaching 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 139 

change of her situation ; and ahhough Sir 
Richard (who was measuring the extent of the 
house and appraising its furniture, with an opi- 
nion that both were unworthy of a nabob's wi- 
dow, and must give place to handsomer appoint- 
ments) suggested that it would be quite suffi- 
cient to communicate the state of affairs to the 
head of her family, she persisted in dismissing 
him till they shouM meet again at dinner in 
Portman-square, in fulfilment of a previous en- 
gagement. 

'• It's you, is it, my dear ma'am ? " cried Mrs. 
Mac Winnepeg, as she entered the front par- 
lour in Gower-street, full of delicate emotions, 
and blushing unutterable things. " Why do 
you trouble yourself to come here this after- 
noon ? You know I was to call for you, to take 
you to Sir Colin's. Did you fancy I should 
forget my engagement? — I never forget my en- 
gagements. But as you are here you may send 
your servant back to fetch your things to dress ; 
and save me the trouble of going out of my way 
to take you up in Mortimer-street. I 'm not 



140 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

fond of the stones ; and I shall now be able to 
go the best part of the way along the New-road. 
Just step into the hall and tell the man to bring 
your things in a bundle.'* 

" Thank you, dear madam, I fear I must re- 
turn home," said Mrs. Bentham, rejoicing in 
her heart that this state of vexatious depend- 
ence was about to end. " I am come to ask 
your advice on one of the most important events 
of my life. Sir Richard Bayntun has made me 
a proposal of marriage; — highly disinterested — 
respectable situation — permanent provision for 
my poor children — opinion of my friends — de- 
ference to your judgment — definitive reply." 

-' What is all this? " cried Mrs. Mac Winne- 
peg, who had never before heard her brother 
the kernel's daughter, mumble so incoherently ; 
and taking ofFher spectacles, she determined Mrs. 
Bentham should speak explicitly and to the pur- 
pose. " Sir Richard Bayntun has proposed 
marriage to you, do you say ? " 

*' He has." 

" And it is your intention, ma'am, to accept 
him?" 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 141 

" My duty to my children compels me to 
sacrifice my reluctance to a second marriage." 

" That is, you mean to have him ? " — 

" I wish first, my dear madam, to ascertain 
your views on the subject." 

" You want to know what I think of it ? " — 

Mrs. Bentham bowed gracefully. 

" 1 think you would make a fool of yourself; 
and that he has been making a fool of z/ow." 

" My dear, dear aunt, believe me nothing 
can have been more frank and candid than his 
conduct throughout," cried Mrs. Bentham. *' He 
has never made the smallest inquiry into my 
pecuniary situation ! " 

" Have you ever made any into his ? " 

" It was unnecessary : — Lord Cairngrasme's 
frequent commendations of his friend's pru- 
dence, and Sir Richard's handsome mode of 

1* • jj 

iving — 

" Stuff ! — The man has sunk his patrimony 
for an annuity; and spends it to the last 
shilling. I have it from Colin Ogylvie*s solici- 
tor, who, knowing I have settled all my small 



142 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED; 

means on him, wanted me to redeem the an- 
nuity as a saving of ten per cent, to the family 
in Portman-square." 

— Mrs. Mac Winnepeg's fortune settled on 
Sir Colin ; — and Sir Richard's sunk in annuities ! 
— Poor Mrs. Bentham ! 

" Most unaccountable ! Lady Ogylvie has 
always been advising me to encourage Sir Rich- 
ard Bayntun's addresses ! " 

" Is she aware of the state of your own cir- 
cumstances ? " — 

" I did not think it necessary to entrust so 
frivolous a person with the state of rny affairs. " 

" Ay — ay, — I dare say she fancied you tole- 
rably well off; and thinks that your union with 
that stuffed tiger Sir Richard, will enable him to 
put up with the irregular payment of his annui- 
ties. The Ogylvies are in a sad way ! — between 
ourselves, I was obliged to make them a present 
of five hundred pounds this morning. Lord 
bless you, if all their fine furniture was to be sold, 
it would be a losing of fifty per cent. But I have 
consented to relieve them of one burthen. 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 143 

Little Clara is to live with me, and take the 
name of Mac Winnepeg." 

" His whole fortune smik in annuities! " eja- 
culated Mrs. Bentham, insensible to this new 
stroke. 

" Well, my dear, — you've only got to refuse 
him. You can marry old Dotterel, as I find you 
have been persuading the Cairngraemes you al- 
ways intended to do.'* 

" Lord Dotterel has five children by his house- 
keeper, to whom he has been privately married 
these two years. — 1 knew it from the first." 

" But does that compel you to throw yourself 
away on that good-looking adventurer ? " — 

" Unfortunately I have already given him a 
written promise of marriage." 

" After which, you came here, in the honesty 
of your heart, to ask my advice ? " — 

" I wished to break the matter to you by 
degrees." 

" Better break it off without any degress at 
all." 

"And provoke an action for breach of promise, 



144 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED,* 

with heavy damages and public disgrace ! " sighed 
Mrs. Henry. 

" In your place, I tell you what I 'd do,'' 
cried Mrs. Mac Winnepeg, eager to give ad- 
vice when she had made up her mind to give 
nothing else. " Call in your property from 
Indy, buy up the annuities, and you will 
double your joint income." 

" Alas, alas ! " exclaimed the widow. " It 
was only this morning I received intelligence 
that my agents at Calcutta have stopped pay- 
ment ; and that I have not a rupee left ! " 

" Did you advert to that circumstance in 
forming your engagements with Sir Richard ?" — 

" It would have been premature." 

" Perhaps it may alter his views, and induce 
him to relinquish his claim ? " — 

" And what will then become of me ? '' — 

" I have always understood from you, my 
dear ma'am, that the late Judge Bentham's fa- 
mily were in very prosperous circumstances, and 
had nothing so much at heart as to keep you 
and your children entirely among them. For 
my part, you must perceive that, hampered as 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 143 

I am with Colin Ogylvie*s family, my mite 
would contribute little to your comfort.'* 

" What will become of me ! " cried the dis- 
comfited Mrs. Henry, the vision of her oftended 
sister-in-law in the red velvet pelisse rising up 
in a menacing attitude before her. 

" Why I don't see that you Ve a choice. 
You can't be worse off. A marriage with that 
tailor's block will at least afford you a mainte- 
nance." 

" But perhaps, as you suggest," faltered the 
widow, " the change in my circumstances may 
produce a change in his intentions?" — 

" Then bring an action for breach of pro- 
mise against him'* 

" But you say, he has not a guinea ? " 

" Consult your dear friends. Lord and Lady 
Cairngraeme. I find from Lady Ogylvie you 
consider them your protectors in the world. 
Sir Richard is their boon companion. Perhaps 
they will do something for him ? " — 

" Surely, madam, you must be sufficiently ac- 
quainted with Lord Cairngraeme's character, to 

VOL. Hi. H 



I 



146 A MANCEUVRER OUTWITTED,* 

know that he was civil to me only because I re- 
quired nothing at his hands. The moment he 
finds me in a state of dependence, he will throw 
me off!" 

And so it proved ! — It did not even suit Lord 
and Lady Cairngrseme that the routine of their 
life should be broken in upon by losing Sir 
Richard Bayntun as a bachelor dropper-in ; but 
on discovering that the clan of Ogylvie was 
about to be disgraced by a public trial, exposing 
their amiable relative from India as quite a pau- 
per and almost an adventurer, their indigna- 
tion was beyond all bounds. At their instiga- 
tion the matter was compromised ; — the file and 
the viper agreed to economize by living together ; 
— and sooner than sacrifice a sum of three or four 
thousand pounds which would exile him for 
ever from the pave of London, the deluded ba- 
chelor gave his reluctant hand to the defrauded 
widow ; and for many a year the coarse causticity 
of Mrs. Mac had an ample field in the menage 
of the pompous but parsimonious couple. 

*' 1 dined with your Lordship's relations the 
Bayntuns, yesterday," said she to Lord Cairn- 



OR, RELATIONS FROM INDIA. 147 

grasme, having managed to possess herself of 
his button at a meeting of the Horticultural So- 
ciety. " ' Five nothings on five plates of delft ! ' 
as Swift said of Stella's supper." 

" Pray do not call them my relations, '* said 
his Lordship stiffly. 

" Your friends then. They were your inti- 
mate friends." 

" We usually find out the faults of our inti- 
mate friends." — 

" Sir Richard took in my niece in a disgrace- 
ful manner." — 

'' You mean that Mrs. Bentham took in 
poor Sir Richard." — 

" After all, I fancy 'twas the biter bit. Both 
were acting as almost every body acts in the pre- 
sent day, — keeping up pretensions they had not 
means to justify. 'Tis the age of humbug! 
— Appearances are no where to be relied upon. 
Empty show and lies (not told but acted) are 
just now the order of the day." 

" It is very true, madam," replied the Earl 
sententiously, and withdrawing himself in a dig- 
nified manner from her clutches. " In the pre- 

h2 



148 A MANGEUVRER OUTWITTED. 

sent disorganized state of society, one knows 
not where to pin one's faith. Things are not as 
they should be ! There are no longer any fixed 
principles to be relied on. Who on earth can 
calculate upon what he is to meet with in the 
world, when we find a regular club-and-carve-all 
bachelor making a speculation of matrimony ; — 
and are deceived into patronizing jooor relations 
under the deceptions title of Relations from 
India!"— 



THE INTRIGANTE. 



It is the weaker sort of politicians that are the greatest* 
dissemblers. Bacon. 



CHAPTER I. 



Ambition, that high and glorious passion which makes 
such havoc among the sons of men, arises from a proud 
desire of honour and distinction ; but when the splendid 
trappings of which it is usually caparisoned are removed, 
it will be found to consist of the mean materials of envy, 
pride, and covetousness. 

Burton's Anatomie or Melancholy. 

Various as they are numerous, are the ways 
of rising in the world, for such as — neither "born 
great " nor likely " to have greatness thrust 
upon them," — are eager to achieve it for them- 
selves and their posterity. Ambition has always 
been permitted to rank among the grandiose 
and heroic passions ; and its integral quantities 
being weighed in a gigantic scale and appro- 
priated to usurpers and conquerors, statesmen, 



152 THE INTRIGANTE. 

orators, artists and poets, we have all heard 
and repeated that 

by that sin fell the angels, 
till we forget the vast number of men and 
women — very mediocre men, and very insig- 
nificant woman, — to whom it has proved a 
stumbling block. 

"Love of Fame" (phrenologists and modern 
philosophers define it more pithily) has been de- 
signated in certain well-turned verses much in- 
flicted upon the memory of school-boys, to be 
the universal passion. But the shrine of ambi- 
tion rarely proves deficient in votaries; and, 
linked as it is with the selfish indulgences of 
mortal nature, often commands a yet larger con- 
oregation. The ambitious lawyer sidling to- 
wards the woolsack, — the ambitious politician, 
dreaming of the treasury and its premier- 
ship, — the ambitious physician, looking forward 
to the presidency of his college, — the am- 
bitious colonel of dragoons, fighting his way to 
a baton, through volumes of smoke and dust, — 
the ambitious author, scrawling his, through vo- 
lumes of " sound and fury signifiying nothing," 



THE INTRIGANTE. 153 

*- are in fact less actuated bv lust of the 
empty distinctions of life, than by a regard for 
its loaves and fishes. One is perhaps, enamoured 
of a well-appointed equipage, and urges on his 
own industry by visions of chariots and horse- 
men, running footmen and outriders. Another 
is prone to sensual luxury, and his finest speeches 
are concocted with xhefamet of a good dinner 
fragrant in his nostrils, — advocating the abolition 
of the slave trade till half the nation are in tears, 
only for love of a second course. A third man 
is covetous of a couple of yards of tabby rib- 
bon, — red, blue, or green, according to his na- , 
tion and language, calling or profession; — and 
perils his life or reputation with a view to their at- 
tainment. A fourth is fonder of the apostrophe 
of" my Lord," than of the mere " Sir " implying 
nothing of right or title over the apostrophizer ; 
— or his wife has a predilection for walking out 
of a room two feet in advance of her country 
neighbour Mrs. Thomson, — or his sons want to 
make their honourable way to Almack's under 
cover of his new Peerage. A fifth,-— but why 
enumerate when our present object is to dwell 

H 5 



154 THE INTRIGANTE. 

upon the ambitiou of those to whom woolsacks 
and lawn sleeves are forbidden toys ; of 

A whole sex of queens. 
Power all their aim, and pleasure all their means, 

whose object is to rise and raise, by the exercise 
of personal influence ; — of that brilliant crowd, 
in short, which furnishes the fashionable Intri- 
gantes ; — the Mrs. Mashams of May-fair — the 
Princesses des Ursins of St. James's ! — 

It would be difficult, perhaps, to point out a 
person in whose fashioning and fortunes nature 
ever more wantonly played her pranks than 
Anne Danby. The offspring of poor and vulgar 
parents, vulgar in mind as well as condition, 
our heroine beheld the light in a small curacy 
in Somersetshire ; in a mean dirty lodging- 
house, rendered still meaner and still dirtier by 
two urchins of pupils, by whose " mental culti- 
vation " her father eked out his scanty means of 
subsistence. The new and unwelcome incum- 
brance was laid aside in her yellow flannels, that 
she might interfere as little as possible with the 
pickling and preserving season, in the midst of 
which she made her appearance ; and so little 



THE INTRIGANTE. 155 

of the poetry of life was mingled with the prose 
of Dynington, so thoroughly indifferent was 
the housewifely Mrs. Danby to the varnish of 
human nature, that she never troubled herself 
to examine whether the new-comer were as red- 
haired as Betsy her sister, or as squint-eyed as 
Sammy her brother. She was satisfied that the 
little creature " thruv prodigeously ; " and as it 
roared but little to interfere with her culinary 
operations, pronounced it " a nice quiet babby." 
She was too busy in darning the grey worsted 
stockings of the pupils, and brushing their woolly 
heads, to luxuriate in the sweet sensibilities of 
maternity. 

What an advent for a heroine ! — what a home 
for the development of that star and garter pas- 
sion high Ambition ! 

By the malice of the Fates or of her god- 
fathers and godmothers, Parson Danby's second 
daughter was moreover christened Anne ; — a 
very pretty name, when applied to the gentle 
Lady Anne, or the Queen of the Bluff Harry ; 
but which, with a housewisely mother, and a 
father devoted to birch and Latin Grammar, 



156 THE INTRIGANTE. 

was sure to degenerate into Nancy. Nancy 
accordingly she became ; and though ungraced 
by Betsy's flaming locks or Sammy's squint, 
the poor child grew up as ugly as Sin and as 
thin as Death. Her features were as prominent 
as those of the curate, — her complexion as 
coarse as that of his helpmate ; her long straight 
black hair, which she was too careless to curl, 
and her mother too busy to sheer to christianlike 
proportions — resembled that of Mawworm ; 
while her whole appearance, — wild, shaggy, un- 
trimmed, half-shy, half-fierce, — resembled that 
of no human being, either in or out of the 
parish of Dynington. Till Nancy was sixteen, 
in short, she was a great, raw-boned, ugly, awk- 
ward girl, without one redeeming point of na- 
ture or art to give promise of future distinction. 
There is no use in misleadinoj mankind bv 
the depiction of precocious heroes and he- 
roines. Most girls are silly, most boys are 
stupid, — all disagreeable. We have very little 
doubt that the anecdotes which Brienne has 
been taxed to furnish concerning Napoleon's 
youth, are mere fabrications ; and notwith- 



THE INTRIGANTE. 15T 

Standing the retrospective interest lavished upon 
Byron's boyhood, we have good reason to know 
that as a whelp he promised no better than 
others ; and that at Harrow, the chief demon- 
stration of his genius consisted in driving return 
post-chaises. Nancy Danby was remarkable for 
nothing beside her ugliness, — ^unless for a certain 
taciturnity which her mother called laziness, and 
her fadier sulkiness. Betsy had shot up into a 
stirring lass, able and willing to assist her frugal 
parents in the labours of scrubbing pupils and 
clarifying sugar ; — and Sam was a thick heavy 
young man of considerable use to the pedagogue* 
in his mathematical department ; — but Nancy — 
Nancy, who fortunately remained the youngest 
of the needy family, had as yet given no sign 
of eminence either in the useful or ornamental 
departments. No one, indeed, noted her un- 
gainliness or commented upon her deficiencies; 
she w^as not sufficiently interesting to any mortal 
breathing to be made the subject of observation. 
How often has the step of man traversed in 
ignorance and indifference, a space of earth be- 
neath whose blank surface the red gold was 



158 THE INTRIGANTE. 

lying dense and heavy in its clayey bed ; — how 
often has the beggar sat hungering on a spot 
where the treasures of the mine were sweltering 
in fruitless inaction ! — Anne Danby, with all her 
cold reserve, her apparent torpor, held within 
her heart the germ of deep and powerful paS' 
sion. She had ambition enough to have made 
a hero and marred a saint ; and untoward as 
were her prospects, and scanty her means and 
appliances of raising herself above their influ- 
ence, she was already as sanguine in her hopes 
of personal distinction as Perrette while musing 
over her pot-au-lait. Nature had done little in 
her favour; but she resolved to brave this nig- 
gardly distribution of her gifts and put the step- 
mother to shame, by her own miraculous art 
of gathering grapes from thorns and figs from 
thistles. 

Whether this heroic determination were the 
cause of shaming her grudging benefactress into 
a kindlier mood, or whether the glowing spirit 
thus roused into energy had power to break the 
spell under which she had so long vegetated, 
certain it is that, on attaining her seventeenth 



THE INTRIGANTE. 159 

year, Anne Danby beajan to give promise of be- 
coming a fine woman. Her long shaggy hair 
was now braided and twisted into shape, or 
twined in glossy bands around a magnificent 
forehead; an amendment that gave to view a 
pair of large dark oriental eyes, hitherto un- 
heeded, and a line of countenance of the most 
impressive character. Determination lurked 
around the small compact mouth; and discri- 
mination darted with every searching glance. 
The sallowness which blended so unbecomingly 
with her neglected attire and slouching gait, 
assumed the deep tone of one of Murillo's pic* 
tures, when mingling with the commanding 
contour of her fine features ; and scarcely had 
Nancy, in her lonely walks in the greenwood, 
detected within herself the impulse of ambitious 
fervour by which her existence was animated, 
when the spark shone out in every look and 
movement. Without knowing why, the inha- 
bitants of Dynington, — woolly-headed pupils 
and all, — confessed that she was an altered 
creature. Some said she was now " a fine- 
grown girl;" others thought that " with a little 



160 THE INTRIGANTE. 

teaching, she might be made as useful and as 
clever as Miss Betsy." In short, though few 
among the tribe were capable of discerning 
the energy of mind which briglitened her fine 
countenance, while the progress of womanhood 
filled out tVie features and form uncongenial with 
the delicacy of extreme youth, they had, at least, 
wit to notice that she was expanding into a 
splendid woman ; and that Berkley Murray 
(one of the former mat-headed pupils who, on 
his progress to Oxford, occasionally passed a 
day or two at Dynington, ) was of a similar 
opinion. 

At first, indeed, it was judged a remarkable 
thing, even by stupid Sam and Betsy the house- 
wife, that a young gentleman who, as Master 
Murray, had rebelled so fiercely against the 
wavs and means of the Tile House and fled so 
precipitately at the earliest possible moment of 
the holidays, should voluntarily and cheerfully 
return as Mister Murray, — ay ! and even as the 
Honour obleMXsteY Murray, — to swallow slices of 
the hard corned beef on which he had starved 
for three years of compulsion ; and inhale the 



THE INTRIGANTE. 161 

fumes of brandy and water over which old 
Danby droned away his evenings by the smoky 
parlour fire. But Berkley put forth so plau- 
sible a pretext for his visits in the trout stream 
flowing through the water-meadows of Dyning- 
ton, and appropriated so large a proportion of 
every twenty-four hours composing the several 
days of his visit, to the fishing-rod and fly-book 
of poor Samuel, that the Danbys, who were not 
persons of inquiring minds, were content to 
take his motives upon his own showing. 
He did not give much trouble : — for Mrs. 
Danby was no longer required to look to his' 
chilblains and disentangle his flowing ringlets ; 
and the extra-expenditure of a clean table- 
cloth and fresh bottle of currant wine per diem, 
were amply repaid by the venison, hares, and 
pine-apples dispatched from Farrington Castle 
on his arrival at home. The only member of 
the family indeed, to whom his sojourn at the 
Tile House was likely to prove inconvenient, 
was Nancy ; who, being the least useful of her 
offspring, was duly and daily dispatched by the 
dominie's wife, to carry " Murray" his sand- 



162 THE INTRIGANTE. 

wiches, or " let Murray know that breakfast 
was waiting." But it may be inferred, that the 
Honourable Berkley was a zealous disciple of 
the immortal Izaak: for instead of showing 
instant attention to so interesting a summons, 
the messenger and the angler seldom made 
their appearance for an hour or two afterwards. 
— It did not much signify. — The dominie's 
habits were per force regular ; and the family 
had long adopted a rule " never to wait for 
Murray/' 



THE INTRIGANTE. 163 



CHAPTER 11. 



I do fear the world 
Hath tir'd you. You seek a cell to rest in. 
As birds that wing it o'er the sea seek ships 
Till they get breath, and then they fly away. 

Shirley. 



- Love is an erudite master of arts, and calls 
in all the sciences to the aid of his miracles. 
He is said to have made Cymon the dolt — a wit; 
he certainly made Anne Danby the fright — a 
beauty. 

Every day, when she arrived at the Tile 
House on Murray's arm, panting beneath the 
weight of his basket (an interesting speculation 
to Mrs. Danby and Betsy), while he was en- 
grossed by the care of his own and the curate's 



164 THE INTRIGANTE. 

multiform tackle, a richer colour streamed upon 
her cheek, and a brighter inspiration beamed 
from her eyes, like Miranda stooping under 
her load of logs. She said little more than here- 
tofore, and that little was of too flighty a cast 
for the interpretation of the mother and daugh- 
ter who were busy in weighing and crumbing 
the brightbarred perch for Murray's dinner. 
But her words fell sweetly on the ear of Berk- 
ley, and deeply into his heart ; and having long 
considered her as lovely as a Dryad, he now 
fancied her as gifted as a Muse, or rather as all 
the nine amalgamated into one bright wonder. 
Perhaps the sight of Sam Danby's canvas- 
covered Ovid, lying dusty on the shelf, suggested 
the classical illustration. 

Certes, there can be found few more aus- 
picious occasions for poeticizing, than the 
banks of a gurgling trout-stream, flashing a 
thousand sparkling dark-foiled diamonds in the 
sun of a midsummer day ; — crested towards its 
precipitous banks by clusters of straggling water 
flowers, — the brook strawberry, the river hem- 



THE INTRIGANTE. 165 

lock, the forget-me-not, the aven, the yellow 
field flag ; interspersed with patches of the harsh 
bulrush of scriptural association, or overhung 
by elder bushes, splashed with broad white pun- 
gent clusters of bloom. Here and there 'a 
thicket of maple and alder festooned over with 
briar and briony, the pale blossoms of the 
dog-rose, or the dark insidious buds and coral 
berries of the fatal nightshade, overshadows 
a pool whereon the little mayfly skims lighter 
than an infant's thought ; wiiile the sly linnet 
sits brooding silently over her nest in the leafiest 
shelter of the thicket, with a white shower of 
bramble-blossoms dropping, leaf by leaf, over 
her motionless head. Sometimes a bird, startled 
by the whisk of the angler's line over the pool, 
suddenly wings its way from among the lower 
branches, rippling the waters as it flies ; — some- 
times a gay dragon-fly, adorned like a knight of 
chivalry in steeled mail, hovers over the stream, 
as if for the fond vanity of reflecting its gaudy 
colours. The tufted meadows, on either side, 
send up their profuse herbage enamelled with a 
bright variety of summer blossoms; among 



m 



166 THE INTRIGANTE. 

which the whirring of a thousand insect wings 
fills the air with drony music, broken by the 
cuckoo's mocking call and the harsh re- 
monstrance of the corncraik. Such sounds 
have in fact a monotony more tranquillizing 
than even that of silence; and, save when the 
herd-boy's call at a distance intrudes a human 
sound into the scene, Solitude is there in her 
softest mood and sweetest aspect. 

It was in much such a spot, and under the 
influence of balmy June widi its blue skies 
and fleecy clouds, its breezes like the breath of 
love, its harmonious sounds, and dreamy visions 
— that Anne Danby sat by Murray's side on 
the grassy banks of the Dyne ; now enwrapt in 
the motionless silence indispensable to the suc- 
cess of his sport ; now, — when some intervening- 
thicket rendered that river-solitude still more 
lonely, — with an arm enlaced in his, listening to 
the sweet music of his professions, and replying 
with all the naivete of first love. The relative 
position of the parties considered, — Murray being 
an Oxonian of one-and-twenty, and Miss Danby 
a village maiden of seventeen, — Murray being 



THE INTRIGANTE. 167 

son to the worldly-wise Earl of Farrington, and 
Miss Danby daughter to the book-learned do- 
minie of Dynington, — it will perhaps be inferred 
by the experienced reader of novels and human 
nature, that Berkley was the serpent, and Nancy 
the Eve ; that the Maudlen student was all art, 
and the maudlin miss all nature ; that the Ho- 
nourable Mister entertained dishonourable views, 
and that the fiery-haired Betsy's sister was a 
victim as predestinate as Clarissa Harlowe? — 

By no means ! — Berkley Murray was a fine 
spirited, warm hearted youth ; who, like the ma- 
jority of young gentlemen preparing for college 
at a private tutor's, had found it very agreeable 
to escape out of the close dull study, with its 
Algebra and Greek, to the bower of his tutor's 
daughter, with its lilac bushes and blackbirds ; 
and who, at the lanky epoch of seventeen 
while flyfishing in the Dyne " with one fair 
spirit for his minister," thought, and pro- 
nounced himself the " happiest of men ! '' For 
the most part, this felicitous portion of man- 
kind no sooner attain the slang and impudence 
of the university, than they disavow the fair spirit 



168 THE INTRIGANTE. 

and her ministry ; exchange the rod and line 
for a hunting whip and top boots, and recur to 
the tenderness of the fair Ophelia of the Par- 
sonage solely for the diversion of their club. 
But Berkley Murray was of a finer race than 
that of the beaux or bloods of his day. He loved 
Anne Danby in earnest ; and, what was more, 
believed that she earnestly loved him ; a per- 
suasion which, in conjunction with the remem- 
brance of her large dark eyes and lofty person, 
her musical tones and noble sentiments, enabled 
him to defy the attractions of the Sunday belles 
illuminating Magdalen Gardens with their best 
bonnets; and induced him, summer after sum- 
mer, to make Dynington a halting place for his 
caravan, on its pilgrimage between Oxford and 
Farrington Castle. 

But with Nancy, the case was widely dif- 
ferent. Her love for the brother of the angle 
was sincere ; but it regarded the son of the Earl 
of Farrington^ — not her father's blue-eyed, fair- 
browed pupil. Her attachment was lavished 
upon the Honourable Mister Murray, not upon 
the Apollo Belvidere in a fustian jacket, who 



THE INTRIGANTE. 169 

furnished the Tile House with so many pike to 
be stuffed by Miss Betsy, and so many silver eels 
to be stewed (with the juice of a mouldy lemon) 
by her mother. Had he been as ugly as Sam 
Danby, and as prone to tobacco as her father, 
he would have suited her purpose as well. She 
had no heart for love : — the feelings of the Cu- 
rate's daughter were wholly given over to the 
impulses of— Ambition ! 

Yet, as they sat beneath the hazel bushes, 
weaving garlands bright with water flowers and 
projects for the future bright with hope, it was 
Murray who spoke of their marriage as of a 
thing pre-assured by fate, in spite of his dead 
ancestors and her living relations ; while Nancy, 
with a sigh of deep despondency, assured him 
that such an alliance was irreconcilable with 
the prejudices of his family or the subservience 
of her own. While Berkley, in the enthusiasm 
of his passion, avowed his intention of declaring 
all to the Earl and braving his worst resent- 
ment, it was the clear-sighted Anne who com- 
pelled him to the prudence of patience; 
and persuaded him to entrust his destinies to 

VOL. III. I 



ITO THE INTRIGANTE. 

time. She knew that Lord Farrington was in a 
precarious state of health. Berkley's modest 
patrimony would be opulence to her^ it seemed 
madness to provoke the danger of disinheritance. 
Her eloquence was effectual. Again the young 
lover proceeded to the castle, to dispatch back 
haunches and partridges to the banks of the 
Dyne ; comforted by the assurance of his Anne's 
unchangeable fidelity (there was not a soul in 
the village to provoke her inconstancy, unless 
the apothecary's apprentice) and as firmly per- 
suaded as young gentlemen of twenty-one are 
apt to be on such occasions, that he " was a 
notable fowler and had found a white crow! '' 

It is easy to conceive that the influence must 
have been indeed strong, which could impart to 
the curate's daughter a degree of fortitude 
enabling her to bear with her mother's reproofs, 
her sister's taunts, her brother's sullen scorn ; 
or the obstinacy with which she now withdrew 
from the circle of their toils and pleasures, and 
devoted her time exclusively to the enlighten- 
ment of her mind. Her lover's hints had 
opened to her view a world unknown to them; 



THE INTRIGANTE. 171 

and imparted glimpses of certain graces and re- 
finements, indispensable to persons moving 
within its sphere. Rising with the lark to study 
French, and watching with the owl to pursue the 
course of historical reading pointed out by Mur- 
ray as within the scope of her father's library, 
she now curtailed her solitary rambles in the 
woods, and withdrew from the banks of the 
Dyne to the seclusion of her own miserable 
chamber. One only object engrossed her senses 
and dazzled her imagination. To become the 
Honourable Mrs. Berkley Murray, and as the 
Honourable Mrs. Berkley Murray to betray no 
superficial inferiority to the station into which 
she had manceuvered herself, blinded her eyes, 
deafened her ears, and blunted her perceptions to 
all the clamorous vulgarity of the Tile House 
and its inhabitants. 



I 2 



1*72 THE INTRIGANTE. 



CHAPTER III. 



It often falls out that we believe ourselves deceived by 
others, when we have deceived ourselves. 

Sir Philip Sidney, 

Berkley's ingenuous nature did not, how- 
ever, admit of the scrupulous prudence in the 
maintenance of his secret, so much enforced by 
the schoolmaster's daughter. A public reproof 
from Lord Farrington on the length of his visits 
to Dynington, brought on a blush, which brought 
on a private inquiry ; and the Earl had the satis- 
faction of learning from his own lips his son's 
engagement to Miss Nancy Danby, and deter- 
mination to defy disinheritance and ruin for the 
sake of so peerless a creature ! — Now the age 
of chivalry is over, there is unfortunately no 
mode left of dying in a lady's honour, more he- 
roic than starvation. 



THE INTRIGANTE. 1T3 

Fortunately, Lord Farrington's elder son was 
of a temperament directly opposite to that of the 
Honourable Berkley. Finding that his father 
had already given vent to the effervescence of 
his indignation by inditing to the curate of Dy- 
nington a letter such as an Earl, blest with exten- 
sive clerical patronage, may alone venture to ad- 
dress to one of " the cloth," Lord Murray per- 
suaded his lordship to abstain from any vehe- 
ment demonstration of feeling towards the cu- 
rate's pupil ; — assuring him that a young man 
so thoroughly at the mercy of his own wild im- 
pulses as Berkley, would assuredly hamper him- 
self by some new escapade, and surrender at 
discretion. And this prediction was verified in 
a shorter time than either the Lord by patent 
or the Lord by courtesy anticipated. Within 
six months of tbe fatal discovery of his betroth- 
ment, Berkley, after having been made a goose 
by Anne Danby, was made a pigeon by his 
cousin Frank Bradshaw, the most knowing 
fellow in the parish of St. James. Three 
thousand seven hundred pounds was a heavy 
fee for a younger brother to lay down on his 



174 THE INTRIGANTE. 

admission to that recherche corporation, the routs 
of fashion. But Lord Farrington was inclined 
to welcome this penalty of youthful folly as a 
trifling mulct; since it enabled him, without 
any wonderful exercise of tyranny, to break off 
all connexion between the lovers, and exile his 
son as a diplomat to the city of Washington. 
The prospect of inability to meet the payment 
of a debt of honour induced young Murray to 
subscribe to all conditions ; and Lord Farring- 
ton, having left him in doubt of meeting his 
engagements with Frank Bradshaw and Co. 
till his passage was secured for New York and 
his baggage on board, contrived to exhibit 
the payment of his debts as a signal act of 
favour, even though coupled with a sentence of 
banishment from the Anne of his heart. Berk- 
ley Murray was aware that he was attached to 
the American mission for a period of three 
years ; but three years would only serve to per- 
fect the charms and excellencies of Miss Danby, 
and engender mutual evidence of their mutual 
fidelity. 

Such, however, was not the version of the 



THE INTRIGANTE. 175 

young gentleman's views and expectations which 
Lord Murray and his father conveyed to the 
Tile House in lieu of the farewell letter he de- 
posited with his brother. Anne Danby dis- 
cerned in a moment the frustration of all her 
hopes. She was too well acquainted with the 
malleable nature of her lover's heart to believe 
that one hundred and fifty-six weeks would pass 
without its taking the shape instigated by some 
Yankee Dalilah ; and instead of betaking herself 
to the thickets of the Dyne to play Ophelia 
among the water weeds, sat herself down, dogged 
and tearless, to devise new schemes of future 
aggrandizement- — She was angry, not grieved ; 
— indignant, not subdued. 

It was probably the insight obtained into her 
character by Lord Murray, during a few hours' 
visit to Dynington the preceding summer, which 
enabled him to prognosticate this mood of mind. 
At his suggestion the son of Lord Farrington's 
family solicitor was despatched on a visit to Dy- 
nington, with an offer to the curate of a family 
living of some importance, on certain conditions 
which did not generally transpire. The nego- 



176 THE INTRIGANTE. 

ciation was an arduous one; and Mr. Thomas 
Clermont, who officiated on the occasion, being 
a good-looking, sharp-witted young man of eight- 
and-twenty, found the air of the country so ad- 
vantageous to his health and spirits, that he con- 
trived to prolong Mr. Danby's perplexities and 
Lord Farrington's conditions, till he succeeded 
on his own part in persuading the fair Nancy 
that she would display a very dignified disdain 
of the whole House of Murray, by forestalling 
Berkley's infidelity, and accepting the offer of 
his own hand and fortunes. 

The dominie's wife, meanwhile, seeing that 
her awkward, useless Nancy had captivated 
the son of a lord, fancied she was expecting 
very little for her sparkling clever Betsy, in 
planning an alliance with the smart young at- 
torney who was now their inmate; and it was a 
matter of unfeigned amazement to her, when 
Anne followed her one night into her bedroom 
(such a bedroom ! ) on their return from drink- 
ing tea at the vicarage, to acquaint her that, 
having banished the ungrateful Murray from 
her memory, she was about with the consent 



THE INTRIGANTE. 177 

of her father, to become Mrs. Thomas Cler- 
mont, and her father, with the consent of its pa- 
tron, the Right Hon. tlie Earl of Farrington, 
about to become Rector of Lullingholme. 

Within six months after Berkley Murray's 
precipitate voyage across the Atlantic all was 
satisfactorily adjusted. The bride and bride- 
groom passed the straits of Gibraltar on their 
way to Malta, where young Clermont had ob- 
tained an appointment of some value ; and, 
nnless the thousand pounds bestowed as an out- 
fit for the bride, came from the source which 
procured the bridegroom his place, it might ba 
difficult to conjecture to what miraculous origin 
the Danbys were indebted for so sudden an 
affluence of the good things of this world. It is 
doubtless to be implied that Parson Danby de- 
rived his glebe, and Mrs. Clermont, junior, her 
amethyst necklace, from one and the same 
source, — the joyful gratitude of the Murray fa- 
mily towards all and sundry who assisted to 
redeem them from so ignominious a connection. 
Betsy and Sam were glad to get rid, on any 
terms, of a " sister Anne," whom they despised 

i5 



178 THE INTRIGANTE. 

for her fine ladyism, and hated for her good for- 
tune. Lord Farrington was supposed, accord- 
ing to the most approved usage, to have be- 
stowed his Church patronage on the tutor of his 
son ; and indeed it was grateful to Sam and his 
father, to rest from their labours of cramming 
and drilling, and to Betsy and her mother from 
those of combing and scrubbing, — unirritated 
by the sorrowful gaze of the pair of large dark 
eyes, which had proved the bane of Berkley 
Murray, and th*^ antidote of Mr. Thomas Cler- 
mont 



THE INTRIGANTE. 179 



CHAPTER IV. 



What man so wise, what earthly wit so ware. 
As to descry the crafty' cunning train. 

By which deceit doth mask in vizor fair 
And cast her colours dyed deep in grain. 

To seem like Truth, whose shape she well can feign. 

Spenser. 

A SHOWY-LOOKING agreeable young married 
woman, arriving from England at an English 
Colony, is sure of being received with indul- 
gence. The Clermonts were known to have 
" come out '* under the patronage of the Earl 
of Farrington, who was known to have " come 
m" under the immediate patronage of the King ; 
the gentleman was said to be the son of an 
eminent legal practitioner, and the lady the 
daughter of a respectable clergyman. These 
were fair titles to acceptance in society. Mrs. 



180 THE INTRIGANTE. 

Clermont, free from the servile associations of 
the Tile House, was pronounced to be elegant 
and well-informed ; and Mr. Clermont was by 
nature one of those adroit, plausible, pliant per- 
sonages, who contrive to render themselves 
agreeable into whatever dilemma of life they 
chance to fall. He had once maintained his 
popularity, when travelling from London to 
Bath as a seventh passenger in a stage-coach 
during the dog days ; and had not received his 
first quarter's salary at " the little military hot- 
house," before he was pronounced on all sides 
to be " the best fellow in the world." The 
Clermonts gave little supper-parties — the Cler- 
monts allowed droppers-in at luncheon — the 
Clermonts made their house so pleasant ! While 
all the other ladies in Valetta were complaining 
of want of society, the bride, who, comparing it 
with Dynington, felt herself the most fortunate 
of women, — had no temptation to quarrel with 
the climate, or sigh for Hyde Park and the last 
new novel. She had never been half so happy 
before ; and the animation of her countenance 
and cheerfulness of her manners, afforded con- 



THE INTRIGANTE. 181 

siderable relief to the naval and military heroes 
accustomed to the peevish nonchalance of the 
ladies of the Mediterranean. Unengrossed by 
the practice of frivolous accomplishments, she 
devoted the leisure left her by her husband's 
official duties, to the cultivation of her natural 
abilities; and, intent on adding Italian to French, 
resumed her studies with secret but unremitting 
diligence. 

She was now gradually becoming a per- 
sonage, — and a very popular personage. Berk- 
ley Murray (who, on the termination of his 
matrimonial perils and dangers, was recalled 
from banishment and thrust into Parliament,) 
was fated to learn from such of his dandy friends 
as extended their tour from Italv to Malta, that 
Mrs. Clermont was the most charming woman 
in the island ; that she was at the head of the 
circles of Valetta and the idol of the garrison : 
while Anne was destined in her turn, and much 
to her amazement, to find from the newspapers, 
and other echoes of fame, that Mr. Murray, — 
Berkley Murray, — the Hon. Berkley Murray, — 
her own very particular and once loved Berk- 



182 THE INTRIGANTE. 

ley, — or, as he was teraied in the house, " the 

honourable member for Lullinghoh-ne," was 

creeping into the brightest sunshine of pubhc 

favour. He was already accounted one of the 

best speakers of the day. The fervour of soul 

which formerly rendered him the dupe of her 

own manoeuvres, now animated his mind into 

the passion of eloquence ; and as the spokesman 

of his father's party, the organ selected to give 

words to their measures, he was soon promoted 

to the rank and title of a " very rising young 

man." Although too young for a statesman, 

he was quite old enough to be an orator. 

Writers and readers of works of fiction, are 
too apt to limit their belief to the existence of 
tender passions resulting from personal attrac- 
tions or abstract merit. This is a very erroneous 
view of human nature. A marriage originally 
instigated by interested motives, is not neces- 
sarily destitute of sentiment ; nor should every 
woman, whose attention is captivated by a 
star and garter, be said to sacrifice herself to 
ambition. A man enamoured of a pretty face, 
falls in love with its possessor because she has 



THE INTRIGANTE. 183 

a pretty face ; and seeks her as a wife because 
his affections are moved towards her accord- 
ingly. Some persons have become seriously 
smitten by a woman's skill as a musician, — some 
by her enthusiasm as an artist ; and in the 
same way an ambitious woman becomes really 
attached to the proprietor of a coronet; or an 
interested one, bestows her affections on an in- 
dividual rich in a deer-park and bank-stock. 
It cannot be doubted that many a young lady 
has fallen tenderly in love with a man's posi- 
tion in the world, his equipage, and establish- 
ment; and M"s. Clermont's heart thrilled far 
more warmly towards the Honourable Com- 
missioner Murray, than Nancy Danby's had 
ever done towards the graceful Berkley. She 
heard his praises with embarrassment ; exulted 
in his fame ; and sometimes, in the utmost se- 
crecy of her heart, glanced towards the advan- 
tages likely to accrue to herself on her return 
to England from his notice and patronage. 
It was unnecessary to discuss the subject with 
a man of so congenial a nature as her hus- 
band : who, as the dirty son of a very dirty at- 



184 THE INTRIGANTE. 

torney, entertained no scruples concerning the 
nature of the ladder by which he was to climb 
up to the temple of Fortune. He was a man 
who regarded the art of living well with and in 
the world as the chief accomplishment of human 
nature ; and was now grown dextrous with 
much practice. His success in society at Malta 
had put him in good humour with himself; and 
scarcely had he played the courteous host two 
years in the Mediterranean, when he acquired, 
with the most suave and ingratiating address, a 
degree of popularity rivalling even that of his 
handsome wife. It was impossible to attack 
more shrewdly the weak point of friend and foe. 
Every body liked to talk with so capital a lis- 
tener as Clermont — every politician loved to 
argue with him, for he was always ready and 
even eager to be beaten. Did he converse with 
a blockhead — he knew nothing, and was only 
desirous to obtain instruction, on any point un- 
der discussion, whether the metaphysics of Kant, 
or the points of a pony ; while in his inter- 
course with really clever men, he bored them 
with no impertinent manoeuvres, but was ready 



THE INTRIGANTE. I85 

for an immediate encounter, hand to hand, and 
without periphrasis or peroration. 

The supple and adroit character of Cler- 
mont would have been detected in the crowd 
of London society. His extreme pliancy 
could not but afford matter for suspicion ; — it is 
natural to infer nefarious motives from such a 
waste of dexterity. But in a southern climate, 
people are too idle to raise superfluous scruples 
and inquiries touching their neighbours ; and 
the official circles at Valetta are well content to 
take a pleasant fellow as they find him, without 
investigating whether he had ever been a pick- 
pocket, or is ever likely to be a privy councillor. 
A few ill-natured people thought him strangely 
indifferent to the growing intimacy of Mrs. 
Clermont at the Government House, as well as 
to the miraculous regularity with which the 
Lord High Commissioner condescended, day 
after day, to take tiffin in his. But Clermont 
was fortified against all jealous vagaries, by 
his knowledge of the frigid egotism of his 
wife; and thought he was defending his own 



186 THE INTRIGANTE. 

cause sufficiently by whispering in confidence 
to all his acquaintance, that his lordship had 
the greatest confidence in Mrs. Clermont's 
judgment; that she occasionally acted as his 
secretary, in matters too weighty to be intrusted 
to the hands of hirelings; and that their long 
tete-a-tetes were occupied with the study of 
the last new political pamphlets from Eng- 
land. Thus enlightened, the good people of 
Valetta still sneered ; but thev said nothing. 
A few disappointed aspirants, indeed, could 
scarcely command their countenances to offer 
congratulations to the husband of the accom- 
plished amanuensis, when, in the course of the 
year, he was preferred by his Majesty's Minis- 
ters to fill the second civil appointment in the 
island ; for, though Mr. Thomas Clermont was 
celebrated for mysterious hints of the magnitude 
of his interest in the Cabinet, most people were 
of opinion that the recommendation which pro- 
cured him his new place had reached Downing- 
street all the way from the Island of Malta. 

A saint in crape is twice a saint in lawn ! 
— Mrs. Clermont, as the wife of a high official 



THE INTRIGANTE. 187 

personage, was now discovered to be one of the 
most gifted of her sex. The prosy of Valetta 
talked of going to hear her talk, just as the 
prosy of London affect to go and listen to Cole- 
ridge, that they may cram for their next conver- 
sazione. The markets of Marseilles and Bour- 
deaux were put in requisition to render her din- 
ners as good as those eaten in Arlington-street ; 
and all who had an interest in drinking their 
way to the boon-companionship of his Excel- 
lency, whom they were sure of meeting at Mrs. 
Clermont's supper-parties, made it a rule to 
drop in evening after evening at her house.' 
Few places afford better opportunities for the 
extension of an intrigante's connexion than the 
island of Malta. In addition to the resident 
officials, civil and military, it is frequented by 
the officers of the crack frigates, — the loungers 
of the crack yachts,— the elite of the crack tra- 
vellers ; — and may be considered a complete 
house of call for fine gentlemen. A lady, at 
leisure to make herself agreeable in Valetta, 
has, in fact, almost as good a chance of popula- 



188 THE INTRIGANTE. 

rity as the Governess-general of India. Mrs. 
Clermont was not slow to profit by these advan- 
tages ; and when she arrived at a Jermyn-street 
hotel, in the twenty-fourth year of her age and 
the fifth of her marriage, had managed to ac- 
quire a considerable acquaintance among the 
lordlings and Honourable Fredericks of the ad- 
joining clubs of St. James's- street; to say no- 
thing of the warm friendship of a certain Lady 
Gertrude Greyville, who had been driven to 
Malta by consumptive symptoms the preceding 
winter, and welcomed to a commodious and 
cheerful home by Mrs. Clemen t''s well-timed 
hospitality. The two ladies became as Helena 
and Hermia ; and strange to say, as the health 
of Lady G. improved, that of Mrs. C. gradually 
declined. Some people, being of opinion that 
consumption is a contagious malady, chose to 
regard Nancy as a martyr to friendship; while 
others, who consider affectation as still more in- 
fectious, protested that she only wanted an ex- 
cuse for lying on the sofa, and wearing a be- 
coming cap. But babblers such as these knew 



THE INTRIGANTE. 189 

nothing of Mrs. Clermont ; — her views were far 
more excursive. 

It may be noted, among the anomalies of the 
modern art of healing, that persons becoming 
hectic in England are instantly ordered to a 
warm climate, — Lisbon or Madeira during the 
war with France, — Italy or Sicily at the pre- 
sent time ; but no sooner does some wretched 
individual begin to cough in the Mediterranean, 
than he is sentenced home " to try his natal 
air.'* Mrs. Clermont, for some reasons best 
known to herself and her husband, had long 
been anxious to try hers; and her phthisical 
symptoms increased so rapidly a short time be- 
fore Lady Gertrude's return to England, that 
the grateful friend would not hear of leaving 
her behind. Lady Gertrude, who had been an 
heiress, and was still a beauty, was not in the 
habit of experiencing contradiction. She in- 
sisted that her beloved Anne (whose husband 
was detained at Malta by his official duties) 
should accompany her home; and, after a 
great deal of douce violence, Mrs. Clermont 
was persuaded to assent to a scheme of 



190 THE INTRIGANTE. 

her own planning. The Greyvilles had al- 
ready obtained a passage in the frigate com- 
manded by their relative, Captain Rosse ; and 
due representation having been made of the 
hospitality exercised towards themselves by the 
Clermonts, and of the lady's interesting state of 
health, the kind-hearted sailor good-naturedly 
consented to burthen himself with an additional 
passenger. He had at least the satisfaction of 
seeing that the assistance thus afforded was most 
effective. It was surprising how rapidly the 
invalid recovered her health and spirits during 
the voyage. Before they reached the Bay of 
Biscay, she had attained the bloom of a damask 
rose ; and when she arrived in town, and settled 
herself in a small but elegant house in Curzon- 
street, was restored to health as completely as 
Lady Gertrude herself. 

Her recovery was, to say the least of it, ex- 
ceedingly a propos. Mrs. Clermont arrived in 
the middle of the London season ; by no means 
a convenient moment for being either sick, or 
sorry, or ugly. It was May ; bright, shining, 
stirring, auspicious May ; and the Queen of the 



THE INTRIGANTE. 191 

Mediterranean seemed bent on beguiling the 
time, by looking as like it as possible. Scarcely 
had Captain Rosse circulated at his club the 
news of the Greyvilles' arrival, with a tribute of 
applause to the cheerful disposition of their 
friend, and the charm she had contributed to 
their voyage, when all her former Mediterra- 
nean votaries thronged to greet her. Her gates 
were more besieged by Honourable Post Cap- 
tains, than those of the Admiralty, — by boy Co- 
lonels and baby Captains, than those of the Horse 
Guards; — and the whole United Service Club 
was of opinion, that never had their dear Mrs. 
Clermont looked so handsome, or been so agree- 
able. All their wives, mothers, or sisters, were 
brought to leave grateful visiting tickets for the 
amiable woman who had been as their wife, 
mother, or sister, during their stay at Malta ; — 
while the empressement of Lady Gertrude^s 
noble family, the De Tracy s, knew no bounds. 
In the course of a week or two, Mrs. Clermont 
found herself almost as much the darhng of 
London society, as she had ever been of that of 
Valetta. 



192 THE INTRIGANTE. 

All this she had of course foreseen and in- 
tended ; but her intentions and prognostications 
did not stop here. Her object was Murray, — 
the influential Murray, — the rising statesman, 
the embryo great man ; and the agitated start, 
deep flush^. and tremulous demeanour with 
which she saw herself recognised by her once 
dear Berkley, in the flurry of a fashionable ball- 
room, served to convince her that, if her influ- 
ence over his feelings had been suspended, it 
was by no means extinguished. He was by her 
side in a moment ; — at her feet on the following 
day !— 

From the moment of Mrs. Clermont^s debut 
in the great world, she had been hailed as ador- 
able ; but this last circumstance was decisive. 
Berkley Murray was the lion of the hour ; the 
man whose oratory drew crowds to the ventila- 
tor, and filled the newspapers with notes of 
admiration ; the man without whom no dinner- 
giver could venture to dine, nor a feeder of the 
coteries presume to whistle her menagerie of 
outlandish beasts together. No sooner was it 
seen or suspected that " Lady Gertrude Grey- 



THE INTRIGANTE. 193 

ville's lovely and interesting friend" was also 
the lovely and interesting friend of Berkley 
Murray, than she became a very goddess in- 
deed. It certainly would have puzzled the late 
wife of the reverend Doctor Danby, fully as 
much as the mother of the Palmer in Marmion, 
to detect her child in the distinguished-looking 
young woman who now held Almack's and his 
Majesty's Secretary of State in thrall, and shone 
as " the Cynosure of neighbouring eyes" among 
the fashionables of May Fair. 

Mrs. Clermont had in fact a thousand per- 
sonal claims to notice. She was tall, graceful, 
finely formed ; with the most luxuriant black 
hair, and the most animated countenance in 
the world. Her looks were all expression ; and 
her way of listening to a story eloquence itself. 
Her taste was pure and highly cultivated ; her 
tact needed no cultivation. No one dressed so 
well, — no one talked so well, — no one walked 
so well, — no one rode, no one did the honours 
of her house, no one afforded so bright an 
ornament to other people's, as Mrs. Cler- 
mont; — there was a certain airiness in lier 

VOL. III. K 



194 THE INTRIGANTE. 

appearance that perfected the elegance of her 
face and figure. The heau-monde was fairly 
taken by storm ! They asked no questions 
about her; voted the Hon. Berkley a very 
lucky dog ; and either did not know, or did not 
care, whether there happened to be a Mr. Cler- 
mont in existence; — whether she had still a hus- 
band or had ever had a father. 



THE INTRIGANTE. 195 



CHAPTER V. 



There is no defence against reproach but obscurity. 
It is a kind of concomitant to greatness ; as satires and 
invectives were an essential part of a Roman triumph. 

Addison. 

" Doctor," said the Earl of Farrington, (not 
the old earl but the new earl, — Berkley's father 
having been gathered to the earls his ancestors 
in the family vault). " I see the name of a 
Mrs. Clermont in the newspapers. Your 
daughter cannot surely be resident in town?" 

Old Darnley, who had now the advantage of 
two paralytic attacks and an excessive deafness 
to encrease his original dulness, looked blank 
and said nothing. 

" His lordship inquires, sir, whether my sister 
Nancy is living in London?" bawled the Rev- 

K 2 



196 ' THE INTRIGANTE. 

erend Samuel, most irreverently into the ear of 
his parent. 

" Nancy ? — thank you kindly, my lord ! " 
squeaked the old doctor, stopping short at the 
gate of the church-yard; the conversation be- 
ing an effort of condescension on the part of 
the patron of Lullingholme towards the officious 
rector and the curate his son, who thought it 
their duty to escort him, after sermon, from the 
door of the vestry to that of his carriage. " My 
daughter, Mrs. Clermont, writes me word her 
health is much better for her voyage home, 
but not yet strong enough for a journey here ; 
and so she has taken lodgings in town for 
the advantage of medical advice. Not but 
what, in my opinion, our good Doctor Quinine 
here might have brought her round as well as 
all the king's physicians in a lump. Going ? — 
your lordship's obedient humble servant." 

"Medical advice! — delicate health!" mused 
the earl, while his carriage rolled back to the 
Castle, as if the head coachman rejoiced as 
heartily as his lord's lordship that their weekly 
duties were over. " Then, after all, it cannot be 



THE IMTRIGANTE. 197 

old Danby's daughter whose comings and go- 
ings are so carefully recorded in the public 
prints ; who dances at Almack's, and adorns 
the drawing-room. I thought she had taken 
a most miraculous stride in the world. * The 
beautiful and accomplished Mrs. Clermont!' 
what could put it into my head to confuse old 
Danby's beetle-browed maypole with this new 
meteor of fashion ! '* 

His lordship had not half done wondering at 
his blunder, when the deep rumble of passing 
under an embattled gateway informed him he 
had arrived at home ; a circumstance the less 
cheering that he had merely taken up his quar- 
ters at the Castle on his road from another seat 
to the metropolis, and had not a single visitor, 
nor the hope of one, to render the three days he 
was about to pass in his own company less for- 
midably dull. The prospect of a long spring 
Sunday, passed alone in the old library, induced 
him almost to regret that he had not followed 
the family custom, and invited both vicar and 
curate home to dinner. But " a change" was 
on the point of overtaking " the spirit of his 



198 THE INTRIGANTE. 

dream," which rendered such a catastrophe su- 
perfluous. 

As he passed through the inner vestibule, 
Lord Farrington was struck by the sight of a 
hat lying in a familiar guise on the marble slab ; 
nor did the bosom of Robinson Crusoe beat 
with wilder vehemence on detecting the foot- 
print on the sand, than that of the desolate 
lord at the sight of a " town-made" Bond- 
street sold beaver, so full of promise as the 
one before him. He anticipated iio common 
guest. There was a dashing originality in the 
cut of the article, that convinced him the in- 
comparable Frank Bradshaw was his inmate; 
and scarcely was the door of the book-room 
thrown open by the sedate, well-powdered, prig- 
gish butler in waiting, when he beheld his cou- 
sin in propria persona, attempting to vault over 
the parapet wall bounding the terrace. 

" Frank ! Frank Bradshaw, my dear boy ! " 
ejaculated Lord Farrington; "by Jove, I'm de- 
lighted to see you !" But he might as well have 
restricted his apostrophe to the hat. Bradshaw 
was, according to his custom, engrossed by the 



THE INTRIGANTE. 199 

object of the moment : and till he had fairly 
accomplished his project, and cleared at a bound 
the terrace wall, with the flower border and the 
gravel walk below, his noble friend had no 
chance of catching eye, or ear, or tongue. 

" Farr ! my fine fellow," cried he at last, 
when, perceiving the arrival of his host, he 
dashed back through the open window, and was 
stretched at full length on the air-cushion sofa, 
with the celerity of a Harlequin. " Here we 
cross, at the equinoctial point — you up to town 
for the season, — /to the North for salmon 
fishing. Like to see my new fly ? — Linnean 
Society going to present me with a medal for 
the invention. Got a thousand ready made up. 
Caught two swallows and a sand-martin with 
them already, angling out of the britchka as 

came down from town. — Like to see one ? " 

" Thank you, I am ijo judge. My brother 
Berkley is the Piscator of the family; or was, 
before he took to spreading his nets in Parlia- 
ment, and {)aiting his hooks with " 

"Berkley? — Berkley Murray is just now 
floundering in a stream whence fish are landed 



200 THE INTRIGANTE. 

only to be made bait of. Berkley ! — no, no ! 
his days of rod and line are past and over. 
But to judge from appearances he has provided 
a rod for his own back in a new line : — eh ? — 
ah ? — rod — line — smart — eh ? " 

" A new line ? — I should have thought that 
Downing-street left him little leisure for no- 
velty hunting ? " 

" By the way, they say this Mrs. Clermont 
is no novelty. It seems that she and Berkley 
used to play Phoebus and Daphne together 
while he was an urchin in petticoats ! — eh ? — 
ah? — Phoebus and Daphne ? — eh? " 

" Mrs. Clermont ! — The lovely and accom- 
plished individual we read of in the Morning 
Post, is, after all, then, positively and truly old 
Danby's ugly hoyden ? — Phoebus and Daphne, 
my dear Frank ! — Trust me, the nymph has expe- 
rienced a metamorphosis twice as miraculous ! '' 

^' Ugly ? never beheld a more splendid crea- 
ture ! A poef s heau ideal of Cleopatra ; 

Fair is her brow, but darkly delicate 
Her cheek ! 

Mignon in her maturity ! — Ninon in her girl- 



THE INTRIGANTE. 201 

hood ! — His Majesty's Secretary for the Home 
Department has every excuse for his infatua- 
tion." 

" Do you mean that Murray is making an 
ass of himself by the pubUcity of his homage to 
this obscure adventurer ? " 

" Obscure? — Mrs. Clermont is just now the 
person par excellence. Society has always a 
bagged fox in reserve, to insure a good season's 
sport. No matter who, — what, — where, — which, 
— why; — Parson Irving, St. John Long, Ramo- 
hun Roy, the Duchesse de Berri, Fanny Kem- 
ble, Walter Scott,— good, bad, indifferent, far 
or »ear ; — Hatton Garden, Fon thill, Skolholt, 
or the ball of St. Paul's." 

" And my father's attorney's son's wife, then, 
is, at this present gossipping, the centre of the 
fashionable sphere ? — Oh ! ye Athenians ! " 

" Eh ! — what!^ — how ! — Lord Farrington's 
son's attorney's wife, did you say ? — Mrs. Cler- 
mont the wife of an attorney's son ? — Mrs, 
Clermont — the Mrs. Clermont? — A frank, my 
dear Farr ! — a frank ! I 'm a made man. Ladv 

K 5 



202 THE INTRIGANTE. 

Louisa Marcham will put me into her white 
book for the remainder of my days, for such a 
piece of intelligence. A frank, an thou lovest 
me ! " 

" Nay, I shall lend no aid to the circulation 
of a libel so big with the greatness of truth, 
respecting any dulcinea of my brother's. If 
Murray, — or the stars, — or the foolhood of the 
great world, choose to instal Miss Nancy as a 
goddess, — with all my heart ! Let her even 
call herself the Lady Anne Clermont, and I 
will do nothing to nip her budding honours." 

"What ! — connive at a tacit imposture? — Fie, 
my dear Farr 1 — I tell you this thing of pounce 
and parchment is received as a fashionable gem 
of the first water." 

" And what then .? — In these enlightened 
times, when every blockhead one meets affects 
the cunning blade, and all the women in the 
world pretend to be thought women of the 
world, it is delicious to see the knowing ones 
taken in. In spite of Almack's, with all its 
vouchers, — in spite of Tattersall's, with all its 



THE INTRIGANTE. 203 

pedigrees, — one sometime finds such gross frauds 
successful ! People who insist upon seeing into 
a millstone, are so apt to break their noses in the 
examination ! " 

" My philosophy is of a very different nature," 
cried Frank, taking a gold patent pen-maker 
from his waistcoat pocket, and proceeding to the 
writing table. " The only esprit to which / pre- 
tend is esprit de corps. In the purity of my 
conscience I really can't allow Lady Louisa and 
my own especial clique to be imposed upon ; — 
So here goes — 

'DEAR LADY LOU, 

* Cut the Clermont sans cerhnonie (The 
creature is a country curate's daughter, — a 
London attorney's daughter-in-law ) ; and place 
your escape from her acquaintance to the ac- 
count of Your ladyship's obedient, 
' Farrington Castle.' F. Bradshaw.' 

There! — I need not add ' Sunday,' by way of date. 
— Who writes letters in the country except on 
Sundays ? " 



204 THE INTRIGANTE. 

" Well, my dear Bradshaw, since you insist 
on making a little mischief, here is your envelope. 
The history may circulate for a week or two, as 
one of ' Bradshaw's entire;' and there will be 
no great harm done." 

There was harm done, however ; — very con- 
siderable harm. An association between Frank's 
anecdote and Lord Farrington's frank, with 
some mysterious cpnnection previously suspected 
between Mrs. Clermont and the Murray family, 
induced more faith in the tale than was usually 
bestowed on Frank Bradshaw's romances ; and 
Lady Louisa^ whose designs on Berkley had 
been circumvented by the arrival of the Maltese 
goddess, now permitted herself to assume to- 
wards her a tone of the most piquant imper- 
tinence. It is surprising how far a woman of 
fashion may push her insults, having the majority 
on her side ! The word ' adventurer,' enlisted 
a considerable party on that of Lady Louisa ; 
both prompting her and prompted by her, to 
pursue a war of words of the most harassing and 
vexatious kind with the discomfited lady of Berk- 
ley Murray's love. 



THE INTRIGANTE. 205 

The old history of Mademoiselle de la Valliere 
and the Duchess of Orleans, was accordingly 
renewed. It is not to be supposed that the 
high-spirited Murray would leave her exposed 
to the impertinence of a set of insolent women, 
to whom she was only obnoxious on account 
of her devoted friendship for himself. No 
sooner did they commence their attack upon his 
lovely friend, no sooner did their raillery draw 
tears from her fine eyes, than putting lance in 
rest, he appeared publicly as her champion. 
Generously sensitive to the indignities incurred 
by Mrs. Clermont for his sake, he rendered his 
homage more marked, more public than ever ; 
was seldom to be seen in the circles of the beau 
monde without his Circe leaning on his arm; 
was constantly to be detected behind the crimson 
curtain of Lady Gertrude's opera box ; and to 
be suspected behind that of Mrs. Clermont's 
boudoir window, — when a general sentence of 
" not at home" excluded daily multitudes of less 
interesting visitors. Tears afford, after all, one 
of the most potent arguments of the sex ; and 
(from the period of those wept by Maria Theresa 



206 THE INTRIGANTE. 

to her Hungadan States which collected an 
army round her throne, to those with wliicli 
Miss O'Neill washed away the offences of Mrs. 
Haller in the sight of all the prudes in the 
kingdom) never was there a more effective flood 
than the one extorted from the onyx eyes of 
Mrs. Clermont by the insolence of her rival. 

Perhaps it was the dread of a second attack 
upon his susceptibility from the same channel, 
that induced the exertion of Secretary Murray's 
interest, by which (six months after Mrs. Cler- 
mont's arrival in England) his Majesty's Gazette 
announced his Majesty's nomination of Thomas 
Vernon Clermont, Esq. to be a Commissioner of 
his Majesty's Excise. Perhaps he inferred from 
the depression of her spirits, how eager she was 
that her loving lord should become the servant 
of his Majesty's Government, in any other de- 
partment than the Colonial ? — Frank Bradshaw 
and Lady Louisa Marcham thought otherwise. 
They declared to each other, and even whispered 
to Lord Farrington, that Mrs. Clermont was 
aware the world had begun to wonder how she 
could he so ill, and look so well ; — and how soon 



THE INTRIGANTE. 207 

she would find it convenient to return to her 
conjugal duties in the Mediterranean. The 
grimace made by Frank, on learning that the 
Clermonts had engaged a capital mansion in 
Spring-gardens which it was their intention to 
render a general rendezvous to the official vvorld, 
was almost as ripe with implications as the 
wasrffins of Lord Burlei^^^h's head in the Critic. 

DO O o 

But it signified little what was said or thought 
on the subject. Mr. C, was now the annuitant 
of the country to the amount of between two 
and three thousand a year ; and Mrs. C, at 
five-and-twenty, had accomplished a triumph 
overtime, place, and circumstance, entitling her 
to rank among the most successful intrigantes 
of the day. 



208 THE INTRIGANTE. 



CHAPTER VI. 



Every thing may be mimicked by hypocrisy, but humi- 
lity and love united. The more rare humility and love, 
the more radiant w^hen they meet. Lavater. 

It was Christmas when the newspapers an- 
nounced that Mr. and Mrs. Clermont had taken 
possession of their new residence : — it was Christ- 
mas when Lady Gertrude Greyville read aloud 
to a small circle of guests assembled at Tracy 
Park, the Hon. Mr. Murray's formal apologies 
for declining her invitation for the holidays. 

" How provoking ! " cried she, as her husband 
entered the room. " I have had a series of dis- 
appointments about our party. The Clermonts 
are engaged in arranging their new establish- 
ment; that amusing creature Bradshaw never 
stirs from their fireside ; and now, it seems that 
we cannot even get Berkley Murray ! We shall 



THE INTRIGANTE. 209 

have no charades, no tableaux, no theatricals, no 
any thing/' 

" We can do very well without them," said 
Bob Greyville, a dull man, who hated to be 
overcrowed at his own table by the brilliant 
coterie of wits assembled by his wife ; " I hate 
people who are professionally amusing. All 
their monkey-tricks are rehearsed beforehand : 
and it is making a mere stage of society to be 
always acting and applauding." 

" Acting or applauding," said Lady Gertrude 
laughing. " Don't let us suppose the actors are 
compelled to encourage their own efforts." 

" I am sorry, however that Murray cannot 
come," resumed Greyville ; who had some little 
sympathy with a man as silent if not as stupid 
as himself — " Murray's a very superior person ; — 
never speechifies except in the House; — nor dic- 
tates, unless to his underlings in office. I like 
Murray amazingly." 

" Mr. Murray is a very superior person," said 
old Sir Robert Greyville. 

*' A very rising man, certainly," added his 
lady. 



210 THE INTRIGANTE. 

** A very agreeable companion/' said Antonia, 
their daughter, with her head studiously declined 
over her cup of coffee. 

" A devilish good fellow ! " cried Captain 
Rosse, who was seated beside his cousin. " Not 
an atom of official priggism about him. And 
yet what an advance he has made since he re- 
turned from America ! Very few people guessed 
what Murray had in him, when first he came 
into Parliament." 

" Mr. Murray is very quiet, very undemon- 
strative," replied Miss Greyville, to whom he 
seemed to turn for an answer, though his ob- 
servations were addressed to the table in ge- 
neral. 

a Very quiet, till he is roused. But strike 
out a single spark, and no one can tell where 
the conflagration will end." 

" No uncommon case. It would have been a 
greater miracle for him who smote the rock in 
Horeb, to staunch than to call forth the gush- 
ing stream." 

" That's just one of Murray's own figures of 
speech!" cried Rosse heartily. "Murray has 



THE INTRIGANTE. 211 

all the enthusiasm of genius ; — not the froth of 
mere effervescence, but the fervour of a noble 
spirit." 

He was rewarded for this sally by a smile 
from his cousin Antonia, such as his attempts 
to please could not always elicit from her sweet 
lips ; and Lady Greyville, who had been look- 
ing anxiously towards them during their col- 
loquy, now began an eager inquiry of her 
daughter-in-law, respecting the drive projected 
for their morning's amusement. But Captain 
Rosse was not to be silenced on a theme that 
seemed productive of satisfaction to Miss Grey- 
ville. 

" Many people think that, on Lord Wol- 
stan's retirement, Berkley Murray will succeed 
to the ministry. I have heard it said, indeed, 
that he is to have a peerage ; but I fancy they 
can't do without him in the Lower House." 

" Surely he is very young for such an office?" 
inquired Antonia, raising her face and disco- 
vering the blush by which it was overspread. 
" His friends would look with some anxietv, I 



212 THE INTRIGANTE. 

should imagine, on so responsible an appoint- 
ment?'' 

" No, by Jove ! — His friends would take it 
quietly enough ; his enemies would be the people 
to raise an outcry. I never saw the man yet, 
who did not resign himself patiently to the 
heaviest responsibility incurred by a bosom 
friend's acceptance of office." 

" Mr. Murray has, however, many old and 
faithful friends," persisted Antonia mildly. 

" Ay ! — and a few new and faithless ones, or I 
am much mistaken," interrupted Rosse. " Wit- 
ness the tribe of Clermont, in all its odour of 
profaneness." 

" The Clermonts can scarcely be called 
friends of Mr. Murray. His intimacy with 
them has done, and is likely to do him irrepa- 
rable injury," observed Sir Robert gravely. 

" Remember, good people, that, though out 
of sight, I am not out of hearing," said Lady 
Gertrude, who had risen from the table to an- 
swer a note in an adjoining room, the door of 
which was ajar. " They are at least my friends ; 



THE INTRIGANTE. 213 

and, as Sir Peter says, ' I leave their character 
among you.' " 

" A valuable legacy, truly," observed Rosse 
in a low tone, to be heard only by Miss Grey- 
ville. " Lady Gertrude takes care that we 
shall not have too much reason to thank her 
liberality." 

Antonia was silenced. She knew that the 
anxious eyes of her father and mother were 
upon her face ; the anxious ears of her sister-in- 
law open to catch her most trifling observation ; 
and the subject was one on which she could 
scarcely touch, without giving pain and offence 
to each and all. 

Sir Robert Grey ville, father of Bob and An- 
tonia, happened to be the nearest country neigh- 
bour of the Earl of Farrington ; and their poli- 
tics being exactly of a par, while their disparity 
of condition secured them from all bickerings of 
county rivalship, the two families grew up to- 
gether in the good fellowship that approaches 
nearest to friendship. Cricketing parties brought 
the young people together in summer; archery 
meetings in autumn; skaiting and Christmas 



214 THE INTRIGANTE. 

balls in winter; and their dancing, riding, 
and singing lessons were taken in common, 
during the spring in town. Lady Helen Mur- 
ray was the hand-in-hand companion of Maria 
and Antonia Greyville ; and Bob Greyville, the 
favourite crony of Lord Murray and Berkley. 
Now nothing is more common than for young 
ladies brought up in the monotonous seclusion 
of their fathers* parks, to fall in love with " the 
favourite cronies" of their elder brothers ; and 
whereas the Lady Helen, instead of following 
the vulgar routine, saw fit to become Mar- 
chioness of Holmebush, while Maria (whose 
character had somewhat of an angelic or 
evangelic tendency) gave her hand to a church 
dignitary of the neighbourhood, in weeds for 
his third wife, — poor Antonia was destined to 
make amends for their perversity, by devot- 
ing her whole heart and mind to young Berkley ; 
whose own heart and mind were so deeply 
pledged to the heroine of Dynington. Her 
passion, according to the approved forms of ro- 
mance, grew and prospered in proportion to 
its hopelessness ; for "Love, like the wall-flowers," 



THE INTRIGANTE. 215 

say the ballad-mongers, " flourishes best among 



ruins." 



Antonia Greyvillewas, however (jesting apart), 
a very lovely and amiable girl ; who, reared in 
comparative retirement, and mixing with few 
young people of her own age, had very naturally 
attached herself to that member of the Murray 
family, who most resembled herself in good looks 
and good qualities. Bob, her brother, having 
eloped with the heiress Lady Gertrude de Tracy 
before the attainment of his majority, and her 
elder sister having betaken herself about the 
the same time to the sanctities of Madeley vica- 
rage, Antonia was early left alone with her pa- 
rents ; who, discerning her predilection for the 
younger son of their old friend Lord Farring- 
ton, and ignorant of his engagements elsewhere, 
had no scruple in sanctioning their intimacy 
during Berkley's college vacations. They even 
hinted their suspicions to Lord Farrington, 
and received his ready concurrence in their 
opinion that Antonia's twenty thousand pounds, 
and the thousand per annum destined by the 
Earl to his younger son, would afford the young 



216 THE mTRIGANTE. 

couple a sufficient maintenance, when brightened 
by the hopes which talents so considerable as 
those of Berkley Murray seemed to sanc- 
tion. 

It was in this state of affairs that intelligence 
of the hero of their romance's engagement, burst 
upon the astonished trio ! — The first difficulty 
that presented itself, was the task of extending the 
disclosure to Antonia. The idol of her parents 
(who had been somewhat alienated by the way- 
ward marriages of their two elder children), the 
gentle Antonia Greyville was dear even to the 
selfish old lord of Farrington Castle ; and her mild 
disposition and steady prudence, redeemed from 
the charge of egotism by enthusiastic nobleness of 
spirit, — were indeed such as to justify a partial 
father in seeking her as a bride for his son. 
One of the great aggravations of Berkley's of- 
fence in Lord Farrington's eyes, was the impos- 
sibility it brought with it of welcoming home 
Antonia as his daughter ; while Sir Robert and 
his wife had no scruple in accusing young Mur- 
ray of having practised ungenerously on the 
affections of their child. In this emergency, 



THE INTRIGANTE. 2 IT 

Antonia became the firm and generous advocate 
of the banished Berkley. 

" Remember, dear mother," said she, attempt- 
ing to pacify the exasperated Lady Greyville, 
'' that we only are to blame. We invited him 
here, — tried to make his visits cheerful and in- 
duce his return. His walks, and drives, and 
studies with me, if not proposed by ourselves, 
were at least eagerly acquiesced in ; and believe 
me, on my most faithful word, that not a syllable 
has ever passed his lips which could be inter- 
preted into a declaration of love." — 

"As an engaged man he had no right to* 
foster the growth of an attachment on your 
part, such as he cannot but have clearly per- 
ceived." 

" I trust not," cried Antonia, colouring 
slightly. " I trust I have not so far tarnished 
my self-respect as to make hhn aware of a 
weakness I had no motive to conceal from 
my mother. No ! I am convinced that Mur- 
ray attributed my predilection for his society to 
tlie same friendship, the same cordiality of early 
regard, which brought him hither." 

VOL. III. L 



218 THE INTRIGANTE. 

" Then why not confide to you the perplex- 
ities of his position ? " 

" ProbabJy he was bound by some promise of 
secrecy to Miss Danby. Nay ! dear madam, 
turn not away ! I may be blind or partial in 
my interpretation of his conduct — but be not, 
in your turn, too severe. Remember how many 
difficulties poor Berkley has just now to over- 
come ; and do not aggravate Lord Farring- 
ton's displeasure by the confession of our mor- 
tification." 

Nor did these generous effusions of senti- 
ment proceed from girlish bravado. Antonia's 
first interview with Lord Farrington after his 
son's departure for America, was a trying ordeal ; 
but by assumed cheerfulness she completely 
deceived the old man into a notion that 
he had wasted a very superfluous degree of 
sympathy on the sufferings of his neighbour's 
child. Nay, even Lady Greyville and Sir 
Robert were at last induced to admit that they 
had overrated the extent of their daughter's 
attachment. Antonia would have accounted it 
a sin to indulge in the display of feelings likely 



THE INTRIGANTE. 219 

to give them pain. Divers, however, and 
diversely eligible were the oiFers of marriage to 
which she turned a deaf ear, or persuaded her 
father and mother to oppose their disapproval, 
and if it were indeed her object to drive the 
young attache from her memory, she certainly 
did not seek to secure his ejection by the substi- 
tution of another in his place. Labouring 
strenuously to prove to Sir Robert and her 
mother that she had regained her composure of 
mind, she now entered with animation into 
the diversions of the metropolis ; and dressed, 
danced, and smiled, among the most popular 
dressers, dancers, and smilers of the great world. 
But she had no confidante, — no Norah in white 
dimity, to whom to admit the violence done to 
her feelings by the resignation of self to the hap- 
piness of her father and mother ; or it would 
have been seen that there was something touch- 
ing and holy in her forced gaiety. 

It is only by favour of poetical license, that 
girlhood is represented as a season of strong pas- 
sions. No heroine, tragic epic or romantic, can 
be permitted to exceed the early blush of her 

L 2 



220 THE INTRIGANTE. 

teens ; nor would the most philosophical reader 
be inclined to lavish his sympathy on a Helen of 
thirty years' experience. But those best ac- 
quainted with the sex are aware that passion is 
incompatible with legal minority ; and that 
damsels of sweet sixteen are far more addicted 
to a foihlesse for cherry-pie and a new sash, 
than for heroic virtues or heroic frailties. Even 
Shakspeare has endowed his exquisite Juliet, 
in all but her earliest scenes, with impulses 
far too impassioned for her years; and of all 
his heroines, Miranda alone is a girl, — a 
mere girl — and nothing but a girl. But An- 
tonia Greyville was within only two years of 
Berkley Murray's age ; and when at four- 
and-twenty he re-crossed the Atlantic, she had 
attained the sober demeanour and maturer 
impulses of twenty-two. No longer intoxi- 
cated by the flatterers of the ball-room or frip- 
peries of fashionable life, it was her pleasure, 
— her painful pleasure, — to listen to details of 
the honours achieved by the young secretary, 
and the unexampled popularity attending his 
career. His fame was now public property : 



THE INTRIGANTE. 221 

the " one loved name," afforded the burthen of 
general conversation. " Murray's oratory," — 
" Murray's influence," — " Murray's steadiness 
and self-possession," were incessantly bruited in 
her ears. 

But while listening admiringly and with the 
truest sympathy to all these praises, she fancied 
herself proof against any evil influence over her 
feelings. After the first fatal moment of disen- 
chantment which proved that, while wandering 
by her side summer after summer in the woods 
of Farrington, with Shakspeare in their hands, 
and living poetry all around them, the affec- 
tions she had believed her own were far away 
at Dynington, with the tutor's daughter, she 
had never deceived herself touching Berkley and 
his sentiments ; and not even the marriage of 
Anne Dan by prompted her to renew for a mo- 
ment the dream of her defeated hopes. If 
Berkley had resisted her influence while fair and 
young and fondly confiding, he was not likely 
to find it more potent now that her cheek was 
paler, her smile less frequent, her words less 
unreservedly ingenuous. Lady Greyville, how- 



222 THE INTRIGANTE. 

ever, thought otherwise. She saw that the 
fervour and enthusiasm of Murray's character 
were now sobered into a more common-place 
frame of mind ; — that he was no longer a vision- 
ary and a theorist, but an active, practical, 
matter-of-fact official man ; — that instead of 
being dazzled, as in his buoyant youthj by a 
showy exterior, he was now attracted by those 
better qualities of heart and mind in which her 
daughter's superiority was unimpeachable. He 
had grown reserved too in proportion as he 
found himself an object of general attention ; 
or, overwearied by his public exertions, sought 
only the society of persons with whom long ac- 
quaintance placed him at his ease. Among 
these the Grevilles stood first. His old friend 
Bob and his fashionable wife were valetudina- 
rianizing abroad ; but Sir Robert and Sir Ro- 
bert's wife and daughter, were still within a 
few hour's reach of Farrington Castle during 
the holidays; still stationed in Arlington-street 
from February to July, to be dropped in upon, 
and consulted and chosen as the consolers of his 
public irritations, whenever the rising politician 



THE INTRIGANTE. S23 

Could snatch a leisure hour from the peremp- 
tory duties of his calling. Antonia, indeed 
(falling into the reverse of her former error), 
philosophically attributed his preference of their 
society to that of the brilliant crowd in which 
he was courted, to the mere force of habit, and 
the influence of old acquaintanceship ; but her 
parents were of opinion, that she was no less 
mistaken than before. 

There was, indeed, one argument in favour 
of such an opinion, with which they were at pre- 
sent unacquainted. Berkley had originally attri- 
buted Anne Danby's marriage to the undue 
influence of her parents and his own ; and, re- 
garding her as a victim, was inclined to over- 
look those defects of character, which increased 
knowledge of the world had created among the 
reminiscences of their connexion. He had be- 
come conscious that her disposition was flighty, 
— her sentiments exaggerated, — her manners 
coarse, — her person defective ; but so long as he 
was bound to consider her sacrificed to his 
interests and prospects, it was impossible to 
withdraw his affections. Anne, his own be- 



224 THE INTRIGANTE. 

loved Anne, must not be the less dear to his 
heart that she had been forced, for his sake, 
into the arms of a vulgar attorney. 

But this illusion (all-potent during his ba- 
nishment at Washington) vanished very shortly 
after his arrival in that hubbub of tumult and 
scandal, which has established a telegraph of gos- 
sip on the banks of the Thames in communion 
with the uttermost ends of the earth. The first 
inquiry hazarded of the first Mediterranean tra- 
veller of the season with whom the first 
fashionable dinner party brought him in con- 
tact, sufficed to inform him that the vulgar 
attorney's repining wife was the leading star of 
the gaieties of Valetta ; and that, instead of 
cherishing a pensive tenderness for the lover of 
her youth, all her efforts to please were directed 
towards the captivation of a vulgar old Lord 
High Commissioner, who loved her better than 
any thing but arrack punch. Interested motives 
could have alone suggested so vile a degradation 
of her charms ; and it was natural enough 
that the disappointed Murray should turn 
from the glaring picture of the bold, flirting, 



THE INTRIGANTE. 225 

intriguing Mrs. Clermont, to the mild tranquil- 
lity and confiding friendship of Antonia Grey- 
vilJe, and feel that he could not love her enough 
in apology for having formerly preferred the 
fierce and unfeminine daughter of Mr. Danby. 
He redoubled his attentions — was continually at 
Sir Robert's house. His confidential conversa- 
tions with the well-read and discriminatino^ An- 
tonia, embraced even the principles and projects 
of his public life. From such a companion 
what indeed had he to conceal ? — To such 
a companion whom could he possibly prefer ? 
In her he found a soother of his labours — a 
strengthener of his principles — a fosterer of his 
hopes — a guardian angel for his fireside ; — and 
what could he wish for more ? — Alas ! it was no 
wish of his which, at that fatal crisis, summoned 
Mrs. Clermont from the Mediterranean. It 
was no preconceived act of treachery which 
caused the rising blushes to wither anew on An- 
tonia's cheek — and a second vision of happiness 
(a second, how far dearer than the first ! ) to 
vanish from her hopes. 

On learning the intrigante^s arrival in Lon- 

L 5 



226 THE INTKIGANTE* 

don, in company with her own flighty sister-in- 
law. Miss Greyville experienced no anxiety 
beyond a regret that Murray should be mo- 
lested by her presence. But his visits ta 
Arlington-street soon grew shorter and less 
frequent. In proportion as Mrs. Clermont's 
fame and popularity extended, Antonia saw her 
own influence decline ; till, at length, it became 
a consolation to her feelings that he withdrew 
himself wholly from her society. After all that 
she had felt and hoped, it was indeed difficult 
to receive him with courtesy as the avowed lover 
of Mrs. Clermont. 



THE INTRIGANTE. 227 



CHAPTER VII. 



Opinion governs all mankind. 
Like the blind's leading of the blind ; 
For he that hath no eyes in *s head 
Must be by a dog glad to be led ; 
And no beasts have so little in 'em 
As that inhuman brute — opinion ! 

Butler, 

* 

Lady Gertrude Greyville, although well- 
meaning and inoffensive, was too volatile to ob- 
tain the confidence, too heartless to warm the 
affections of her husband's family. Her mother- 
in-law, out of all patience with the friend she 
had injudiciously selected at Malta and un- 
luckily brought back with her to England, did 
not however venture to entrust her discretion 
with the circumstances with which their inti- 
macy with Lord Farrington had made them 
acquainted, touching the conduct and princi- 



228 THE INTRIGANll;. 

pies of Dr. Danby's daughter ; or with the evil 
she had wrought against Antonia's hopes and 
Antonia's happiness. Lady Gertrude dearly 
Joved her gentle sister-in-law ; and her first im- 
pulse would have been to attack Mr. Murray on 
the subject of his inconstancy, and her next to 
call on her friend, Mrs. Clermont, for her ex- 
culpation. 

Not a syllable therefore was suffered to 
transpire in her hearing ; and nothing but the 
intervention of Antonia's lucky planet pre- 
vented the whole party being assembled toge- 
ther at Tracy Park for the holidays. Lady 
Gertrude thought she had done wonders in 
inviting her cousin. Captain Rosse, whom her 
whole family were pressing upon Miss Grey- 
ville's acceptance ; and it was simply with a 
view to her own pleasure and diversion that she 
tried to secure the company of Murray and 
their common friepds the Clermonts. She was 
not unaware, indeed, that the breath of scandal 
had breathed somewhat bitterly on the reputa- 
tion of her friend; that at Malta, the gallant 
Governor — in London, the Right Honourable 



THE INTRIGANTE. 229 

Secretary, — were supposed to exercise an undue 
influence over her feelings, and be unduly in- 
fluenced in their turn bv her fascinations. But 
Lady Gertrude was an innocent person, and 
had proportionate faith in the well-doing of 
other people. Herself of unblemished reputa- 
tion, she had nothing to gain by deteriorating 
the fair fame of her friends ; and only loved her 
dear Mrs. Clermont the more for having been 
so vilely calumniated. 

Meanwhile, notwithstanding all Lady Grey- 
ville's indignation on hearing that Murray had 
evaded the visit to Tracy Park to which she 
had looked forward as still capable of turning 
the scale of his affections in Antonia's favour, 
and all her envy and jealousy of the intriguing 
belle on whom his company was bestowed else- 
where, Mrs. Clermont had in fact no share in 
his absence. Scarcely were his excuses de- 
spatched to his old friend Bob, and his old 
friend Mrs. Clermont's new friend Lady Ger- 
trude, when an express from Farrington Castle 
summoned him to the bed-side of his dying 
brother. An accident in hunting, aggravated 



230 THE INTRIGANTE. 

* 

by unskilful surgery, terminated the career of 
one who was looking forward to half a century's 
enjoyment of his honours; and Berkley re- 
turned to town at the expiration of a fortnight 
*' a belted Earl and a' that." The ardour of 
Mrs. Clermont's welcome was commensurate 
with his increase of honours; and poor Lady 
Greyville, who was growing old and sickly, 
became crosser than ever in considering from 
how brilliant a destiny the interposition of the 
intrigante had been the means of excluding the 
gentle Antonia. 

" My dear Lady Greyville," cried Frank 
Bradshaw, as they were all dining together 
one day at Lady Louisa Marcham's, " we look to 
you to expound to us the mystery of Farring- 
ton's connexion with these Clermont people ? — 
You are a near country neighbour, I fancy, of 
the Murrays. I remember my friend the late 
Lord saying" — he stopped short; recollecting 
that his friend the late Lord's saying too nearly 
regarded Miss Greyville and her influence over 
Berkley to be uttered in the young lady's pre- 
sence ; particularly when she had the grace to 



THE INTRIGANTE. 231 

blush SO intensely on the mere mention of his 
name. 

" I believe it is generally known," replied the 
old lady, considerably vexed, and having paused 
to collect her breath after a full glass of ma- 
deira, " that Mr. Thomas Clermont is son to 
Lord Farrington*s late man of business." 

" Anglice attorney ! " cried Bradshaw. 

" And that Mrs. Clermont," supplementized 
Sir Robert, " is the daughter of the Vicar of 
Lullingholme, Lord Farrington's nominee." 

" Anglice, his old tutor ! — Ay, ay ! just as 
I had always heard. And these are the people 
whom his influence has forced into society ; and 
whom his patronage is gradually raising to dis- 
tinction ! " — 

" And why not ? '* asked Antonia, mildly. 
" Mr. Clermont is said to be a man of superior 
abilities and great official application ; and 
Mrs. Clermont is a graceful and accomplished 
woman, an ornament to every circle in Lon- 
don." 

" Miss Greyville, shall I have the honour of 
sending you some jelly ? '' asked Frank Brad- 



S32 THE INTRIGANTE. 

shaw, with one of his most elaborate sneers, as if 
he thought her tirade unworthy of reply. 

" Lord Farrington has just got the master- 
ship of 's for a brother of Mrs. Clermont's ! *' 

observed Lady Louisa Marcham, to whom the 
very names of Clermont and Danby were an 
abomination. 

" Dr. Samuel Danby is understood to be a 
very learned man," said Antonia distinctly, and 
nothing daunted by Bradshaw's impertinent 
inferences. 

" And only last year he got the Archdea- 
conry of Leicester for her father ! " 

" What nobleman in office has done less for 
his tutor?" — again observed Miss Greyville. 
"If Dr. Danby should even live to be a Bishop, 
there would be nothing miraculous in his ele- 
vation." 

" For my part," cried Lady Louisa, " I am 
too warmly Lord Farrington's friend, not to 
regard his connexion with the Clermont clique 
with alarm and disgust. Mrs. Clermont is the 
most artful woman in the world ! " 

" 'Tis a pity he can't make her his private 



THE INTRIGANTE. 233 

secretary," cried Frank Bradshaw. " They 
say she originally pursued her intrigues at Malta 
in some such capacity." 

" She does act as his privy councillor," sneered 
Lady Louisa. " I saw her coming out of Far- 
rington House the other day, at a very singular 
hour. I did not know that even ministers of 
state were privileged to receive morning visits 
from ladies." 

" Well, well, good people ! " cried the good- 
natured Rosse, vexed to see Miss Greyville 
vexed, by hearing the conduct of her old 
friend and neighbour so impartially discussed, 
" if Mrs. Clermont were to exert herself for 
our captivation one thousandth part so much 
as she does for Farrington's, we should find 
it a hard matter to escape the snare. Never 
was there a more fascinating person where 
it is her will to please; and I predict that 
we shall live to see her one of the leading per- 
sonages of London society." 

Lady Louisa protested loudly against such a 
threat; Frank Bradshaw sneered; and Sir 
Robert and Lady Greyville looked sublimely 



234 THE INTRIGANTE. 

indignant. Nevertheless, Mr. Bradshaw's pro-* 
phesy, however extravagant in the ears of 
the GreyviJles, was already in process of ac- 
complishment. A handsome woman, really 
desirous to please, and gifted with tact and 
presence of mind, can scarcely fail of ac- 
quiring partizans; and not a day passed but 
the lady of Spring-gardens, the lady whose 
diimers were so recherche, the lady whose bon- 
mots so renowned, arid, above all, the lady who 
was looked to as the polestar by which the popu- 
lar and influential Earl of Farrington was sup- 
posed to steer his course, readily increased the 
little busy knot of acquaintance who called them- 
selves her friends. 

Lord Farrington's mansion was now the 
rendezvous of all that was illustrious in 
the political, literary, or fashionable world. 
Nothing could equal the splendour and ele- 
gance of its appointmeuts — the delicate ima- 
gining of its fetes — the high-bred tone of its 
circle. To be excluded from its coterie 
amounted almost to forfeiture of caste ; to be 
one of its habitual guests was a sufficient pass- 



THE INTRIGANTE. . 235 

port to every other house worth entering. The 
favour of the sovereign, the respect of his coad- 
jutors, the acclamations of the people, united to 
stamp the new Earl as the first man of his day, 
and fated to render that day important in the 
eyes of posterity. Yet, instead of appearing 
elated by this excess of honour, his unobtrusive 
and graceful suavity increased in proportion to 
his elevation in the world ; and if Mrs. Clermont 
grew the fairer for adulation, Lord Farrington 
assuredly became more courteous, — more consi- 
derate, — more generally agreeable. He had, in 
fact, all the elements of popularity in his character. 
No one could be more free from egotism or self- 
conceit ; no one could combine a higher tone of 
refinement with so much simplicity of taste and 
feeling ; no one could be more embued with 
the natural obligingness that constitutes the 
best sort of politeness. Instead of the effort to 
please occasionally betrayed by Mrs. Clermont, 
there was a repose about the character and 
address of Lord Farrington which showed him 
free from design, — free from arrogance, — from 



236 THE INTRIGANTE. 

an undue desire of distinction, —from the over* 
nice fastidiousness arising from want of sym- 
pathy with our fellow creatures. It was plain 
that, had he been fated to curatize for life at the 
Tile House, he would have lived and died a 
good man ; it was presumed that, having been 
called by fortune to the presidency of the 
thrones and dominions of Downing-street, — he 
would live and die a great one ! 

Most people in this world (setting apart the 
solemn hopes of immortality) may be said to 
live for some particular circle or society : — the 
country gentleman for his county, — the London 
man for his clubs,— the lawyer for his courts,— 
the intrigant for the Court, — the fashionable 
beauty for the heau-monde^ — the evangelical for 
the controversial tea-drinkings of the saints, — 
the scribbler for the wire-wove cosmogony of 
reviews and magazines, — the antiquarian in the 
dust of ages, — the dandy in the dust of the 
Parks. But a minister of state realizes more 
especially Byron's assertion that 

Our life is two-fold. 



THE INTRIGANTE. 237 

Let him have professed, previous to his ac- 
ceptance of office, the severity of an anchorite ; 
— let him have supped on roots, and burnt the 
midnight oil over his studies in the coldest 
abstraction of meditative apathy ; — yet from 
the moment he swears to devote his energies 
to the service of his king, his country, and his 
kind, — he must become a man of fashion ! There 
is no remedy for it. Old, ugly, morose, ill- 
conditioned, — he must learn to " amble gently in 
a lady's chamber;" — study the art of graceful re- 
presentation ; — ^perfume his grizzly locks ; — wear 
his ribbon with an air; — smile, smirk, and congee 
in the heated atmosphere of the ball-room; — and 
bind himself to the golden rack of fashionable 
frivolity ! It is the business of the First Lord 
of the Treasury to stand well in the eyes of the 
nation, literally and figuratively. Queens are 
to be propitiated as well as kings; — princesses 
as well as princes. So long as at public dinners 
and regal entertainments the fair creatures of 
the earth are admitted to mingle with the dark 
ones, my lord the premier, whose brow is fevered 
and withered with the cares of public responsi- 



238 THE INTRIGANTE. 

bility, — who has scarcely time to adjust his attire 
with decency, after the weariness of the council 
chamber or the secretary's bureau, — must mince 
out paltry gossip to the meretricious beauty 
smiling beside him ; and prove himself as fa- 
miliarly acquainted with the chicane of May 
Fair and the intrigues of Almack's, as with 
those of Congress or the court of St. Peters- 
burgh. Little does the unsuspecting politi- 
cian imagine, while storing his mind with the 
tough elements of his arid science, how plente- 
ously he shall be hereafter filled with good 
things; — how much turtle and venison — and 
what floods of hermitage and bourdeaux, go to 
the compounding of a popular minister ! — " Let 
us eat and drink, — for to-morrow we go out of 
office," seems the axiom of public men from 
Sardanapalus to Canning ; and it may accord- 
ingly be observed that from the moment an 
individual becomes inscribed in the list of his 
Majesty's ministers, the first thing narrated of 
him in the public prints is the name of his 
physician. — (" The Lord Chancellor is re- 
covering; — Dr. Bolus, we are happy to state. 



THE INTRIGANTE. 239 

has taken leave of his noble patient.") The 
public (good easy soul, that most credulous of 
doting old women) attributes the sufferings 
of the invalid to the fatigue of official du- 
ties; and instead of adverting to the repletion 
of cabinet dinners or the unaccustomed fever- 
heat of the gay assemblies peculiar to his grave 
vocation, — talks only of the labours of the ses- 
sion, and the consequences of a sedentary life. 

Seldom, however, does it happen that these 
lighter ministerial duties devolve upon one so 
fitted by age and aspect to do them justice, 
without perilling his life in the attempt, as the 
Earl of Farrington. His graces of person and 
address fitted him no less for the ball-room 
than the cabinet; and though, at the early date 
of three-and- thirty, he had succeeded in con- 
quering the confidence of the nation, there were 
other conquests for which he was equally well 
qualified. Not an artful mother, or flirting 
matron in London, but laboured to convince 
him of the fact, and laboured unsuccessfully. 
The onus of their disappointment was laid to 
the door of Mrs. Clermont. 



240 THE INTRIGANTE. 

If female instinct so far prevailed in Miss 
Greyville's bosom as to render the abuse of a 
rival acceptable, she might have been amply gra- 
tified by the hints and inuendos, the scandals 
and accusations, whispered against her sister-in- 
law's friend, whenever the solemn dignitaries of 
the Greyville circle were gathered together. 
Sir Robert and her ladyship were much ad- 
dicted to heavy dinner parties; and as an in- 
terlude to their grave potter respecting the 
state of public affairs, my Lord Farrington the 
minister, and Mrs. Clermont the minister's 
minister, were continually brought under dis- 
cussion ; more particularly when these sober 
synods were composed of the country neigh- 
bours of the Murray and Greyville dynasties. 

" And so, ma'am, the old Doctor at Lulling- 
holme is going to be made a dean. To think 
of some people ! — A country schoolmaster ! — a 
man whom really one hardly liked to see at 
one's table. I wonder how Lord Farrington 
can commit himself in such an extraordinary 
way ! " cried an elderly spinster one evening at 
Lady Greyville's whist-table. 



THE INTRIGANTE. 241 

" I hear he is a very venerable old man,'* 
observed a fat lady in the corner, who had five 
younger sons to provide for, and was gradually 
sidling round to the Clermont faction ; " and 
Lord Farrington's education is a sufficient tes- 
timony to his mental qualifications." 

" Farrington went to Harrow a mere boy," 
observed a man of straw in a green riband, who 
was pursing up his mouth over his hand at 
whist; "and having run through school with 
more speed than profit, was sent to Dynington 
to be crammed till it was time for college. I 
don't fancy, however, that he did much there — 
except make love to Miss Danby. My son tells 
me he made no figure at Oxford." 

" That must have been his own fault," said 
the trimmer, " for it is well known that young 

Dr. Danby, the present master of *s, is 

one of the most learned men of the day. I sat 
next him at dinner one day at one of Lord 
Farrington's big-wig parties ; and I 'm sure he 
did not say a single word I could understand. 
He was a great deal too far .north for my weak 
capacity." 

VOL. III. M 



242 THE INTRIGANTE. 

"I certainly do think," ejaculated the old 
lady who first started the subject, " that the 
way this Mrs. Clermont is courted in society 
affords a most alarming proof of the laxity of 
public morals in the age we live in. Who or 
what is Mrs. Clermont, I should like to know, 
independent of her connection with Lord Far- 
rington ; and if she really owes her consequence 
to that connexion, what are we all about who 
are seen in her society ?" — 

" We have no right to make so unjust a con- 
clusion ! Mrs. Clermont owes her distinction 
in society," observed Captain Rosse (who had 
been too busy turning over the leaves of Miss 
Grevville's sketch book to chime in earlier in 
the discussion), " to a very handsome face and 
very attractive manners." 

" And who has a right to object to the society 
of a woman living on the happiest terms with 
her husband ? — Thanks to the blessing of Eng- 
lish law, every one is innocent till proved 
guilty ; " — ^said the zealous advocate. 

'' I think a distinction should be made in the 
gender of the pronoun," cried the old lady, get- 



THE INTRIGANTE. 243 

ting very red. " Legal proof is not always 
necessary to convince the world that a woman^g 
conduct is indecorous and disgusting. Nothing, 
in fact, is less susceptible of proof; and yet — " 

" So long as an honourable man sanctions 
the conduct of his wife by treating her with 
respect and affection, she is spotless in the eyes 
of all reasonable beings," said Rosse. 

" More especially a right honourable man/' 
sneered Frank Bradshaw, who, hearing the dow- 
agers raising their voices in the dispute, had 
flown from Antonia's side, hoping to be the 
bottle-holder in a whist squabble. 

" Well, I don't suppose the Clermonts will 
keep up the farce much longer," said the green 
ribbon. " There will, probably, be a separation 
and divorce, and re-marriage, some fine autumn ; 
when all the world is busy pheasant shooting ; 
and then, proof will bring conviction; and, the 
intrigante anchor herself in an earldom at 
last." 

" One would suppose you thought Mrs. Cler- 
mont as great a goose as her neighbours," said 
Frank Bradshaw, laughing. " Divorce ? — No — 

m2 



244 THE INTRIGANTE. 

no I — she at least is wise enough to know that, 
though our ladies chaste and fair, fly to visit her 
as Farrington's mistress, not one of them would 
go near her as Farrington's wife. Doctors* 
Commons is the true Rubicon of fashionable 
life.*' 

" Goose or swan," said Rosse, " she is a 
mighty pleasant woman. The public has no- 
thing to do with her family arrangements ; and 
while Lady Holmebush is to be found in her 
company, (Lady Holmebush, on whom not even 
the oldest, ugliest, or most ill-natured prude 
ventures to cast an imputation,) I fancy we may 
all permit ourselves to enjoy Mrs. Clermont's 
passing pleasing tongue without fear of chafing 
a thin-skinned conscience." 

The name of Lady Holmebush was conclu- 
sive. The old ladies (green ribbon included) 
were silenced ; but, if they said nothing, they 
" thought the more ;" and it was only natural 
that their thoughts should revenge themselves 
upon Mrs. Clermont. 



THE INTRIGANTE. 245 



CHAPTER VIII. 



So weak are human kind by nature made. 
Or to such weakness by their vice betray'd. 

Young. 

Captain Rosse reasoned with more good-na- 
ture than discrimination. Lady Holmebush was 
the last person to '3e trusted in any matter con- 
cerning the interests and pleasures of her brother. 
Although the Lady Helen Murray had become 
a Marchioness some years previous to the ac- 
knowledgement of Berkley's silly entangle- 
ment with his tutor's daughter, she had been 
sufficiently in his confidence to know that he 
was fondly attached to Anne Danby, — and suffi- 
ciently partial to him to give credit to the Anne 
Danby, so beloved, for every christian virtue 
and womanly charm. She felt sincere interest 
for her as the object of her dear Berkley's at- 



246 THE INTRIGANTE. 

tachment, and sincere pity as the wife of old 
Clermont's vulgar son. 

There could not be a woman of a more guile- 
less turn of mind. Educated in retirement, 
she had preserved even to womanhood the 
most childish simplicity. Having come in con- 
tact with nothing base or vitiated, she was with- 
out experience, and consequently without faith 
in the deceits of the world ; her mind was as 
lovely as her person ; her heart all tenderness 
and truth. Happy the man, whose fate and for- 
tunes remove him so far above the necessities of 
life as to enable him to select a companion so 
angelic ; who, instead of requiring worldly 
knowledge in his wife, can afford to place a 
seraph in his bosom, and suffer her to pass 
through life a gentle dupe to the knaveries of 
her fellow-creatures ! — 

" Do you know," said the Marchioness one 
day to her husband, shortly after the death of 
her elder brother, " people are so ill-natured 
about that charming Mrs. Clermont. Several 
of my friends assure me that she is still in love 
with Berkley ! " 



THE INTRIGANTE. 247 

" Is it likely to be true ? *' inquired Lord 
Holmebush, watching her beautiful counte- 
nance. 

" True ? I never saw a woman more attached 
to her husband and children." 

" Does she tell you so ? '* 

" She talks of nothing else. Mrs. Clermont 
perfectly adores her family ! " 

" But she is rather light and free in her gene- 
ral conversation?" 

" Light and free ! You are growing as harsh 
as the rest of them : — I never knew a more deli- 
cate, a more feminine creature ! " 

"Indeed? — Umph !— all right I see ! Well, 
my dear Nelly, 'I will take the ghost's word for 
a thousand ! *'' said Lord Holmebush, laughing. 
" Whatever she chooses to appear to you, shall 
be her true character. I had half determined 
to beg you would not be too much in Mrs. 
Clermont's company ; but I see there is nothing 
to fear. Invite her here, therefore, whenever it 
suits you ; or rather, till you find occasion to 
alter your opinion." 

Lord Holmebush did not consider that, al- 



248 THE INTRIGANTE. 

though it might be politic in Mrs. Clermont to 
mask herself pretty closely in the society of his 
modest and amiable wife, the world in general, 
unaware of the false colours she had assumed, 
would either blame the Marchioness as a part- 
ner in her levity, or accept the forgery at sight 
on the strength of the Marchioness's endorse- 
ment. And such, indeed, was the result of her 
intimacy at Holmebush House : the strait- 
laced felt they had no right to cast a stone at 
a woman leaning on the arm of the pure and 
virtuous Helen ; and Mrs. Clermont was ad- 
mitted (as the guest of Lady Holmebush) into 
many a circle which had previously closed it- 
self against her approach. 

And soon all doubt — all hesitation on the 
subject — was felt to be an impertinence. " One 
sees her every where ; — I dined with her at 
Holmebush House last week," became a pas^e 
par tout Nothing now was perfect without the 
presence of the lovely Mrs. Clermont. Her 
dress, her air, her bonmots were unanimously 
quoted; and Lord Farrington's engouement 
(sanctioned by the unanimous verdict of society) 



THE INTRIGANTE. 249 

seemed to grow with what it fed on. AJl his 
trust, all his idolatry of the days of the river 
Dyne, seemed to have returned upon him ; 
his own Anne, was now as fair a " spirit," and 
more his " minister," than ever. Not only had 
she vindicated herself from every aspersion of 
Mediterranean scandal, but persuaded him that 
all her thoughts, words, and deeds, from the 
moment of their first meeting to their last part- 
ing, had been actuated solely by solicitude for 
his welfare. It was to spare him a disadvanta- 
geous connexion — to recall him from America 
—she had given her hand to young Clermont ; 
— it was to talk and hear of him that she had 
courted the friendship of the Greyvilles ; — it 
was to forward her husband's interests, and her 
own consequent return to England and himself, 
that she had borne with the tedious Lord High 
Commissioner. 

Who could resist such declarations, breathed 
by a voice so tuneful, — so beautiful a mouth ? 
With whatever resolutions poor Berkley thought 
fit to fortify his prudence, she had only 

To look in his face till he forgot them all ! 

M 5 



250 THE INTRIGANTE. 

till he saw nothing in the wide universe but those 
melting eyes,— that brilliant countenance, those 
pearly teeth. The world united to declare that 
Mrs. Clermont was the handsomest woman on its 
surface, and for once he was quite of the world's 
opinion. To be the first, the sole object of ado- 
ration to so highly gifted a creature, — a woman 
who was " all soul," — whose " soul" was of so 
high an order, whose notions so sublime, whose 
language so eloquent, whose looks still more elo- 
quent than her words ; — what a climax of triumph 
for so humble an individual as Berkley Earl of 
Farrington, first Lord of his Majesty's Treasury, 
and first favourite of his Majesty's friendship ! — 
None but the densest of the dull should pre- 
sume to be wise in his own conceit ! — In the face 
of all the grievous examples furnished to man- 
kind by history and living nature of the frailties 
of philosophers, and the weaknesses of the wise. 
Lord Farrington, wliose name appeared in ca- 
pitals in the gazettes of all the capitals in Europe, 
who held King, Lords, and Commons, in his 
sleeve, and balanced the constitution of the 
realm in his right hand, was after all the 



THE INTRIGANTE. 251 

dupe of Nancy Danby, the puissant princess 
of the academic Tile House; — a lady who 
had conned the elements of universal know- 
ledge on an alphabet of gilt gingerbread, and 
been instructed in the graces of life by the itiner- 
ant jig-master who visited Dynington on occa- 
sion of its annual fair ! — a lady whom uni- 
versal London declared to be the most elegant 
of the daughters of fashion ; admiring the 
high breeding of her address fully as much as 
the beauty of her person. Nay ! even of those 
who at first opposed her growing innovations 
and assumptions, — there was but one who still 
held aloof, — but one who silently misdoubted her 
excellence, — but one who knew or suspected 
her real character ! 

This one (and the exception is easily to be 
accounted for) was the daughter of Sir Robert 
Greyville. Antonia, although for Lord Far- 
rington's sake she might advocate the cause of 
his chosen associate and affect incredulity re- 
specting the nature of their connexion, saw 
clearly that the worshipped Mrs. Clermont was 
a mere intrigante; that through life she had 



^52 THE INTRIGANTE. 

rendered Berkley Murray her stepping-stone 
to preferment; and that her elevation to her 
present position was a wicked freak of fortune ! 
At times, in her solitary musings, Miss Greyville 
was tempted to regard the object of Lord Far- 
rington's firm and fond affection as the most 
fortunate of human beings; at others she could not 
but wonder that any human being should find 
enjoyment in so fitful a fever as that of Mrs. Cler- 
mont's hazardous triumph. Herself of a gentle 
and tranquil temperament, she could by no means 
comprehend the delights attached to the haste, 
tumult, and toil of pleasure; — the perpetual as- 
cent of the weary mountain of ambition ; — the 
unintermitting strife of planning, plotting, and 
manoeuvring; — the intricacy of machinery which 
served to move on the sober dial-plate of public 
life — that dignified hour-hand, his Majesty's mi- 
nister, and that busy minute-hand, the cunning 
Mrs. Clermont. 

The lady herself, meanwhile, omitted no 
effort to propitiate the good-will of the Greyville 
family. Although she had learned from Berk- 
ley in his school-days the prodigious intimacy 



THE INTRIGANTE. 253 



subsisting between the two families, and from 
Lady Gertrude, during their Mediterranean 
friendship, its renewal after young Murray's 
return from America, she had never che- 
rished the least apprehension of Antonia's in- 
fluence. She saw that in childhood, gu'lhood, 
womanhood, her own star had ever been ascend- 
ant; and possessed too much of the self-reliance 
of genius, to cherish superfluous jealousies. 
She was aware that persons whose ambition is 
moulded upon a gigantic scale must not pause 
to make war upon the straws and pebbles in- 
tercepting their progress ; and that one of the 
great secrets of rising in the world, is to overr 
step petty obstacles without making a parade of 
the achievement. 

And yet, though satisfied she had nothing to 
fear from Miss Greyville's attractions, she saw 
that Lord Farrington entertained the truest re- 
gard, a regard founded on esteem, for the com- 
panion of his youth ; and apprehensive that, in a 
moment of self-examination (such as by an inex- 
plicable association suddenly invoke the phantoms 
of childhood's pleasures and friendships amid the 



254 THE INTRIGANTE. 

haunts of every day life), he should miss the so- 
ciety of the Greyvilles, and blame her as the cause 
of their estrangement, she hazarded a bold ad- 
vance to conciliate the friendship of Antonia. 
But Miss Greyville was all ice, — as cold, as 
polished, as inaccessible ; — receiving every over- 
ture with the most chilling courtesy; smiling 
into silence the laboured sallies of the fashion- 
able bel-esprit, and tranquillizing with a calm 
eye of investigation, all her cajolery and all her 
grimaces. Vainly did the Clermont develope 
her repertory of arts ! — The taunts of Lady 
Louisa March am could be parried by the readi- 
ness of her wit ; —the lofty scorn of the dowagers 
soothed down by delicately ministering to their 
pride and selfishness ; — nay, even the dashing in- 
solence of Frank Bradshaw she had overwhelmed 
by the magnitude of her influence on society. But 
what was to be done with Miss Greyville? — 
How was that imperturbable disposition to be 
excited, — how was that clear searching eye to 
be blinded, — how was that dispassionate ear to 
be deluded ? She put forth the most brilliant 
and sparkling effervescence of her wit ; — but An- 



THE INTRIGANTE. 255 

tonia smiled courteously, without surrendering 
one outpost of her cold reserve. She aifected 
sensibility ; and made a profession of fine sen- 
timents and fine feelings that might have de- 
ceived Hannah More or Mrs. Trimmer into 
credulity; — but Antonia was inexorable. She 
soared into the " high sublime of deep absurd," 
and Madame de Stael might have been dazzled 
by the ghtter of her eloquence ;— but MissGrey- 
ville detected the " true no-meaning," through 
all its sonorous verbosity. She became senten- 
tious, and Bacon might have inclined his ear to 
hear;— but Lord Farrington's faithful friend 
despised those moral axioms which so little in- 
fluenced the conduct of their professor ! 

Mrs. Clermont was at length piqued and 
grew flippant. But perslfflage could not fasten 
upon the even tenour of Miss Greyville's simple 
manners and blameless life. Do what she 
would — call up what storms from the vasty 
deep, — draw down what baleful vapours from the 
moon, or exhale what blistering dew from the 
fenny field,— there,— there, — bright, lofty, and 
unextinguishable over her head, shone the one 



256 THE INTRIGANTE. 

clear planet whose orbit was appointed of 
Heaven, — whose sphere a sphere of holiness ! 

It was in vain that she attempted to obtain 
from her friend Lady Gertrude, some solution of 
the enigma, or some insight into the frailties of 
Miss Greyville's character. For once, the pro- 
verb was at fault ; — no enmity existed between 
the: sisters-in-law. Antonia was a right-minded, 
and the wife of her brother Bob a right-hearted 
woman ; and there was no mischief to be made 
out of them or between them. The only thing 
that Mrs. Clermont could manage to learn 
to Antonia's disadvantage, was the fact that she 
was in her thirty-second year; but even this 
was an unavailable weapon to a woman who had 
fully attained her thirty-fifth ! 

At length, however, a circumstance transpired 
concerning Miss Greyville, which if it did not 
gratify the malice, was calculated to excite the 
utmost alarm of Mrs. Clermont; and great 
indeed was her anxiety to prevent its reaching 
the ears of Lord Farrington. The aged wife of 
Sir Robert, full of years and respectability, was 
going down into the grave ; and if one feel- 



THE INTRIGANTE. 257 

ing of human weakness blemished the virtue of 
her parting hours, it was a tincture of bitterness 
in reviewing the fortunes of Antonia. She had 
long been reconciled to her son's match by the 
good humour of Lady Gertrude, and her faith- 
ful devotion to Bob the future Baronet. She 
had long ceased to regard her elder daughter's 
alliance as a degradation ; for, thanks to Lord 
Farrington's friendship, Dr. Mannington was 
now a dignitary of the church, — and thanks to 
her own happier frame of mind, a welcome at- 
tendant in her sick chamber. But there was no 
palliative to smooth down her irritation con- 
cerning her youngest daughter. Girls vith a 
quarter her attractions had become duchesses, — 
with a tithe of her virtues marchionesses, — yet 
she was still a spinster ; — and on the decease of 
her parents, would have nothing to do but to 
retire to some dreary watering-place, to work 
worsted rugs, regulate the shooting ideas of 
some Sunday school, and vegetate through re- 
pining maturity to desolate old age. Often and 
vainly had Lady Greyville set forth the miseries 
of such a destiny, as arguments to induce her 



258 THE INTRIGANTE. " 

daughter's acceptance of one among the vast 
variety of " establishments " laid at her feet ; 
but Antonia laughingly assured her mother 
that she had a vocation for being an old maid, 
a tenderness for tabby-cats, and a predilection for 
the music of the tea-kettle, such as must prevent 
her unitincr herself to my Lord Beecho-rove's 
country seat or presiding over Sir William 
Threecourse's London dinners. 

But when the old lady's anxieties grew strong- 
er with her declining health, when she saw the 
moment approach for leaving Antonia alone in 
the world, she became too earnest in her admo- 
nitions to be answered with the bantering of 
raillery. " Antonia ! " said she one evening, 
when the whole family were assembled in her 
sick room, " this melancholy attendance of yours 
will soon be at an end ; and you, who have 
been so tender and vigilant a nurse to my infir- 
mities for the last three years, will sadly miss 
an object on which to bestow your kind atten- 
tions." 

" My dear mother," exclaimed Miss Greyville, 
startled by the abruptness of this appeal, and 



THE INTRIGANTE. 259 

misdoubting its motive, " do you forget that my 
father is in constant need of my services ; — that 
my brother and sister — " 

" Your brother and sister have homes and in- 
terests of their own," replied Lady Greyville 
gravely. " I could wish, before my death, to 
see you equally fortunate.*' (Antonia turned 
away, with a painful presentiment of what 
was coming.) " Captain Rosse has been with 
me this morning," resumed the invalid, " to 
beg my intercession in his favour. I heartily 
wish it were not needful. Six years ago, 
when first he made you an offer of his hand, 
there were circumstances, my dear child,— 
recent circumstances, — to which I could readily 
attribute your refusal. But you owned to me 
then, and owned to him, that but for a pre-en- 
gaged heart you might have been his ; — that his 
position in the world, — his character, his princi- 
ples, were all you could desire." 

" And I am sure you can have had no reason 
to alter your opinion," interrupted her brother, 
apprehensive that Lady Greyville would exhaust 
herself. " Every body allows Rosse to be the 



260 THE INTRIGANTE. 

best natured and most honourable man in the 
world. There is not a fellow in England better 
spoken of." 

" I admit it all," replied Miss Greyville, less 
apprehensive of vexing her brother than her mo- 
ther; " nor is there any one I regard more 
highly. But if I did not wish to marry him six 
years ago, when I was younger, less fixed in my 
prejudices, less strong in my own opinions, I 
should be sorry to become his wife now, on a 
mere plea of eligibility ; — for my sentiments are 
no wise altered respecting himself or others.'^ 

She blushed deeply as she uttered this avowal 
of lingering attachment for one who had so stu- 
diously proved his indifference towards her as 
Lord Farrington. But she had nothing to fear 
from the interpretation of her companions. 
There were no Frank Bradshaws, no Lady 
Louisa Marchams, in the family circle of the 
Greyvilles. 

Fruitless as were the old lady's representa- 
tions to her daughter of the superiority of a 
career of active duty, of matron and maternal 
virtues, over the selfish indolence of mere spin- 



THE INTRIGANTE. 261 

sterhood, the last energies of life seemed concen- 
trated in her desire to behold Antonia the wife 
of a good and honourable husband; and during 
her last few weeks she actually admitted the 
faithful admirer of her daughter among the 
number of her own family. 

" Let me join your hands before I die ! " said 
she ; — and the trial was indeed a severe one to 
her daughter's constancy. 

" You have been the best of parents," faltered 
the trembling Antonia. "Do not insist on my 
giving a pledge at this solemn hour, which I 
should repent at a calmer moment. Why should 
I hesitate to speak the truth ? — to acknowledge 
before you all, that my first love will be my last; 
— that my heart is as fondly devoted to Lord 
Farrington as it ev^er was to Berkley Murray ?" 

" Hush, child ! " cried her father, who was 
seated beside the dying woman, " why afflict 
your mother in her last moments ? " — 

" She has done her duty," faltered the dying 
Lady Greyville, — «' God forbid that my last ac- 
tion should be an act of inj ustice." 



262 THE INTRIGANTE. 



CHAPTER IX. 



Who thinks that fortune cannot change her mind 

Prepares a dreadful jest for all mankind. 

And who stands safest ? — Tell me, is it he 

That spreads and swells in puff'd prosperity ? 

Or, blest with little, whose preventing care 

In peace provides fit arms against a war. 

Pope. 

With all her lack of faith in human virtue, 
Mrs Clermont could not but perceive that an 
attachment such as Antonia Greyville's, a pas- 
sion coeval with her own existence, — a passion 
superior to the influence of time, absence, cold- 
ness, inconstancy, — to the counter-charm of self- 
interest, the importunities of other lovers, the 
reproaches of a father, the intreaties of a 
dying mother, — was of no common order. The 



THE INTRIGANTE. 263 

whole affair indeed was incomprehensible ! — She, 
the gaudy denizen of the world of luxury, accus- 
tomed to peruse the superficial lines of fashion- 
able emotions, — to see eternal passions grow and 
wither with the summer roses, and new attach- 
ments spring up among the hot-house flowers of 
every successive season, was ill qualified to ap- 
preciate the temperament and condition of a love 
of nearly twenty years duration. What could be 
more weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable, accord- 
ing to her estimate of men and things, than the 
" needless Alexandrine " of so protracted a sen- 
timent ? Short sighted mortal ! — was not her 
own interested ambition of a still more ancient, 
date, — of a still tougher continuance, — of a still 
more obstinate vitality ? — 

But, even while affecting (in her discussion of 
the subject with her friend Lady Gertrude) 
to despise the self-humiliating constancy of Miss 
Greyville's hopeless passion, she was chiefly 
eager that a hint should not transpire to en- 
lighten Lord Farrington's mind. Not from any 
apprehension that her own influence was on the 
decline ; — she had every thing in favour of her 



264 THE INTRIGANTE. 

supremacy ; all his friends — all his associates, 
were her friends and associates. He was accus- 
tomed to hear nothing of Mrs. Clermont but 
raptures and ecstasies ; and was not himself of 
a disposition to espy defects, or seek after blame, 
in a person belonging to him by so many various 
ties. Moreover, the intrigante possessed a wo- 
man's faith in the magic powers of the toilet ; of 
which she was an eager as well as a gifted 
votary. No one dressed so well or so ela- 
borately: and, though younger beauties and 
more radiant wits might arise to "pale her 
ineffectual fires,'' she felt at least qualified to 
defy the whole united sex in the arrangement 
of her curls, and the devising of her ball-dress. 
Fashion was her hand-maiden as well as her 
divinity. Nor is it surprising that, as history 
avouches Napoleon himself to have been chained 
for years and years to the car of the faded Jose- 
phine by the glittering links of this meretricious 
chain, a budding statesman still within some 
years of his fortieth, should submit to a similar 
influence. Lord Farrington gloried in knowing 
that his friend (there was no other name by 



THE INTRIGANTE. 265 

be politely designated) was followed by the 
admiring eyes of all London, whenever she 
appeared in public ; — was written of in the 
papers, talked of in the coteries; — worshipped 
by all the men, and envied by all the women. 
He gloried : — but it was deceived by the con- 
viction that all these trappings of fashion were 
assumed to do him honour ; — that she endured 
publicity in order to be constantly by his side ; 
— that she bore patiently for his sake with the 
importunate homage necessitated by his official 
career. 

But let all men distrust the sentiments of a 
woman who outrages for their sake the duties^ 
of her sex. It may be an unheroicj and even 
an ungenerous axiom ; — but experience proves 
that the mighty barrier of principle is seldom 
overleaped, or the laws of female delicacy in- 
fringed, except by persons capable of following 
up that single error by a thousand others. " Gal- 
lantry," says one of the shrewdest of French phi- 
losophers, " is usually the least important defect 
of a woman of gallantry." With Mrs. Clermont 
it was less offensive than the leprosy of sordid 

VOL. III. N 



266 THE INTRIGANTE. 

ambition which presented men and women to 
her view only as dupes and victims ; — which made 
lier hfe a plot, — her diversion a stratagem, — her 
husband a tool, — her lover a stepping stone, — 
her very children the mere perpetuators of her 
success. Affection, duty, virtue, were empty 
sounds in the ears of the cold-blooded and venal 
intrigante ! 

In point of fact, Mrs. Clermont loved neither 
father, mother, brother, sister, nor friend. And 
yet, in the exercise of her passion for in- 
trigue, she had shoved, pushed, hinted, and im- 
plored her old father into a silk apron, — her 
brother into three thousand a-year. Government 
and Murray preferment ; and Betsy (who had 
married after her kind the apothecary's appren- 
tice of Dynington) into the lady of Dr. Drouse 
of Chelsea College, with pickings little inferior 
in extent to those of Samuel. It was an un- 
lucky thing, indeed, for a woman of Mrs. Cler- 
mont's turn of mind, that she was issued of so 
impracticable a generation. Had her brother 
been a presentable man, or her sister's husband 
a moderately intelligent one, there was scarcely 



THE INTRIGANTE. 267 

a post to which they might not have aspired. 
But although Roman emperors may have pro- 
moted horses to be consuls, and the great auto- 
crat his physician and coachman to be major- 
generals, — it was quite impossible to make a 
king's chaplain out of Doctor Samuel Danby, 
or a king's commissioner out of Doctor Deme- 
trius Drouse. 

In her own person, meanwhile, the apex 
of the pyramid was attained. Anne of Dy- 
nington, perched on the pinnacle of the tem- 
ple, — with princes for her guests, queens for 
her nursing mothers, England for her wash- 
pot, Ireland whereon to cast her shoe, and Scot-< 
land to be glad of her, — might at length be said 
to have climbed the high top-gallant of her 
joy. Although she had no visible means of for- 
tune saving the 3,800/. per annum accruing to 
her from her husband's places, her expenditure 
equalled that of the greatest and richest of her 
rivals : — for she was an excellent steward ; — knew 
where to pinch and where to play the prodigal ; 
— and enjoyed moreover various little perquisites 

N 2 



268 THE INTRIGANTE. 

of office — of the ffatherins tofjether of which, offi- 
cials are alone cognizant. With an income com- 
paratively moderate, the Clermonts lived better, 
and dressed better than any two people in I^on- 
don. Their two boys were at Eton, — their house, 
a fashionable caravanserai ; — their equipage ex- 
quisite ; — their style and appointments unexcep- 
tionable. But false appearances cannot last for 
ever. 

It is observed of the stuccoed houses of modern 
times, that, so long as the surface is preserved 
entire, nothing can be handsomer or more showy. 
But let a single crack appear, and the whole 
fa9ade is rapidly peeled off; here, exhibiting the 
bare brick of the original structure, and there, 
presenting a mortary mass of the most paltry de- 
scription. And lo ! such was the eventual des- 
tiny of the Clermont or Danby dynasty ! 

In the seventh year of Lord Farrmgton's 
reign, just when he seemed seated firmest in the 
political saddle, the public, in one of its panic 
fits of perversity, began suddenly to kick against 
its rider. An opposition Sunday paper was 
started, expressly to write down his administra- 



% 



THE INTRIGANTE. 269 

ticn ; and the gentry of the press having disco- 
vered that a hole in the heart is a very vul- 
nerable part of the human frame on which to 
establish a raw, Mrs. Clermont was speedily 
selected as his lordship's weak point. Having 
seized, bound, and laid bare their victim, they 
proceeded first to flay, and then to anatomize. 

It is amazing what depths of obscurity are to 
be penetrated by the libel-spinner of political 
life; an insect which burrows here and insinuates 
its long proboscis there, till not a nook is left un- 
explored. The whole history of Dynington was 
brought to light. " Piscator, or the Angling 
Premier,'* furnished a series of sketches and* 
lampoons, the biting accuracy of which soon 
rendered rouge a superfluous adornment to 
Mrs. Clermont's face; and pursued Lord Far- 
rington's tingling ears to the very presence of 
his sovereign. The scratch wig of the old pe- 
dagogue, — the chequed apron of his housewife, 
— Betsy, — and above all, Nancy herself, — were 
tricked off week after week, in ludicrous mas- 
querade for the gratification of the scandal- 
lovins: public. Mrs. Clermont's natural no- 



270 THE INTRIGANTE. 

thingness, — her acquired importance, — nay, the 
exact means by which it had been achieved, 
were dexterously exhibited Sunday after Sun- 
day, in as many difFerent shapes as the itinerant 
fan -juggler can conjure out of a folded sheet of 
paper. 

All this was mortifying enough ! — Commis- 
sioner Clermont had scarcely nerve to show his 
face in The House, or indeed in any house but his 
own. People began to look uneasy when ad- 
dressed by the intrigante, to shun her parties^ 
and omit her from their own. And what was 
incalculably v/orse. Lord Farrington's popula- 
rity once assailed, he soon experienced the ine- 
vitable fortune of official men. He was now as 
elaborately disparaged as he had before been 
overlauded. — His authority gradually declined ; 
— and his favour, both with- the sovereign and 
the people, seemed withering with the speed of 
crass cut down in the sunshine. 

His lordship became the nontongpaw of every 
public offence. The unpopular premier was not 
only asserted to have raised the price of dry 
goods and tobaccos, but to be the origin of negro 



THE INTRIGANTE, 271 

slavery, — to have dispersed an outward-bound 
fleet by a typhoon, ^caused an insurrection in 
Ireland, — a rebellion in the province of Sinca- 
pore ; — produced universal smut in the crops of 
the season, — and a general rot among the cattle 
in Romney Marsh ! — There was no rain or 
early pease ; and the people accused " the head 
of the corrupt ministry :" — there was no ice in 
the icehouses, and the ball-givers declared that 
nothing would go right till there was a change 
in the administration. 

Inexperienced in political reverses, the great 
mi\n was unduly afflicted by this convulsion fit 
of public ingratitude. What he said in his^ 
wrath of the Athenians, is not to be repeated ; 
and sad indeed were his lamentations on the 
subject to his dear Mrs. Clermont, while depre- 
cating the hard unkindness and altered eye of 
the king his master, and the gradual falling off 
of divers partizans, his servants. " The game is 
up," cried the high minded Berkley. " I have 
lost the confidence of the public ; and my admi- 
nistration shall not be scorned as a burthen, 



272 THE INTRIGANTE. 

where once it was courted as a safeguard against 
national ruin. I will resign." 

What a hearing for the intrigante !— Resign ! 
— Renounce the helm of state,— the dignity of 
patronage,— the joys of sinecure, — the raptures 
of perquisites. — Resign! — become a mere Earl 
with twenty thousand per annum; — a con- 
temptible creature with just sufficient to main- 
tain his own state and condition, without so 
much as a green leaf to throw to those creeping 
caterpillars, his friends ! — Resign ! — Mrs. Cler- 
mont would not hear of such a thing. Was it 
for such a consummation she had clung to him 
so long and so closely ? — 

She was, however, obliged to hear of it. 
All that she could urge respecting the sacrifice 
of personal feeling indispensable to the true pa- 
triot ; — all that she could asseverate concerning 
the hosts of undeclared partizans who, so long as 
he continued in office, remained quiet and self- 
secure in the shade; — all that she could de- 
scribe of the attachment of the people, and the 
partiality of the people's prince, was of no avail. 
Lord Farrington, although too noble-minded to 



THE INTRIGANTE. 273 

give much credit to the tirades of opposition 
newspapers or shrink from the hootings of a few 
ruffians hired to molest him, saw clearly that 
his public influence was at an end. " Others 
may perhaps succeed better in pacifying the 
country/' said he. " My task is accomplished." 
At first Mrs. Clermont parried the announce- 
ment of his intentions with remonstrances and 
flattery ; and as he grew firmer in his intentions, 
tried the influence of irony. " What would the 
world say of his self-mistrust ; — of his want of 
consistency; — of his moral pusillanimity ?" — But 
on discovering that Lord Farrington's ears were 
already too excoriated by the sayings of the 
world to admit of much sensibility towards its 
further eloquence, she tried her only remain- 
ing argument — threw herself on his forbearance, 
and implored him at least to remember his 
friends. Alas ! good man ! — of what else had he 
been thinking for seven years past? — to what 
else had he sacrificed his time, inclinations, cha- 
racter, principles? — Raising his beloved Anne 
from his feet, he entreated that, for once, his 

N 5 



274 THE INTRIGANTE. 

friends would think of A?'m, and not increase 
the perplexities of a most perplexing crisis. 

Next to compliance with her entreaties, this 
was precisely what Mrs. Clermont wanted. She 
had now an excuse for an indignant rupture of 
her heart-and-soul or rather heart-and-hand 
connexion with the falling Caesar. She ex- 
pressed herself " hurt ; " and saw, or at least re- 
sented, an indication of personal blame in Lord 
Farrington's declaration that "from his boyhood 
to his ex-premiership, he had been devoted to 
herself alone." After a parting audience with the 
king, he retired to Farrington Castle for a few 
weeks to recruit his flurried spirits and exhausted 
health ; and Mrs. Clermont, for the first time, 
discreetly forbore to bear him company. She 
even replied to his long letter of expostulation 
by a short note, hinting that in their present ex- 
cited state of feeling^ it was better thev should 
not meet ! 

Of Mr. Clermont, all this time, little has been 
recorded. That he accepted Anne Danby's 
hand under circumstances so ignominious, was 
no very advantageous introduction to the reader's 



THE INTRIGANTE. 275 

notice ; — that he accepted office from the hands 
of his wife's lover, exhibits only consistency in 
baseness ; — and that he should desert that lover's 
side during the first onset of the enemy, is a se- 
quel duly to be inferred. He was, in fact, a 
shrewd active man ; born without honour, bred 
without principle ; who, in the ardour of his re- 
solution to rise out of the mud amid which he 
struggled into life, saw the necessity of becoming 
casehardened to the oppressor's wrong, the 
proud man's contumely, till he should acquire a 
right to become tyrannical and contumelious in 
his turn. Having found that there was more to 
gain by playing the pleasant fellow than by 
becoming the jack-in-office, he had not at- 
tained a sufficient pre-eminence, even at the pe- 
riod of Lord Farrington's dethronement, to 
throw off the mask. Most people therefore still 
qualified him as ** a devilish clever fellow," or 
" a devilish useful man ;" and all pitied or af- 
fected to pity him for having an extravagant 
wife, whose follies compelled him to objection- 
able modes of attaining preferment, and whose 
temper prevented a due assumption of his 



276 THE INTRIGANTE. 

marital authority. One or two indeed called 
him harsh names, and reviled the meanness of his 
spirit. But these were the very men who dined 
oftenest at his table, and profited most largely 
at second hand by the sins they thought proper 
to deprecate ; and on the whole no one was more 
regretted by the eating and drinking public, on 
the dissolution of Lord Farrington's administra- 
tion, than his dirty doer of dirty jobs, the supple 
Mr. Thomas Vernon Clermont 



THE INTRIGANTE. 277 



CHAPTER X. 



Alike the busy and the gay 

But flutter through life 's little day 

In fortune's varying colours drest; 
Touch'd by the hand of rude mischance. 
Or chill'd by age, their airy dance 

They leave. Gray. 

It is not to be supposed, however, that a 

woman worldly-wise in her generation as Mrs. 

• 

Clermont, was so ignorant of the first principles 
of her calling as to have been living with politi- 
cal friends as though they were always to be 
her friends ; or her political enemies, as though 
they were to be her enemies for ever. She was 
in fact only so far a party-woman as squared 
with her private interests ; and cared no more 
for the state or its service (setting aside the 
salary thereunto attached) than for the politics 
and constitution of Cochin China. 



278 THE INTRIGANTE. 

For some time past indeed, (from the mo- 
ment the first flaw became perceptible on the 
stuccoed surface of the late administration,) 
Mrs. Clermont, like an eeronaut busy in pre- 
paring for a new ascent, had been gradually and 
silently cutting away the strings which bound 
her to the old spot. Had any one been suffi- 
ciently on the watch to detect the thousand and 
one manoeuvres of her daily life, it must have 
amused them to note her attempts to " hedge off" 
in her friendships and acquaintances. She now 
became philosophical enough to overlook party 
influence ; discovered that women have nothing 
to do with politics; extended her smiles to both 
sides of the House as well as to "both their 
houses ;" and soon came to be accounted hand- 
somer and more agreeable among the ''outs'* 
who were soon to be the " ins," — than among 
the " ins " who were soon to be the " outs." — It 
was noticed that during the last season of Lord 
Farrington's administration, she shared her 
opera box with the lady of a leading opposition 
lord ; and though, till the fatal crisis, she was 
regarded, by what vvas termed her own party, 



THE INTRIGANTE. 279 

as a friend in the enemy's camp, it soon be- 
came pretty evident that she had been quite as 
much of an enemy in their own. 

Treachery, political or domestic, is doubly 
treacherous in a woman. There is something 
peculiarly base in the consciousness of impunity 
with which a female traitor fences herself round 
in her misdoings. The dark sex is amenable 
to many tribunals; the fair, to one alone. A 
man is under the jurisdiction of sword, pistol, 
horsewhip, and axe ; a woman may infringe 
all the laws of honour and probity, with nothing 
worse than public contempt as the penalty 
of detection. She cannot be kicked down 
stairs, or thrown out of a window, or even 
called opprobious names. Should she be in- 
sulted, however deservedly, husband or brother 
must defend her at the peril of his life ; — be her 
foUies and extravagancies what they may, she 
is held personally unaccountable for their in* 
decorum. But this very impunity should impart 
to her public vocation something of the sacred 
character investing the heralds of old. She 
should be the bearer of no secret intelligence. 



280 THE INTRIGANTE. 

no calumnious reports, no dishonourable pro- 
posals. She should scorn to do that, under 
shelter of her sex, which as a man would render 
her amenable to the laws of honour. 

But the laws of honour are regarded by the 
intrigante as just as easy of evasion as the laws 
of God. She opposes her cunning to a con- 
ventional, and her hardness of heart to a divine 
tribunal ; — lives from hour to hour and day to 
day, instead of from time to eternity ; — and with 
the assistance of her superficial grace and self- 
possession, manages to dispense with every cha- 
racteristic of modesty and discretion. Her sole 
moral restraint exists in the axiom that " virtue 
is a clever thing;" that " il n'y a rien de plus 
adroit qu'une conduite irreprochable ;" and, 
but for the market value of a good reputation, 
would become as lost to shame as she is dead to 
virtue. 

The *' adroitness" of Mrs. Clermoiit had 
induced her therefore to put some measure on 
her proceedings ; to leave herself a loophole for 
escape, even as regarded her connection with 
Lord Farrington. She had done nothing out- 



\ 



THE INTRIGANTE. 281 

rageous ; nothing so bad but that the prudes 
might affect faith in her innocence, and have an 
excuse for visiting her as long as they pleased ; 
had never resided at the Castle unless there 
were other visitors in the house ; never tra- 
velled thither in the same carriage or on the 
same day with himself; never dined with him in 
town without her husband, or received him at 
her own house except during the hours devoted 
to general society ; and in consequence of these 
cautions, Satan, at whose shrine she had so 
scrupulously lighted a taper, stood her friend 
in time of need. Even those who spoke longest 
and loudest against Lord Farrington, were oi'. 
opinion that " it was a great pity poor Cler- 
mont should be turned out. Clermont was such 
a very good fellow — such a very pleasant fel- 
low; his wife so handsome, — his claret so ex- 
cellent, — his cook so supreme ! — Clermont was 
every body's friend ; — had neither said nor done 
an ill-natured thing during his public career ; — 
his place had never been regarded as a politi- 
cal place, (there could be no occasion for him 
to resign) ; and it was indispensable to retain a 
few persons familiar with the forms of public 



282 THE INTRIGANTE. 

business, (there could be no occasion for dis- 
placing him.) — Clermont was too useful to be 
dispensed with; and could, should, might, or 
indeed ought to remain in office ; — they could 
not without him ; — they could not do without 
his wife.'*' Clermont was accordingly solicited 
to do precisely what he had always intended to 
do — retain his place ; and Mrs. Clermont, — 
after looking pensive and interesting for a few 
days, and declaring that the long-standing con- 
nection of her family with the Murray family, 
the obligations of her late father to the late 
Lord Farrington, had hitherto forbidden all 
demonstration of the real nature of her political 
views — re-commenced her course of official din- 
ners ; and, with the exception of a change of 
names and faces, — of a new cast of the piece, — 
the farce went on and went off quite as bril- 
liantly as ever ! 

Meanwhile, it afforded no surprise to Lord 
Farrington that the day following his arrival at 
the Castle brought not (as usual) his friend 
Clermont's travelling-carriage, nor the post a 
letter of apology. The high tone of pique 
assumed towards him by Mrs. Clermont at 



\ 



THE INTRIGANTE. 283 

parting, convinced him that a quarrel was 
inevitable; — but he expected that it would prove 
a quarrel — not a rupture. Aware that the 
Clermonts were mainly dependent on official 
emolument, he could make due allowance for 
the angry feelings of a mother who saw the 
bread taken from the lips of her children. But 
he trusted the little Clermonts would feed upon 
his own plum-cake ; and that his beloved Anne 
would soon cease to regret the crumbs of office. 
His beloved Anne, however, saw tilings with 
the eye of society, not with the eye of sentiment. 
She knew full well that she mii^ht still command 
the house and establishment of her former 
lover ; but she also knew that, unsupported by 
the charm of ministerial influence, such a con- 
nection would be rated at its real value. There 
was no longer the apology of a political con- 
nection between her lover and her husband 
to extenuate their familiarity ; no longer the 
stir and publicity of official life to bring them 
together. She had been always called the bo- 
som friend of the First Lord of the Treasury ; 
but she would most assuredly be termed the 



# 



284- THE INTRIGANTE. 

mistress of the lord of Farrington Castle ! A 
rupture therefore was indispensable. A cant 
phrase adroitly circulated, that " Lord Far- 
rington had sacrificed his friends in the most 
unhandsome and unheard-of manner," afforded 
an apology to such of his friends as chose to be 
his friends no longer. 

Now although Lord Farrington anticipated 
a temporary alienation, he had not prepared 
himself for this ; and a drop of bitterness was 
thereby added to his cup, which destroyed 
the crystalline purity he had expected in fill- 
ing it anew from the well-spring of nature. 
In descending to the level plain of private 
life, he prepared, of course, to view sur- 
rounding objects in an altered point of view ; 
but he had not expected to find himself sur- 
rounded by the medium of a distempered at- 
mosphere. He felt that the tenour of his life 
should have secured him from such black ingra- 
titude; and it was curious enough that at the 
moment he was looking for public mortifica- 
tions, his chief grievance proved of a private 
nature. 



\L 



THE INTRIGANTE. 285 

Newspaper after newspaper, letter after let- 
ter, served to enlighten his mind and perfect 
his astonishment. His own familiar friend — 
his better self — his moral shadow ; — she to prove 
haggard — she to desert, betray, insult, deride 
him ! — Like Othello, his comfort was now to 
loathe her ! — But what a comfort for a man of 
Lord Farrington's keen sensibility and noble 
nature ! — , 

He now discovered (while, absorbed in soli- 
tary musing he slowly paced the lofty beech- 
groves of Farrington,) that he never was qua- 
lified for public life; — and perhaps he was 
right. " Keen sensibility" and " a noble na- 
ture" do very little towards the composition of 
an official man, except in the article of oratory ; 
and eloquence is, after all, a minor accomplish- 
ment in a statesman. Lord Farrington was not 
born to become a great man. He wanted many 
of the qualities requisite to such an achieve- 
ment. He had talents, but no application;— 
energy, but no perseverance ; — a high sense of 
moral and political justice, but no toleration for 
trivial wrongs in the accomplishment of the 



286 THE INTRIGANTE. 

general good. His calculations were on a small 
scale. He could not bring himself to believe 
that there is a moral code for the minister and 
a moral code for the man ; he disdained to do 
evil that good might come; and attempted to 
frame the scales of Justice of pure and virgin 
gold. The politicians scoffed at him as a theo- 
rist; the debaters called him a declaimer ; the 
matter-of-fact men, a Utopian. The king 
found him an inconvenient servant ; the coun- 
try an embarrassing master. The element was 
too pure — too lucid : no fish could live in it, 
and no plants, sprinkled with its chilling waters, 
were seen to thrive : — a little mud and a few 
weeds were voted requisite for the nourishment 
of the scaly fry, and their protection against 
poachers. There is a phrase current in the 
world, that " such a one is no better than 
he should be.*' — Now in political life it is ac- 
counted a great blunder to be better than one 
should be ! — The only question is to determine 
the exact proportions of goodness consistent 
with public duty ; or rather, to define the degree 
of frailty which constitutes a good minister, 



V. 



THE INTRIGANTE. 287 

without necessitating the disrepute of being a 
bad man. 

Lord Farrington's successor was a very good 
minister, and therefore a very great man ; — a 
man of sound principles, statesmanhke demean- 
our, unswerving purpose, lofty tone, general 
knowledge, universal influence. The public 
journals uttered columns of prose in his lionour: 
and at lengtli turned him over to history to 
make an example to future generations. What 
had the public journals to do with his private 
peccadilloes ? — What had history to do with his 
paltry intrigue with the Clermonts and their 
faction? — ft was his task to 

Ride on the whirlwind and direct the storm ; 
and he judged it beneath his dignity to inquire 
what little farthing candles had been puffed out 
by certain paltry gusts of wind, with which he 
disdained to interfere. 

The result of this contrast with Lord Farrino- 
ton's lucent purity of principle was not advan- 
tageous. Lord F's administration had been blest 
or cursed with no giants to contend with in the 
political arena ; and very little renown is to be 



2i58 THE INTRIGANTE. 

gained by the far more difficult feat of quelling 
and enchaining myriads of pigmies. On coming 
into office, he found no foreign adversary sword 
in hand ; or, as is termed, " in a menacing 
attitude;" and no glory is to be won by keep- 
ing things, instead of 7naking them quiet. He 
had no conquests — no new alliances to boast 
of; and to have maintained the peace of 
Europe throughout a variety of arduous nego- 
ciations,— to have supported the dignity of the 
country without expenditure of blood or trea- 
sure, — afforded no grand feature to his govern- 
ment, such as his partizans could bring forward 
in reply to the grumblers of the press. His 
enemies called him a feeble minister because he 
had done no harm;— and " the milk-and-water 
administration" was the least malicious of the 
designations lavished by friend and foe, in print 
and manuscript, public and private, on the cabi- 
net which had recendy crumbled to pieces. The 
only real blot upon its virgin page passed un- 
noticed. No one had a thought or word of 
blame to throw away on the female ascendancy 
which imparted its peculiar character. Nay ! 



THE INTRIGANTE. 289 

some were even heard to say that, had the 
Clermonts exercised more influence, things 
would have gone better in Downing-street. 
From the Land's End to Berwick-upon-Tweed 
all were of opinion that they could not have 
gone worse ! 



VOL. in. o 



290 THE INTRIGANTE. 



CHAPTER XI. 



Earthly greatness is a nice thing; and requires so- 
much chariness in the management, as the contentment 
of it cannot requite. Hall. 

One person at least among Lord Farring- 
ton's numerous kinsfolk and acquaintance, re- 
joiced with sincerity in his release from the 
thraldom of public business ; and this was the 
Marchioness of Holmebush. She had nothing 
to gain from his interest — much to lose in his 
estrangement from her company : and great in- 
deed was the satisfaction she experienced in 
visiting Farrington Castle for the first time 
since his accession to its throne, undisturbed in 
her sisterly communion by the tumult of the 
holiday coteries and official cabals. Although 



THE INTRIGANTE. 291 

warmly interested in Mrs. Clermont's behalf, 
she was glad, for once, to dispense even with 
her ; that she might at last feel at home in her 
old house, and become once more Helen to her 
dear Berkley, unscared into " your lordship" 
and " your ladyship'* by the pride, pomp, and 
circumstance of public private life. 

Lord Holmebush, by whom she was accom- 
panied in this sisterly pilgrimage of love (or 
as the world chose to regard it of condolence), 
was scarcely less gratified than the marchioness 
to find the rabble rout of officials, on which he 
was accustomed to bestow the appellation of 
" Farrington's pack," dislodged from their ken- . 
nel. He was a wayward wilful humourist; 
somewhat too apt to look upon the powers^ that 
be, as historical personages ; and to discourse of 
their gestes et Jaits as impartially as though he 
were describing the feats of Charlemagne or 
Henry VHI. He was not only shrewd enough to 
see men and things as they are, but to define 
them with as much frankness as accuracy. There 
were one or two adjectives, which he never 
scrupled to prefix to the patronymic of Com- 

o 2 



292 THE INTRIGANTE. 

missioner Clermont, even in presence of his 
brother-in-law ; and as to the wife, — not even 
the Sunday newspaper spoke more plainly ! 

But no sooner were his predictions fulfilled, 
— no sooner did Anne of Dynington throw off 
her disguise of the lamb's skin and display the 
jaws and claws of the wolf, than all his malice 
ended in mirth ; and every fresh evidence of her 
baseness, brought down by the daily papers and 
daily post, served only to aggravate his laugh- 
ter. Assuming to himself the privilege of par- 
liamentary language, a significant " Oh ! " was 
his sole response to Lady Holmebush's varied 
expressions of wonder that Mrs. Clermont 
should like to enter the old house in Downing- 
street as the guest of dear Farrington's suc- 
cessor ; — or that she could make up her mind 
to dine with the Duke of Datchet, or sup with 
Lord Subpoena, by whose plots and counter- 
plots dear Farrington had been forced out of 
office. 

" The Clermonts have accepted a sinecure 
in the Privy-Seal Office for their youngest boy, 
who is at Eton ! " — said her ladyship, glancing 



THE INTRIGANTE. 293 

over the columns of the Morning Herald. 
" They say she never rested till she had tor- 
mented it out of Lord Lumber, with whose 
brother she was so intimate at Malta." 

''Oh!'' 

" I was looking last night in the library for 
the fine edition of Grammont which my father 
enriched with marginal notes, and of which we 
were all so fond. But Mr. Folio the chaplain, 
assures me Mrs. Clermont borrowed it three 
Christmases ago, and has always forgotten to 
return it." 

" Oh ! " 

" And, would you l)elieve it, my dear Holme-* 
bush ? — Farrington has actually presented his 
friend Clermont with that fine portrait of himself 
by Lawrence, which I so much wished to have ; 
and accepted a tawdry miniature of Mrs. Cler- 
mont by Mrs. Mee, to hang in the gallery in 
its place." 

" Oh ! " 

" And those Dresden jars, which used to 
stand in my mother's dressing-room, presented 
by my grandfather at my christening. The 



294 THE INTRIGANTE. 

housekeeper assures me tliey were packed up 
by Mrs. Clermont's maid and sent ofF.to Spring- 
gardens last autumn. Now pray don't cry 
' oh ! ' again. — Satisfy me by saying, what 1 
am sure you are thinking, that Mrs. Clermont 
ought to have looked more narrowly after the 
proceedings of her servants in another person's 
house." 

Lord Holmebush now indulged in an uncon- 
trollable fit of laughter. Few things amused 
him more than the naivete of his wife ; and 
never had he seen it more largely taxed than 
by the audacious innovations of the Clermont 
family. 

" Well, my dear Helen," cried he at last, " we 
may thank the ruling planet of the house of 
Murray, that poor Farrington has been turned 
out of office while there is yet a chair or table 
left in his house. Two years longer, and the 
Clermonts would in all probability have reduced 
him to bare walls." 

« Why surely you do not suppose — '* 

" Suppose 9 — I suppose nothing. It is enough 
to observe what really i% and to know that 



THE INTRIGANTE. 295 

'whatever is, is wrong ! ' without stretching one's 
imagination to a higher pitch of depravity." 

" Oh ! fie, — you always say so much more 
than you intend, that — " 

" Pardon me ! you have no conception of the 
enormousness and enormity of my intentions on 
this occasion. In the first place, I mean to say 

that Clermont's wife is Well, — well ! — 

don't look so shocked. I promise not to breathe 
another syllable respecting her during our stay 
at Farrington ; but it is on condition that you 
afford me a better subject of conversation. 
During our week's Ute-ct-ttte^ your brother and 
I have exhausted even the Heidelberg tun of po-* 
litics, — set it on the tilt, and waded through its 
filthiest lees. We have abused every thing and 
every body ; and since we came here, ' damns ' 
have not only ' had their day,' but their night. 
Now tell me ; — don't you think you could vary 
the scene by inviting over Bob Greyville and 
his wife ? " — 

" That Lady Gertrude is such a wonderful 
favourite of yours ! " 

" Whatever that woman may be, or to whom- 



296 THE INTRIGANTE. 

soever, must be * wonderful : ' — she has not the 
faculty of doing, saying, or thinking any thing 
like any one else. But were she indeed a fa- 
vourite of mine, it would be more wonderful 
than all the rest ; for I should favour her in spite 
of my feelings and my principles." 

" It is now my turn to cry ' oh ! ' " 

" Cry nothing, Nelly, an thou lovest me. 
The thought of a crying face upon those fair 
shoulders would— but to return to the Grey- 
villes ! — I want you, if possible, to get them 
here ; because, ever since the old Baronet's 
death (he did not long survive his larger half), 
I understand that charming girl Antonia has 
been residing with her brother and Lady Ger- 
trude.'' 

" You seem to be in the secret of all their 
family affairs." 

*' Am I ? — I should not have thought that a 
family with Lady Gertrude Greyville at its head 
could possibly have a secret. I am acquainted 
only with one — that Miss Greyville has been 
devotedly in love with Farrington any time 
these twenty years : and unless you manage to 



THE INTRIGANTE. 297 

bring the old couple together, poor Antoniu 
will grow grey in her attachment, and — " 

" Antonia ! — Antonia Greyville in love with 
Berkley ? — My dear Holmebiish ! what penetra- 
tion ! — you discover every thing! — With the 
exception of my brother, there is no one equal 
to you ! '* 

"In this case, however, none but myself can 
be my parallel ! — With all Farrington's sagacity, 
he has never yet had wit to discover the unac- 
knowledged passion of his old playmate. Or if 
really aware of it, the Clermont has made a 
greater fool of him than I imagined." 

" Holmebush, — Holmebush ! " « 

" But fool or philosopher, the bucket has at 
last touched the bottom of the well, and is on 
the rise again." 

" And you think — '* 

" That you must bring Antonia to the Castle: 
and, sand-blind as Berkley is, / will undertake 
to couch him. You have no idea how skilfully I 
shall operate ! — It will serve to amuse me; for, 
to say the truth, I have been desperately bored 
during the last two days." 

o 5 



298 THE INTRIGANTE. 

" I have the greatest reliance on Antonia's 
merits ; nor Is there a woman on earth I should 
so much like for a sister-in-law. But I remem- 
ber Frank Bradshaw always used to declare 
that—" 

" Hush, hush !— never venture to quote my 
friend Bradshaw in the country. Frank is an 
unimpeachable authority exactly so far as the 
Hammersmith turnpike, but no further. I 
doubt whether I should have any reliance on 
him even at Richmond ; and at Teddington, I 
should as soon think of avouching my word by 
that of Philip Quarll." 

" What nonsense you talk ! " 

" It is at least as good as his, which you seem 
to think worth remembering and repeating. 
And now sit down, like a good girl, and WTite 
a pretty letter to the Greyvilles. We won't 
say a word on the subject to poor Farrington. 
It shall be quite a surprise to him when he sees 
them drive into the court-yard.'* 

A surprise it certainly was, and far from an 
agreeable one. From the present Sir Robert 
Greyville, the ex-minister had been unavoidably 



THE INTRIGANTE. 299 

estranged since the return of Mrs. Clermont 
from the Mediterranean; and Lady Gertrude 
was a woman whose frivohty of speech and cha- 
racter rendered her a most unsuitable compa- 
nion, except in the giddy circles in which she 
was accustomed to move. Although the here- 
ditary hospitality of the house of Murray was 
taxed to do them honour, — although Lord Far- 
rington received them with all imaginable cour- 
tesy, — he was no less anxious to discover why 
they had been invited at all, than why they had 
accepted the Invitation. It was at least some 
relief that Antonia had declined the visit. 
Nothing would have embarrassed him more thai^ 
to receive her as a guest ; and while he ventured 
to impute her alleged indisposition to the same 
feelings of disdain which kept so many of his 
friends aloof, — it afforded him comfort that the 
woman he had used so unworthily, proved as 
selfish and interested as the rest of the world. 

Besides, it would have perplexed him beyond 
measure, had Miss Greyville's eyes been fixed 
upon his face while Lady Gertrude was inces- 



300 THE INTRIGANTE. 

santly bringing forward the new honours of her 
friends Sir Thomas and Lady Clermont ; chal- 
lenging hi7n with having thrown them off, and 
glorying in their present indemnification. Lord 
Holmebush seemed maliciously intent on inciting 
her to render them and herself ridiculous ; but it 
was a spontaneous effort of her own bad taste 
which at length induced her to attack him on 
the subject of Miss Greyville. Although, as she 
observed, there were none present but friends, 
Lord Farrington judged it unnecessary she 
should inform him how her arguments and in- 
fluence were at length triumphant with her 
sister-in-law. 

" We are just setting off on a tour through 
Italy," said Lady Gertrude, as soon as she could 
get her husband out of hearing, " and before 
we return to England, Antonia will become 
Mrs. Rosse." 

" Does Rosse accompany you ? " asked Lord 
Holmebush hastily. 

« Of course ! " 

" Then all is over for Farrington," cried he, 



THE INTRIGANTE. 301 

leading Helen away from the spot • " and he 
deserves it ! — What right has a man to look for- 
ward to domestic happiness, who has thrown 
away his best years on the society of an in- 
trigante ! '* 



302 THE INTRIGANTE. 



CHAPTER XII. 



The great end of prudence is to give cheerfulness to 
those hours which splendour cannot gild and acclamation 
cannot exhilarate ; — those intervals in w^hich a great man 
shrinks to his natural dimensions. Johnson. 

Lord Farrington, although pre-assured of 
the duhiess by which he should be overwhelmed 
when alone at the Castle, — of the "craving void 
left aching in his breast," by the absence of all he 
had so long been loving, — could not be induced 
by his sister to accompany her to Lord Holme- 
bysh's seat in Ireland. It was so long since he 
had ventured on absolute solitude, that he was 
curious to put his spirit to the test. — He tried to 
persuade himself that he had a taste for rural 
economy ; — read Bacon, fancied he was fond 
of gillyflowers and of setting out " dainty 



THE INTRIGANTE. 303 

flower gardens ; '* and bewildered himself with 
theories of the picturesque, — the day-dreams of 
Shenstone, Gilpin, Repton, Capability Brown, 
and Picturesque Price, — till his mind became 
a mighty chaos of clumps, foregrounds, middle 
distances, aerial perspective, and terrene diversi- 
fication. 

But it would not do ! — He who would derive 
his happiness from the loveliness of the face of 
nature, must begin with the face of nature. I'he 
excitement to be derived from " the pomp of 
groves and garniture of fields," becomes insuf- 
ficient to a man who for five long years has been 
commanding the applause of listening senates^ 
and presents too pure, too single, and perhaps 
too physical an enjoyment. A habit of address- 
ing himself to and calculating upon the passions 
and weakness of his fellow-creatures, creates an 
artificial, or as it is termed a philosophical turn 
of mind; and with all the littleness of human 
greatness, the man of cities unwittingly learns 
to despise the unsophisticated surface of the earth, 
when nothing intervenes betwixt its beauty and 
the approving smiles of Heaven. 



304 THE INTRIGANTE. 

" It is a glorious sight !" exclaimed Lord F. 
when he saw the sun rise, for the first time since 
his boyhood, over the magnificent valley com- 
manded by Farrington Castle ; — and having 
gazed at it till he was tired, he turned into the 
library and threw himself on a sofa to read 
Machiavel. — " 'Tis a more gorgeous spectacle 
than a coronation ! " cried he, when he beheld 
it set again in all its regal splendour of pur- 
ple and gold ; and he crept into the boudoir 
that had been fitted up for Mrs, Clermont, and 
began to turn over the luxurious pages of Lalla 
Rookh. He was already woefully weary of his 
own company; yet dreaded to invite to his house 
any portion of the babbling throng from which 
he had escaped, lest he should find himself im- 
pounded once more within the paltry barriers of 
political life. Friends, properly so called, he 
had none. In his boyhood, his attachment to 
Anne Danby, — in his latter years, his infatuation 
to the Clermonts, — had prevented his forming 
any of those happy and happy-making con- 
nexions, which humanize the lofty, and exalt 
the lowly-minded. His friendships were at best 



THE INTRIGANTE. 305 

political liaisons sealed by the bond of common 
office. 

In his whole career, whether prospectively 
or retrospectively considered — whether affording 
projects for the future oi' memories of the past — 
there was nothing solid, nothing cheering. He 
had not a single gratifying remembrance where- 
with to' brighten the monotony of riding from 
Farrington Thicket to Farrington Forest ; — or 
the still drearier dulness of pacing from the 
saloon to the dining-room — staring at hangings 
of blue damask, or green velvet ; — casting his 
eyes over old books v.^hich he knew by heart, or 
new ones which fretted his very soul by their^ 
frivolous inanity. He had been too long accus- 
tomed to the crush of levees, — the ardour of peti- 
tioners, — the intensity of eloquence, — the excite- 
ment of diplomatizing with foreign cabinets, — to 
be amused by the schemes of his attorney, the 
projects of his landsteward, or the intrigues of his 
cabinet council of the audit-room. He had at- 
tained even now but his fortieth year; and having 
devoted to public business those sunshiny days 
which form the appropriate season of pleasure, 



306 THE INTRIGANTE. 

his heart still possessed a treasury of unexplored 
wealth, to the existence of which he had been 
blinded by his illicit connexion with Mrs. Cler- 
mont. But these emotions were very unlikely 
to be called into action during his dull autocracy 
of the Castle. A sense of mental weariness 
was the only novel sensation that dawned upon 
him. He became daily and hourly more con- 
scious that he was bored to death ; and even 
found leisure to regret that his stupid old play- 
fellow Sir Robert Greyville, and his stupid old 
playfellow's giddy wife Lady Gertrude, had 
again discovered that the air of England was 
too harsh for their constitution. About Miss 
Greyville he thought nothing. He doubted 
whether such a person were still in existence ; 
and had no interest to bestow on the wife of 
Captain Rosse. 

The summer was already gone ! London 
must be as complete a blank as the Castle, 
and he bad no remedy but to visit Paris or some 
English watering place, by way of getting rid of 
himself. But this was a forfeiture of dignity to 



THE INTRIGANTE. 307 

which Lord Farrington could hardly yet con- 
descend. Habituated 

To stupid starers, and to loud huzzas, 
he shrank from the pul)licity he anticipated 
as inevitable in either of these alternatives ; and 
imagined that, like Pope's Lord Oxford, he 
might vainly retreat to deserts to escape the 
wondering gaze of the multitude. It needed 
time to prove that the mobs which had been 
wont to obstruct his passage were assembled 
by the minister, not the man ; and that, having 
fairly hooted and pelted him out of office, the 
public had every disposition to allow him to take 
his morning's ride or morning's saunter, without 
molestation, any where between Mile-end and 
Marylebone. 

At length relief appeared in the shape of a 
pressing invitation from a certain Lord Fare- 
brother who lived some sixteen miles off, ai 
the extremity of his own county : who, hav- 
ing five gaunt spinsters to dispose of, chose to 
consider, or call himself, a country-neighbour. 
Farebrother was too much of a private to be a 
public politician. The difficulty of bringing 



308 THE INTRIGANTE. 

up a cawing brood of half-fledged honour- 
ables on a moderate fortune, supplied him with 
a course of domestic economy, which rendered 
the species of economy hight political a very 
superfluous study. His own home department 
occupied all his attention ; and Farebrother 
House was the only house whose debates were 
interestino; in his ears. In such a household, 
Lord Farrington felt at least secure from having 
to fiffht all the battles of his administration o'er 
again ; and with the apprehension of nothing- 
worse than a battue, a billiard-table, and Beetho- 
ven's duets, took his departure for a neigh- 
bourly visit, which, in France would be con- 
sidered im voyage a faire signer ses dispositions 

testamentaires. 

Unworldly as he had ever been and still was 
(the nature of his career as a minister of state 
and as the pupil of Mrs. Clermont considered), 
it certainly did glance into his lordship's mind 
that the abundance of Farebrother spinsters 
was in some degree the motive of his invitation. 
He knew the world was beginning to wonder 
he did not marry : and that even in the obscu- 



m 



THE INTRIGANTE. 309 



rity of his private life, even as an Earl of mo- 
derate date with an income of only twenty thou- 
sand per annum, he might be considered what in 
the polite circles is termed " a very eligible con- 
nexion " and among the ladies' maids " a great 
catch," for one of the Pleiades of Farebrother 
Hall. But Lord F. the father, kept so vile an 
inference studiously out of view; — talking to 
the ex-minister solely of gratitude for assistance 
rendered him In Parliament in the herculean 
labours of turning an offensive turnpike-road, 
which, in former summers, had peppered the 
made-dishes of the Hail with the dust of the 
mail-coaches and post-chaises ; — and apart, and 
with a sly wink to his country neighbours, who 
were aware that he had two honourable dunces 
in the church, of the value of Lullingholme and 
other livings in the gift of the Murray family. 
Lord Farririfijton meanwhile uttered nothinir 
either to his host or the country neighbours re- 
specting his object in the visit. But he said to him- 
self, and reiterated the asseveration after the five 
ugly Miss Farebrothers had passed in review 
before him, that it " would be somewhat diffi- 



310 THE INTRIGANTE. 

cult to touch a heart hke his, accustomed for 
years to the wit and beauty of Mrs. Clermont, 
and the good sense and moral excellence of 
Antonia Greyville.'^ — Poor Antonia Greyville ! 
he had not talked to himself about her for some 
years before. — 

But a cursory view of the five j'Oung ladies 
was a moderate dose to be administered to a 
bachelor Earl : — Lord Farrington found his 
destinies otherwise appointed. He had been 
invited there to marry one of them ; and he 
must be rendered sensible of and if possible 
sensitive to the magnitude and variety of their 
accomplishments. Helen, the eldest, had been 
intended by name and nature for a beauty. Her 
features were finely formed, and kept together 
with much concord till she grew to woman's 
estate; when some species of face-quake had 
induced a singular dilapidation of countenance. 
She had therefore been set up as the " superior 
young woman" of the family, — to talk sensible 
to the county members and widowers, and dra- 
gonize the junior branches. Jane, the second, 
was a daughter of Anak and an Amazon ; shot 



THE INTRIGANTE. 311 

flying, rough-rode her father's colts, and could 
land a pike of four-and- twenty pounds from the 
Farebrother milldam, single handed. Mary, 
the third, was a musical genius : Clara a natu- 
ral philosopher, an impaler of butterflies and 
beetles: and Adelaide, — a very good little girl, 
and a dumbmy. 

The mother of so hopeful a progeny was a 
woman whom most people called " poor Lady 
Farebrother ; '' but, — as she had an easy good 
natured husband, and had lost only five of the 
nineteen sons and dausjhters recorded of her in 
the Peerage, — it is difficult to know to what to 
attribute the world's compassion, unless that she 
had been living for five-and-twenty years upon 
Seidlitz powders and caudle, — the apothecary's 
horse a daily visitation at her gates, one or two 
teething babes successively squalling in the nur- 
sery, — the medicine chest always open, — and 
the vapour of bread and milk pervading one 
wing of the house. Her ladyship was gene- 
rally announced to be "as well as could be 
expected," — in spite of a very bilious complexion 
to justify the pity of her friends and neighbours ; 



312 THE INTRIGANTE. 

—and during Lord Farrington's visit he saw 
her only from the lawn, standing at one of her 
dressing-room windows wrapt in a shawl; and 
resembling in stature and complexion, the wife 
of Lot after her transformation. 

Society such as this was far more insupport- 
able than solitude to the accomplished Farring- 
lon. Nothing but excess of good-nature or good- 
breeding got him through a couple of days with- 
out the pretended arrival of a letter of business 
to tear him from the bosom of the charming fa- 
mily ; when lo ! on the third day Miss Helen, 
well tutored for the effort, astounded him with 
sundry long quotations from a pamphlet, writ- 
ten by a member of his party, in defence of the 
Farrington administration ! — His lordship w^as 
startled, — captivated,— soothed,— surprised. He 
was not aware how much could be said (and 
how well said) in his honour. Nor did a peru- 
sal of the spirited performance lessen his wonder 
and admiration. Brougham could not have rea- 
soned more powerfully — Jeffrey investigated the 
subject more acutely — or Macaulay pleaded 
his cause more eloquently. But the pamphleteer 



THE INTRIGANTE. 313 

was evidently some person familiarly acquainted 
with his character, birth, parentage, and edu- 
cation. His heart thrilled within him in suff- 
gesting the name of Lady Clermont! — The 
ability displayed in the performance was no 
longer a matter of wonder. Anne — his own 
Anne — was equal to any thing.; could out-argue 
Brougham, — out-fence Jeffrey, — out-declaim 
Macaulay: — Anne had the, wisdom of the ser- 
pent with the guilelessness of the dove ! And 
this was the woman he had misjudged, reviled, 
maligned ; — this the friend he had misdoubted ! 
Fool that he was ! Appearances had been alone 
against her; and he now saw clearly that she 
had been mining and countermining in his 
favour, though compelled to assume the enemy's 
colours. 

The letter addressed by Lord Farrington to 
Lady Clermont, on this suggestion, was dictated 
by the impulses of a noble spirit. He implored 
her pardon as humbly as if he had really done 
amiss ; returned thanks for her unmerited good- 
ness, as if he had really reason to be thankful ; 
and perhaps, had Lady Clermont received the 

VOL. III. p 



314« THE INTRIGANTE. 

eloquent missive as it was written, in silence and 
solitude, her feelings might have been touched 
by Lord Farrington's credulous generosity. 
But, unluckily, the tender epistle was forwarded 
from Spring-gardens to Milford Park, (the 
residence of the new premier, with whom she 
was passing the holidays, accompanied by the 
rabble-rout which formerly enacted Chorus in 
the dramas of Farrington Castle;) — and the 
name of " Farrington " on the frank having 
betrayed the secret of their correspondence, her 
ladyship saw clearly that it would afford a sacri- 
fice of propitiation to her new idols to admit 
them into the secret. The letter, accordingly, 
was publicly recited, — publicly derided; — and 
Lady Clermont deigned to gratify their curiosity 
by pointing out to their admiration the un- 
limited scorn which sparkled throughout the 
dozen lines of which her answer was com- 
posed ! 

" The flimsy production," she observed, 
" which his lordship had done her the very un- 
necessary honour of attributing to her pen, was 
generally believed to be the performance of 



THE INTRIGANTE. 315 

Miss Greyville, now in Italy, and on the point 
of marriage with her cousin, Captain Rosse." 

She did not think it necessary to add that, if 
not the author, she was at least the origin of the 
defence, by the calumnies she had assisted to 
put in circulation. Perhaps, indeed, Lady 
Clermont mistook or forgot the whole occur- 
rence ? — 

New-made honour doth forget men's claims ; 
and " Sir Thomas Vernon Clermont, Ba- 
ronet, of Oaklands Park, in the County of 
Sussex," had been gazetted the preceding Tues- 
day as one of the Lords of his Majesty's 
Treasury ! 



p 2 



316 THE INTRIGATNE. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



A soul so calm, it knew not ebbs or flows, 
Which Passion could but curl, not discompose ; — 
A female softness with a manly mind ! 

Dryden. 

The Farebrotbers, baving founded vast ex- 
pectations on tbe grateful courtesy witb wbich 
whicb tbeir noble guest rewarded the intelli- 
gence so unwittingly imparted by the erudite 
Helen, were somewhat surprised at the precipi- 
tation with which Lord Farrington now took 
his departure for London. Entertaining the 
opinion of most persons of their caste, that 
nothing is to be done in the metropolis between 
the months of July and March, they regarded 
his pretext of " business '' as a mysterious sub- 
terfuge. They had no reason to conjecture that 



THE INTRIGANTE. 317 

he was about to resign his aflPairs into the hands 
of his auditor, procure a cabinet passport for 
Italy, and fly for ever from an ungrateful coun- 
try. The pamphlet had assured them that no 
man had ever greater cause than the ex-premier 
to loathe and despise the ingratitude of the Great 
British public;— but they did not dream that 
(like Coriolanus) he would indulge his spleen 
by banishing its Senate, and renouncing all fel- 
lowship with its citizens. 

It may be doubted, however, whether the po- 
litical world held much influence over the pro- 
ceedings of the Earl of Farrington. Avoiding 
the coteries of Paris, which teemed with his « 
partizans, he hastened resolutely on towards the 

Antiche mura ch' an cor teme ed ama 
E treraa il mondo, quando si rimembra 
Del tempo andato. 

He had already determined to winter in 
the Eternal City, — the subject of so much 
eternal prose and immortal poetry; — and the 
first incident that produced any sensation in his 
mind, in the course of his soUtary journey, was 
he sight of an hotel register presented to him 



318 THE INTRIGANTE. 

at his Genevan auberge, for the inscription of 
his illustrious name and line of march, — where- 
in the announcement of " Captain and Mrs. 
Rosse, to Paris, from the villa of Sir Robert 
Greyville, Benogna near Como," stood as con- 
spicuous as the text-hand of the courier could 
make it. — It was observed by the aubergiste that 
his lordship sent away his dinner untouched; 
and by his servants that he passed the night in 
pacing the apartment. 

The intelligence thus unexpectedly conveyed 
had, in fact, given rise to a startling train of 
reflections; conjuring up before him the predi- 
lections of his childhood, the follies of his youth, 
the fickleness of his maturity, the madness of 
his manhood. He recalled to mind the endear- 
ment of the little Antonia ; — the blandishments 
of the artful Anne of Dynington; — the mild for- 
bearance with which Miss Greyville had wel- 
comed him back to her friendship in the onset 
of his official career ; — the bold but artful tact 
with which Mrs. Clermont had manoeuvred her- 
self anew into his confidence; — the calm and 
steady regard with which his earlier friend had 



THE INTRIGANTE. 319 

Watched the progress of his public life, extenuat- 
ing its errors, appreciating its nobler motives, 
glorying in its triumphs, and covering its defeat ; 
— the baseness with which Lady Clermont had 
fled from his side, and abjured his party in the 
hour of danger ; and finally, the generosity with 
which the woman with whose affections he had 
trifled, — whose youth he had condemned to 
wither in cold abandonment, — had stepped for- 
ward in his defence, rebutting the charges con- 
cocted by his former treacherous associates, with 
all the force of her strong mind — all the warmth 
of her glowing heart ! 

Was it surprising that he should turn from 
the image of the resplendent, worshipped, 
worshipping lady of the Lord of the Trea- 
sury, to the obscure and gracious shadow of 
the neglected Mrs. Rosse ? — Mrs. Bosse ! — 
a wife, not only by the grace of Heaven, 
but by the unparalleled, the unpardonable, 
the inexplicable, the infatuated, neglect of 
the Right Hon. Berkley Earl of Farrington ! 
— In the first paroxysm of his irritation, he de- 
termined to pursue his journey (with a speed 



320 THE INTRIGANTE. 

setting reflection and lamentation at defiance) 
to the South of Europe, the North of Africa, 
Egypt, Abyssinia, Timbuctoo,— no matter where, 
or wherefore ! — But the exhaustion consequent 
on over-excitement soon reduced his projects to a 
more sober vein. Sadness crept over him as 
he lay reclined in the corner of his caleche ; and 
he determining to visit Como, and learn from 
Lady Gertrude all that could be learned to 
nourish his regrets and crown his confusion. 

The warmth of her ladyship's reception, and 
her entreaties that he would take up his abode 
in the beautiful villa they inhabited on the 
borders of the Lake, satisfied him that he had 
done wisely, if not too well. Lady Gertrude 
was all ecstacies; — full of rapturous inquiries 
about dear Greyville Park; — a spot she took 
care to run away from, on every convenient op- 
portunity : and her own beloved Tracy Hall ; — 
which, when residing in England, she regarded 
much as an insolvent debtor regards the Fleet 
Prison. 

" Oh ! if you had but persuaded Frank Brad- 
shaw to come with you. Poor Frank must miss 



THE INTRIGANTE. 321 

US sadly ! — He use to stay with us for months 
and months at a time !'* 

" Frank has always some reigning friend 
with whom he stays months and months at 
a time. Believe me, he has not left himself 
unprovided." 

" Well, don't tell me about it till Sir Robert 
comes in ; for Fm sure it will be a satisfaction 
to him to learn that Frank does not miss Grey- 
ville Park. But. dearest Lord Farrington, — is 
it — can it be true — that Lady Clermont is 
such a favourite with the new Court? — That 
she now sets up for proper, just as in your 
time she used to set up for blue; — and that 
nothing has ever equalled her influence, and 
fashion, and all that?" — 

" If public report may be credited, quite 
true. But I have been living quietly in the 
country ever since you quitted England, and 
know nothing that is going on in the great 
world." 

" Dear ! — how provoking ! — I wanted to know 
whether Lady Clermont really had three Royal 
Dukes at her last archery-meeting at Oaklands ; 

p5 



322 THE INTRIGANTE, 

and whether that Austrian Archduke who was 
in London last season did really say that there 
were two Queens in England, her Majesty of 
St. James's, and her Majesty of St. Fashion?" — 

" The newspapers, at least, said so for him ; 
and Lady Clermont is reported to have appro- 
priated the compliment." 

" But do tell me ; — you came by Geneva ! — 
Surely you must have met the Rosses ? " — 

" I missed them by a day or two." 

" Were you not very much surprized to hear 
of the match?" 

'' Not particularly so. I — " 

"Ay!" cried Lady Gertrude, with a sigh, 
'^ you, perhaps, were inclined to be glad, — but 
/ — I who once formed such very different pro- 
jects, — ^you may guess whether / had reason to 
be pleased! Well — don't let us talk of it! I 
never saw poor Sir Robert so put out in my 
life ! Pray oblige me by not mentioning the 
subject before him. He is so angry with 
Antonia.'* 

" Certainly not, if you desire it." 

" And there he is ! '^ — cried Lady Gertrude, 



THE INTRIGANTE, 323 

applying her eye to a telescope that stood on her 
work-table, directed towards the bright expanse 
of the lake that gleamed at the foot of the shrub- 
beries of Villa Benogna : " Come with me to 
the landing-stairs, and we will surprise them." 

Lady Gertrude had previously announced to 
her guest that Sir Robert Greyville, and two or 
three Milanese friends, his visitors, were gone 
on a sailing expedition to Como; and seizing 
Lord Farrington's arm, she now tripped down 
the n?arble steps leading from terrace to terrace 
of the beautiful garden. — He had no time to 
admire the espaliers of orange-trees in full-bear- 
ing,— the vases of aloes and box-trees, — the 
statues standing out in glimmering whiteness 
amid thickets of green myrtle. He had no 
leisure to inhale the musky fragrance charac- 
teristic of Italian gardens, — or to listen to the 
cool plash of the waters against the little quay. 

From the highest terrace they had discerned 
the skiff, nearing the little bay which was 
fringed round with the plantations of Villa 
Benogna; and with a listless heart, Lord Far- 
rington waited upon the guidance of Lady Ger- 



384 THE INTRIGANTE. 

trude, his mind pre-occupied by the idea that 
Antonia and her lover had wandered among 
those beautiful shades, — that the flowers bloom- 
ing around him had imparted sweetness and 
loveliness to their bridal hours, — that those mar- 
ble terraces had echoed back the whispers of 
their mutual vows. A sudden opening in the 
thickets of ilex they were traversing, brought 
them to the edge of the water ; and it was no 
trifling triumph to Lady Gertrude to hear the 
exclamation of delighted surprise with which 
her companion gazed on the white sails of the 
felucca, as it lay anchored in the dark-blue 
watei*s rippling at their feet. 

Lord Farrington's surprise was great indeed ; 
for his face grew white as death when the first 
object that struck his eyes on the deck of the 
little vessel was the figure of Mrs. Rosse, lean- 
ing upon her brother's arm. The bridegroom 
was not there. What could have become of 
him? — and what had brought back Antonia 
from Geneva? 

The explanation was soon made ; — and 
though Lord Farrington's pride prompted him, 



THE INTRIGANTE. 325 

in the first instance, to obtain it without betray- 
ing his feelings or his misconceptions, when he 
became fully aware that Antonia was still and 
still likely to remain, Antonia Greyville, — and 
that the new Mrs. Rosse was an intimate friend, 
promoted by her interference to fill the place so 
long and faithfully reserved for herself, — he uo 
longer scrupled to avow the pangs and self-re- 
proaches with which he had greeted her union 
with another. The time for hesitation or deli- 
cacy was over. He had too long trifled with 
his own happiness. His stars had served him 
better than he had served himself; and since 
it was his better fortune to meet with thp 
object of his boyish friendship still unshackled 
by any nearer tie, still uninfluenced by any 
fonder emotion, he had nothing to do but to 
fall on his knees, to thank Providence in the 
first place, and implore the boon of Antonia's 
hand in the second. 

Lord Farrington could not, in fact, say too 
littie in addition to the assurance of his attach- 
ment and the offer of his hand; while Miss 
Greyville fancied that she could not say too 



326 THE INTRIGANTE. 

much in extenuation of the weakness prompting 
her to accept the proffered gift, in spite of the 
weak, wicked, and ungenerous preference so 
long l)estowed upon her worthless rival. 

Probably his lordship thought it unnecessary 
to hazard her displeasure in defence of a bosom 
friend who had proved so much his enemy ; 
for he suffered Miss Greyville to pourtray un- 
interrupted the years of mortification she had 
endured in witnessing his alienation from her- 
self, his devotion to another ; — listened very pa- 
tiently to all the " fair spirit " whom he wished 
to become his new "minister" thought proper 
to urge; — and when she had exhausted her ac- 
cusations, renewed his original inquiry of — " In 
spite of all my faults, — all my follies, — will you 
deign to be mine?" 

The gentle Antonia was not implacable. Se- 
cure in her own purity and steadiness of mind, 
she had no fear of provoking the scoffs of so- 
ciety ; and cared very little whether Frank 
Bradshaw and Co. were likely to infer that she 
was accepted as a pis-aller by the minister who 
had been turned out, and the lover who had 



THE INTRIGANTE. 327 

been turned off. And she had every encourage- 
ment in the approval of her own family. Lady 
Gertrude, rejoicing in so diverting an incident 
as a sister's marriage, admitted she was now 
very glad that Antonia should have been so 
obstinate in refusing Captain Rosse; — while 
Bob had never been more overjoyed in his life 
than by the prospect of finding a brother-in-law 
in " the playmate of his infancy,'^ — whose pre- 
serves were so near and so very superior to 
those of Greyville Park. 

Thanks to their residence abroad, the mar- 
riage of Berkley and Antonia was curtailed of a 
considerable proportion of that pride, pompr, 
and circumstance of glorious wedlock, which 
in England converts Hymen's saffron vest into 
an armour of buckram. They were united in 
the chapel of the embassy at Florence; and set 
forward on a tour to the South. Neither was 
in any haste to return to England. Lord Far- 
rington dreaded the possibility of a recall to 
public life ; and his bride,— nay, even his wife, 
— nay, even the mother of a little Lord Murray, 
who made his appearance at Naples the follow- 



328 THE INTRIGANTE, 

ing year, — could not divest herself of a certain 
degree of terror of a certain Lady Clermont, 
of whose whereabout the English newspapers 
were still only too apt to prate ; whose bon-mots 
were duly commemorated, and whose hospitali- 
ties blazoned for the admiration of Europe. 

Nearly three years elapsed before the bon- 
fires blazed, and the bells rang, in honour of 
the arrival of the Earl and Countess at Far- 
rington Castle; but some months previous to 
that joyful event, the sun of the intrigante had 
set for ever. Just as a patent for the Barony 
of Oaklands was made out in favour of Sir 
Thomas, his hitherto imperturbable equanimity 
of conjugal patience suddenly gave way. Some 
said that he had formed a scheme for gilding 
the balls of his new coronet by an alliance with 
the widow of a President of the Calcutta Coun- 
cil, lately arrived in a homeward-bound ship 
freighted with pearls and pagodas; — some said 
that Nancy (forgetting her husband was better 
versed than the rest of the world in the mys- 
teries of her birth, parentage, and education) 



THE INTRIGANTE. 329 

had ventured to display the most insulting con- 
tempt of his own. But having once conceived 
a wish to get rid of her, the means were readily 
at his disposal. Easy as he had found it to close 
his eyes against her proceedings, it was still 
easier to open them when it suited his purpose ; 
— to dismiss the offender from his house, — smite 
her with the strong arm of the law, — assume 
the plaintive martyrdom of "an injured hus- 
band, deprived of the world's best blessing, 
the society of a beloved wife ;" — and drive forth 
the pseudo Lady Oaklands, — as the disgraced, 
the despised, the divorced Anne Danby ! — The 
new partner of her frailty was a married man ; « 
— there was no redemption for her, — no atone- 
ment,— no consolation. The Right Hon. Lord 
Oaklands gave his hand to Mrs. Kibaub; — the 
Right Hon. the Earl of Farrington had already 
given both hand and heart to the prudent and 
wise Antonia; — and Nancy, having circumna- 
vigated the sphere of ambition, found herself 
obliged to end where she began, — as a boarder 
and lodger in the obscure village of Dyning- 



330 THE INTRIGANTE. 

ton ! — It were an unnecessary degradation of 
human nature to pourtray the last hopeless, 
helpless, shameless years, of a conscience-seared 
and defeated — Intrigante! 



THE END. 



Y 



3. B. NICHOLS AND SON, 25, PARLIAMENT STREET. 
