ALEXENA; 

OB, THE 

Castle of Santa Marco* 

A ROMANCE, 
IN THREE VOLUMES, 



i 



Vi>/.I[,Fi7(7(: 205. 




f^rl^mi ca '-'If 



/'(/ USrC'CiJj 



ALEXEN A ; 



OB, TUB 



Castle of Santa Marco, 

A ROMANCE, 
IJV THREE VOLUMES. 

EMBELLISHED WITH ENGRAVINGS. 



«« Ye gods of quiet and of sleep profound! 
Whose soft dominion o'er this castle sways ; 
And all the widely silent places round. 
Forgive me, if my trembling pen displays 
What never yet was sung in mortal lays." 



VOL II. 



lontJon: 

Printed at the Minerva Press, for 
A. B.. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALLST. 

1817. 



'-it. 






ALEXENA; 



OR THE 



Castle of Santa Marco. 



-»<♦♦♦» » 



CHAPTER I. 

'" 'Ti» now the very witching time of night, 

When church-yards yawn, and hell itself breathe* out 
Contagion to this world.'* 

Hamlet. 

i\S soon as the " iron tongue of mid- 
night had tolled twelve," the moon re- 
tired, leaving Lord Mortimer and his 
attendants in almost impenetrable dark- 
ness ; Monfrane then led the way, and 
they proceeded towards the castle's 
base, with speed, anxiety, and caution. 

VOL. II. A 



ALEXENA : OR THE 



The path they followed was unincum- 
bered by obstacles of any sort; so they 
reached it in safety, and waited with 
impatience the return of the lamp of 
night, which shortly after burst through 
a mass of sable clouds, and tipped with 
rays of silver, the tops of the surround- 
ing cliffs; her light then served to show 
the utter impossibility of scaling the 
rock, and his lordship examined it with 
minute attention; he went round every 
projection,, peeped into every crevice 
accessible to him, and turned from it 
in despair ; while the sound of the 
heavy foot-falls of the guards on the 
rampart above, insured certain destruc- 
tion, in the event of the slightest noise. 
Thev' therefore were extremelv cauti- 
ous, keeping in the shade as much as 
possible, until Monfrane, in a low whis- 
per, required their return^ expressing 
great anxiety at the delay that had been 
already made, and hinted there was a 
strong probability they would be sur- 
prised, if they contiimed longer in such 
a perilous situation. Had Lord Morti- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 3 

mer at that moment observed the ex- 
pression of his j^uide's features, lie 
would have seen much (o excite his 
suspicion ; the countenance of Monfrane 
Avas marked with the deepest anxiety, 
accompanied by the exulting looks of 
successful cunning ; but liis lordship 
was otherwise engaged ; liis every 
thought was Alexena's, and he was then 
equally inattentive to every other ob- 
ject under heaven; not so Albert, he 
had the penetration to see the change 
that so forcibly marked the manner of 
their guide, and determined to shoot 
him on the spot, should any incident 
occur, which would justify his fears, 
and prove Monfrane a traitor. 

A condense cloud at that instant 
again obscured the moon, which was 
considered a favourable moment to retire 
from their dangerous situation ; they 
therefore followed Monfrane through 
the narrow defile, into an angle in the 
glen, (the most lonely and gloomy spot 
which lay between the cottage and the 
castle;) the road on every side was 
overshadowed with clustering shrubs^ 

A 3 



4 :ALEXENA ; OR THE 

whose foliage cast a deep shade across 
the narrow path, and Albert, in vain, 
endeavoured to catch a glimpse of his 
p-uide's countenance, but the darkness 
frustrated his design, and in eager en- 
deavours to effect his purpcse, he stum- 
bled, and fell; his lordship stooped to 
raise liim, when, to his incredible dis- 
may, Monfrane plunged into the shade, 
v^histlina: so shrill, that the distant 
rocks wrung with the echo, and before 
our hero and his servants could prepare 
their arms, they, to their infinite terror, 
observed upwards of twenty carbines 
levelled at them from every direction ; 
to move, was to incur inevitable destruc- 
tion, as they were completely sur- 
rounded by banditti. The only alter- 
native was submission ; but Lord Mor- 
timer hoped to make conditions before 
he gave up his arms, and desired their 
chief to come forward, to whom he 
would surrender. A robber then ad- 
vanced, who, from the dark plume that 
waved in his cap, and the purple cloak 
which enveloped his figure, appeared 
to be their captain. He commanded 



tASTliE OF SANTA MATICO. S 

(he g^n^^ to sufround their prisoners, 
but promised they should not sustain 
either injury or insult^ and desired 
the troop to treat them with civility. 
"However/* he contiiiued, ''should 
they attempt to escape, recollect your 
orders." The bandits bowed slightly, 
and having disarmed their captives, 
bes^an their march throui»h the most 
desolate wilds imai^inablc. 

They travelled the whole night, and 
as soon as the first tints of morniuir en- 
abled them to disfinguiah objects. 
Lord Morliiner found himself in a most 
horrible romantic glen, between two 
black barren mountaijis, which seemed 
to lead to a forest, and on approaching, 
the idea was confirmed by those of 
the banditti who were mounted alight- 
ing, immediately after they entered a 
thicket, raising the branches as they 
proceeded, forming an arch, under 
which their comrades passed ; and when 
the whole" group were assembled, the 
umbrtijfeous shade resumed its wonted 
position, eilectually securing the en- 
trance to this leafy prison. 



6 



AT.KXKMA ; OR TUli 



CHAP. 11. 



For the love of all thegods. 



Li'l's li'uvc llu- h''riuit pity with our jnothprs ; 
Aiu? wl^ni we li;ivf our .irnuuir InicklM i>n, 
The vfiioiii'il vingcuiicc riilc upon tuir swonh !'* 

Tttoii.. t^ Cats. 

X [\V. haiuliUi tuommI loiward in a 
zi«>'/.a^" ilirnlion. until ihcy rcachrd a 
small cavity in a iDik, of jetty black- 
ness, into uhich thov cicj>t, accompa- 
i»i(Hl bv his lordship; but. haviui;' once 
cnt(M(Hl. the cavern became more spa- 
cious, though the (^\treme darkness 
precluded the possibility of ascertainin«^' 
its extent. In a tew moments, one of 
tlic rob!>ers made the vanity cave riuij 
■with asi«;-nal whistle, and instantly iaint 
Hashes oi' lii;ht oleanuMl in the misty 
obscurity, accompanied by the mnrnuu' 
of voic(\s, and tlu^ distant sound of 
lootstt^ps. Lv)rd INKntimer was now 
lunried forward by his conductors, but 
^Inunk back in tenor, on observing; 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 7 

their srrim shadows reflected in a dark 
pool, whose waters made a mournful 
sound, as they gently washed the cre- 
vices of their stonv boundaries : which 
one of the ruffians perceiving, flung a 
rocky fragment into its glossy bosoms- 
causing a noise like distant tliunder — 
addins: horror to the scene. The bri2:ht 
glare of torches soon displayed the si- 
tuation of thecavern, and countenances 
more terrible than Satan's representa- 
tives ; who, as they approached a mas- 
sive iron grating that impeded further 
progress, welcomed their comrades with 
curses ; swearing, their chief expected 
them two hours before. Mis lordship 
on hearing this, found he had not as 
yet seen the captain of these predacious 
bravoSj and liis imagination instantly- 
presented the form of Belzo Carracci; 
but the ruffians gave him little time for 
reflection, having ordered him to ascend 
a short flight of sfeps, which led to the 
iron grate, that the banditti within were 
movi.jo bv the assistance of a windlass, 
and as it slowly rose into the rocks 



ALEXENA ; OR THE 



above, made a most disagreeable gra- 



ting noise. 



• While a passage was thus preparing, 
the robbers rudely jested with each 
other. "Hark yon, Bondello/' said 
one of tiie villains vvitiiin the grating, 
''1 wish this damned portcullis was after 
coming smash on your toes, as we 
should then see the prettiest face in 
Christendom, eh! what think yon? 
would vou look as blue as the u'vAit 
you sa'v the black knight in the gallery 
of Santa Marco." To this the other 
answered, with a muttered threat, and a 
deep growl : — " I, I, Signior ; you would 
hop, but not run quite so fast as you 
did previous to your ttmibling down 
the great stair-case." Bondello's eyes 
glared fury ; but on laying his hand 
on the hilt of his sabre, he who was se- 
cond in command ordered the mischiev- 
ous wag to be silent, and in a rage de- 
manded, " were they to be admitted 
before the day of judgment?" The 
bandit now became less talkative, and in 
a few moments the grate was suffici- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 9 

ently raised to ailinit Lord Mortimer 
witli his j^uards, who proceeded for- 
AYard, while the portcullis fell with a 
liideoiis crashj irito a deep groove cut 
in the rock for its reception^ and its 
bolts were iuiinediately replaced in their 
respective fastenings. The ruffians for 
some time advanced in a straiirht line, 
until they reached the top of a flight of 
stairs, cut in the solid rock; they then 
descended, and passed through a vast 
number of winding passages, which led 
to a kind of octagon hall^, from which 
others branched oflf in various direc- 
tions. Here they paused for a few mi- 
nuteSj as if waiting for orders. Again 
the cavern run"- with the si2:nal whistle 
and again they proceeded, following 
tiie direction to the ri2:ht, which brou^'ht 
them to a second hall, larger than the 
first. This terminated in a fliglit 
of steps, leading to u slone gallery, 
sirrounded on every side by small 
chambei's, which his lordship conceived 
to be the apartments of the banditti ; 
and at the end of this thev entered n 

m 

A 5 



JO ALEXENA ; OR THE 

large square vault, slill guarded by ten 
of the most ferocious of the troop. 
Here his lordship was informed his 
eyes, and those of his attendants, must be 
covered, and on his remonstrating, was 
ao-ain assured no violence was intended, 
but his unwillingness encreased, which 
Bondello observing, exclaimed, " Come, 
come, Signior, no folly; were we or- 
dered to send you to hell, we should 
blow your brains about your ears, with- 
out all this ceremony." Ilis lordship 
felt the truth of this sava»e rcmon- 
strance, and being convinced further 
resistance would only serve to irritate 
those wretches, quietly submitted to 
liave tlje bandage placed on his eyes; 
Rourke and Albert were also hood- 
winked, and Ihe operation seemed to 
afford great mirth to the ruffians, par- 
ticularly as Tom's face was nigh as 
ruefnl as that of Don Quixote. The 
poor fellow believing the following mo- 
ment should be his last, made an at- 
tempt to pull the handkerchief from his 
brows, as he vociferated ''damn it^ if I 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. II 

am to die, let it be like a man, with my 
eyes open." Down iell the bandage^, 
and judge Rourke's surprise, on finding 
the floor had sunk several feet, leavins" 
(he robbers above gazing at tliem as they 
descended ; he was too much astonished 
to be able to articulate, and on looking 
down, observed several of the banditti 
below, waiting to receive them ; the 
moment after, the platform rested se- 
curely on the floor of a comfortable 
apartment, where there was an excellent 
fire, and a plentiful repast; the floor 
was carpeted, and the furniture of ex- 
cellent workmanship. Tom instantly 
whispered the satisfaction he felt at this 
unlooked-for change, and began to be 
somewhat reconciled to his situation, 
when the robbers poured into the 
chamber, from various apertures in the 
wail, each placing his hand on the back 
of the chair which he intended to oc- 
cupy, and invited Rourke and Albert to 
sit with them. Lord Mortimer was 
conducted to the upper end of the 
room, where he observed the anxious 



12 



ALEXENA ; OR THE 



looks of the troop, which seemed to say^ 
tliey either expected tlie entrance of 
their chief, or p3rmission to partake of 
the inviting repast before them. In a 
few moments a bugle sounded^ and the 
instant after, Monfrane entered, habited 
as a bandit, to conduct Lord Mortimer 
into the presence of liis chief. His lord- 
ship beheld him with surprise and in- 
dignation, at which tlie latter smiled, 
and taking his hand, said, " IMy lord, 
I told you a powerfid friend promised 
protection to your Alexena, I now come 
to lead you to him, and in BelzoCarracci 
you i^hall behold a man, who, I trust, 
^rill prove worthy your confidence." 
His lord^ihip, still more surprised, suffer- 
ed himself to be conducted into an ad' 
joining cliamber, which was most splen- 
didly decorated, and where he found 
Carracci. IMonfrane introduced him, 
and he was received by the chief, with 
all the ease and grace of the finished 
gentleman. Lord Mortimer beheld 
the martiid form of this extraordinary 
iiee-Looter, with evident admiration; 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 13 

his intelli^^ent countenance indicated a 
promptitude in action, and a fund of 
inexhaustible resources ; his arched 
brows gave the stronf»est expression to 
his every action, and his face, though 
extremely handsome, bore the marks of 
the rude elements to which it had long 
been accustomed. When agitated by 
any great exertion, his whole form 
seemed dilated and marked with an air 
of inexpressible ardour; his height 
added grace to his athletic figure, which 
seemed to have been cast in the mould 
of symmetry itself, and though a robber, 
with perverted principles, yet had a 
more gentle heart than many of those 
held up to the admiring world as pat- 
terns of virtue and morality. 

His lordshio, in a short time, forirot 
his imperfections, and in the graces of 
his conversation, found amusement, if 
not information, and before breakfast 
was removed, felt charmed that he had 
found so powerful an assistant in such 
an extraordinary man as Carracci. 
About noon, tlie banditti were ordered 



14 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

to assemble in the great hall of this 
subterranean world, to attend their 
chiefj on business of particular import- 
ance; and when the bugle announced 
they waited, he led his lordship into the 
midst of that horrible assembly, where 
he was certain his wishes would be 
complied with, and the moment he en- 
tered, the banditti evinced their respect 
by a loud cheer of welcome, and by 
uncovering their heads. Carracci waved 
his sabre, and in an instant all was silent 
as the tomb ; then taking his lordship's 
hand, he said, " Behold the friend of 
the man whom you have voluntarily- 
named your chief, and as such receive 
him ; swear thai his cause shall be your 
own, and that to the utmost of your 
power, you will avenge him — swear to 
exterminate the vile Acasto and his in- 
famous agent, the implacable toes of 
Carracci and his band. The day that 
gives him to destruction, insures ye the 
treasures of the castle, and for this 
I pledge my failh. The hall now re- 
sounded with wild huzzas, and in a 
moment out fiew/Mhcir flaming iaul- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. J5 

cliions." — " We swear/' they shouted, 
^' We sweai\to send his soul to hell at the 
first signal." A thrill of horror shot 
through the form of Lord Mortimer, as 
he raised his eye to that of Carracci, and 
started on beholding the terrors of his 
visage ; his gentleness had fled^ and 
was succeeded by the most envenomed 
vengeance ; his lordship then recollect- 
ing his late words, mentally exclaimed, 
" May not Acasto have been his bit- 
terest foe, may he not have driven 
him by his wiles, to his present dread- 
ful situation? It must be so, and 
what punishment is too great for a 
wretch that has, perhaps, wantonly 
destroyed one of Nature's fairest 
works. Oh ! Carracci, I feel convinced 
you have not always been a villain, 
and from ray soul I pity the despair 
which drew you into this whirlpool 
of vice ; is there yet a possibility of re- 
claiming you? I know not, but the 
attempt is worth the trial; and if fated 
to remain your captive any length of 
time, every exertion of mine shall be 
expended in the endeavour, and may 



16 alexena; on the 

the powers of mercy grant me success.'* 
He was now called on to return thanks 
for promised assistance,, which he did 
with such a winning^grace^ as created in 
the minds of the robbers, a particular 
desire to render him service. 

When they retired from the hall, 
Carracci recommended a few hours re- 
pose, after which, he promised to com- 
municate the plan he had formed in his 
behalf, but until then, determined to be 
silent. Monfrane was now ordered to 
conduct him to the crimson chamber. 
^'See," said Carracci, "that it is well 
air<>d, and let no noise disturb that 
quarter. Farewell, my lord," he con- 
tinued, " may you enjoy that repose, 
which never can revisit the unfortunate 
man you have honoured with your con- 
fidence." Lord Mortimer beheld him 
with compassion, and with difflculty 
concealed his emotion, as he replied, 
"trust in Providence, mercy always 
waits with extended arms to rc( eive a 
repentant sismer.'' "Hush! In^sh !" 
Belzo softly exclaimed, " sucjj precepts 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 17 

insure destruction here ; but you are 
fatiijued — "ood ni^^ht — "ood niiirht." 
He then hurried away through a distant 
door, and his lordship followed Mon- 
frane in melancholy silence, attended 
by his domestics. 

As they proceeded, they were asto- 
nished by the various winding pas- 
sasres, which seemed cut in the solid 
rock, and were secured at the different 
turnings by iron gates, whose massive 
strength, and solid fastenings, seemed 
to defy the power of every intruder. 
After wanderiniir some time in those 
chill vaults, tlioy entered a chamber 
containing several gigantic figures of 
warriors, in various attitudes; while 
his lordship paused to examine their 
grim countenances, Monfrane picked 
up a long forked instrument from the 
floor, and with ils points, pressed 
against the eye-balls of one of those 
statues; instantly the wall behind them 
rent asnnder, forming a breach a few 
feet from the ground, and disclosed to 



18 alexena; or the 

his astonished lordship, tlie chamber to 
which Carracci had ordered liim to be 
conducted. A small ladder was placed 
against the aperture, which he ascend- 
ed, and entered a spacious apartment, 
aired by a cheerful fire, that diffused 
light and warmth. The room was 
hung with crimson velvet, trimmed with 
gold, and the hangings of the bed cor- 
responded with the rest of the drapery; 
the style of the entire was magnificent, 
and increased his lordship's wonder. 
Monfrane now entered into conversa- 
tion, and in a few words informed him, 
he was first lieutenant of the troop, 
and had been sent by Carracci to 
Bayonne, for the purpose of conducting 
him to the Castle of Santa Marco, 
being himself in a cottage at the foot 
of the Pyrennees, where, from some of 
his band, he had intimation of Don 
Philip's outrage, the night it had been 
committed. He was about further ex- 
plaining the conduct and intentions of 
his captain, when one of those whistles 



\ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 19 



summoned biin away, and he hurried 
from the chamber, attended by his 
lordship's servants, notwithstanding 
their earnest entreaties to the contrary, 
as they wished to sit by the fire, and 
watch while he slept; but to dispute 
was vain — the orifice closed — the lad- 
der was removed — and Albert, with 
Rourke, securely locked within an 
adjoining chamber, and then Monfrane 
flew off to obey the well known signal. 
We will now return to Alexena, who 
had no conception of the vicinity of her 
lover on her arrival at the castle, nor of 
any circumstance relative to him, since 
their unfortunate separation at Duval's 
hotel, or the reasons which induced 
Don Philip to visit Santa Marco, a 
place, even the name of which, he could 
not hear with composure, and disliked 
more than any other spot on earth. 



20 alexena; or the 



CHAP. 111. 



There's more gold : 



Do you damn others, and let this damn you, 
And ditches grave you all !'* 

TiMON. 

Immediately after the escape of 

Lord Mortimer, Montano robbed the 
Dominican convent and monastery, 
which he etisily eft'ected, bein«^ trea- 
snrer, and then, with his ill-gotten 
wealth, made all possible haste to the 
nearest sea- port, where he engaged a 
vessel, and sailed for France. Being* 
addicted to o'amin£ir from his earliest in- 
fancy, and now having the power of 
gratifying this darling passion, he soon 
became a conslant attendant at the 
tables of Bayonnc, where his acquaint- 
ance with Don Philip was renewed. 
Montano had been the early instructor 
of his youth; but the austerity of 
' his manner disgusted the parents of 
Acasto, who dismissed him; and he did 
not again meet his pupil, until this 
eventful period. They, however^ soon 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 21 

r>ecognized each other^ and shortly 
after found their sentiments congenial. 
Don Philip, n^tvvithsfanding-, won 
ahnost every pistole from the monk, who 
becafne ahnost frantic with repeated 
losses, and tortured himself with 
devices, how he should reicain his lost 
property. Being well acquainted with 
the passions of Acasto, he was forming 
many diabolical projects, when all his 
ideas were suddenly turned into a new 
channel, by discovering Alexena. On 
the wings of a daemon, he flew to 
Acasto Miih this intelligence, and in- 
flamed his imaijination with a gclowins: 
description of her charms, and when 
he found him ripe for his purpose, 
she was represented as an easy 
victim ; and as Montano had foreseen^ 
Don Philip only beheld her to be ena- 
moured ; thus his villainy was, for 
the present, crowned with success; 
Acasto rettnned every ducat of his 
money, and added some thousands 
more to bribe those who were likely to 
prove successful agents. In a short 



2S alexexa; or the 

time a brigantine was prepared, and 
some of the vile domestics of the castle 
were ordered to attend on the coast of 
Fontarabia, with horses. Money pur- 
<;hased the wavering honesty of Duval 
and Ills servants, but the capture of 
Alexena, made ample compensation for 
the trouble and expended treasure. 

It is useless to enter into a detail of 
her journey to Santa Marco; let it 
suffice, that Don Philip was particularly 
attentive, and Montano as brutal as he 
dare be; she suffered the civilities of 
the one, and the cruelty of the other, 
with the same apathy ; and had it not 
been for her firm reliance on the good- 
ness of that Providence which had 
always supported her, under the hea- 
viest afflictions, she must have fallen a 
rictim to despondency and grief 

While her conductors led herthrouah 
the wild passes of the Pyrennees, she 
doubted the possibility of Lord Morti- 
mer's ever being able to trace the foot- 
steps of Acasto; and the farther she 
proceeded, the more those fears were 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. ^3 

likely to be realized. But what tongue 
can tell, or pen describe, her agony, 
when she beheld the terrible fortress 
in which Don Philip informed her she 
should remain, until he had the felicity 
of calling her his for ever. They were 
then before the gates, the draw-bridge 
was about to be lowered, when Alexena 
gave a wild^ desponding glance around. 
" Oh ! merciful God," she exclaimed, 
in the greatest misery, " what shall I 
do? Oh! "will you not save me from 
those fiends ? — is there no friend nii]:h ? — 
alas! no, no — all is gloomy barrenness^, 
and I am, indeed, lost." 

Montano's eves flashed fire — he 
caught the reins of her horse's bridle, 
and, with a curse, flogged the poor 
animal into the grassy court of the 
castle. Her spirits now forsook her; 
objects became indistinct; and she 
fell faintirig into the arms of Acasto's 
Stewart, Torquo, whose savage ap- 
pearance was more than suihcient to 
cause a relapse. When respiration 
restored her exhausted faculties, she 



2i ALEXENA; OR THE 

found herself in a large gloomy chain* 
bcr, supported by black marble pillars, 
lit by a large gothic window, whose 
painted glass emitted a dim light, that 
rendered objects confused, and led her 
to believe the pale emaciated form of 
old Margaret, who sat by her, adminis- 
tering restoratives, was some spectre; 
conjured up by an over-heated imagi- 
nation. ''My poor dear lovely child," 
said this good creature, '' I trust you 
are now better, and though you have 
the misfortune to fall into the hands of 
Don Philip, I think he will not be per- 
mitted by Providence to injure so much 
goodness; there is Larco, who has 
made all the servants cry, by relating 
your sorrows, and the patience with 
which you suffered the cruelties of that 
savage monk." Here she was inter- 
rupted by a loud, yet hoarse voice, 
vociferating, ''Margaret! hollo! old 
hulk, I say, where have cast anchor?" 
'* Merciful Heaven," exclaimed the 
agitated Alexena, '' who is this?" 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 23 

''Who is this?" echoed the hollow 
wall. 

-'TisI, Bill Williams— eh! what 
cheer ? how fares our little scifi ? — 
What ! wrecked by a broadside of 
sorrow — foundered in an inhospitable 
port !" 

" Silence, for heaven's sake !" said 
Margaret, " dear William, Donna 
Alexena is very ill, but not so much as 
your kind fears lead you to believe/' 

" Well, well, there's hope abaft — 
AVhat cheer, young lady, what cheer? 
Damn me if e'er Bill heaves a billovT 
against a vessel, already half shattered 
in the gale of misfortunes." 

" My friend, I thank you," said Alex- 
ena, with bewitching softness, " but I 
wish to be left to the solitude of my 
chamber the remainder of this evening, 
as I am really very unwell." 

" God steer you into the harbour of 
safety," rejoined Williams, as he wiped 
away a starting tear. " But come, old 
Weathergale," addressing Margaret, 
''you are wanting to heave dinner on 

VOL. II. B 



2S ALEXENA; OR THE 

deck as fast as possible. May the Itrst 

bit our chaplain stows^ stick in his 

hatchway, and run him into a snug 

mooring- in hell." 

Margaret, to prevent Alexena being 

alarmed by the sea vocabulary of 
honest Bill, as he called himself, hur- 
ried him from the room, still mijlteriug 
curses on Don Philip and Montano. 

'' D — 1 founder them and their yellow 
rhino," he vociferated, as they descend- 
ed the stairs; "Do you think it will 
purchase a passport to Heaven? — ill 
none of it." 

'' For mercy's sake, I beg you will 
lower your voice, or you may be over- 
heard," observed Margaret. 

" D — n me! who's afraid?" cried 
Williams. " 1 wul save this dear little 
bark, or perish." 

When their voices were no lonirer 
distinguishable, x\lexena slid from the 
bed; and while the pearly tears fell fast 
on her bosom, she besought her Divine 
Father to grant her fortitude to bear her 
trials wilh Christian resignation, and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 27 

rose from her knees considerably re- 
lieved ; the pure spirit of religion arnned 
her mind with fortitude, and promised 
to preserve her from every impending 
danger. Shortly after, INlargaret re-ap- 
peared with a tray of refreshments, and 
with the pleasing information, that she 
had obtained Don Philip's permission 
to remain that night in her chamber. 



■^♦•♦•►4- 



CHAP. IV. 

" A devil, a born devil, on whose nature 
Nurture can never stick ; 

And as with age his body uglier grows. 
So his mind cankers." 

Tempest. 

HE moment Margaret awoke, she 
gently stole to our heroine's bed, who 
had fallen a few minutes before into a 
deep sleep, having watched during the 
night, and did not seek repose until day 
dispelled her fears, but was then en- 
joying a temporary relief from her many 
sorrows. Her kind attendant, who was 

b2 



28 alexena; or the 

obliged to look after the affairs of the 
houshold, with light steps crossed the 
chamber; the door of which she softly- 
closed after her, at the same time 
breathing a fervent aspiration for our 
heroine's safety; and on entering the 
gallery, to her surprise and satisfaction, 
met Donna Louisa on her way to 
Alexena's apartment. 

" Dear Donna/' said Margaret, while 
she almost shrieked with joy, ''when 
did Don Philip release you V' 

" Very lately, my kind friend, and I 
understand am indebted for the indul- 
gence, to a fair captive, in w^hose cham- 
ber you have passed the night." 

*• I, Heaven bless her, fair, good, 
gentle, lovely— every thing amiable. 
— oh ! you w ill be so pleased with her. 
Donna — but she j^et sleeps, and it were 
a pity to disturb her repose." 

'' Fear not, my good Margaret, I 
will go in and watch by her, and do 
you bring breakfast to her chamber, 
which we will partake of together." 

'•That I will. Donna, and serve every 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 29 

dainty in the larder^ with chocolate and 
coffee, of some of which, I trust, yoa 
will induce the poor dear child to par- 
take, as food has not yet been tasted 
by her within these walls." 

Margaret then hurried away^ and 
Louisa glided into Alexena's roonn, 
where she watched and admired her as 
she slept. " Sweet, lovely girl," she 
softly murmured, "you are as yet 
unconscious of the terrors of this hor- 
rible castle, and of the crimes of its 
detestable owner; and may you never 
experience the bitter pangs that have 
rent my bosom within its walls. Oh ! 
you angels of purity, guard, I be- 
seech ye, this your representative, and 
save her from the fiends of lust! Oh ! 
avert the storm, and let her not have 
cause to bewail the hour of her birth." 

The last words of Louisa were not 
lost on her who had caused them, and 
the tears which rolled down her pale 
cheeks, proved they had found the way 
to her heart. 

" Dearest lady, I thank you," said 



so ALEXENA; OR THE 

Alexena, " and if not an intrusion, 
may I entreat the name of her to whom 
my gralitude is so justly due." 

Louisa answered not — her respira- 
tion was suspended — the paleness of 
death stole over herlovelj^ countenance, 
and she sunk senseless on the bed. 
Our heroine was pitiably alarmed ; 
she sprinkled water on her face ; applied 
Tolatiles, and after considerable diffi- 
culty, fortunately succeeded in restoring 
animation. When somewhat recovered, 
in accents of the most touching woe, 
she said, " Oh ! tell me, interesting 
stranger, are you a daughter of the 
house of Guzman?" 

'' Yes," said Alexena, " of Velasco 
dc Guzman, late of Castile : I am his 
only, and unfortunate daughter. 

"My cousin, my dear cousin!" ex- 
claimed Louisa, clasping her to her 
bosom, " in me you behold the sister 
of Henri Count Bolerno, the dearest 
friend of your father." 

This sudden and unexpected disclo- 
sure, almost reduced Alexena to the 



€ASTI.E OF SANTA MARCO. 31 

estate from which the moment before 
she had restored her friend ; and Mar- 
garet made her appearance with break- 
fast before they had regained any 
tolerable share of composure. Louisa, 
though greatly agitated, was not for- 
getful of her relative, who she induced, 
by the most winning entreaties, to par- 
take of the morning's repast, and when 
it was removed, proposed a walk in 
the adjoining gallery, ^' The air blows 
fresh in it, my lovely cousin," she said, 
" and while we enjoy its coolness, I 
will give you a slight idea of this castle, 
and of its imnates; but as you value 
your peace, conceal our relationship; 
for had Don Philip the slightest intima- 
tion of that circumstance, we should 
instantly be separated, never again to 
behold each other." 

Alexena promised to be advised by 
her in every respect, and they wandered 
into the gallery, from thence into seve- 
ral suites of apartments, which looked 
down on the ramparts, examining the 
furniture of each room as they passed. 



32 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

Having entered one^ the shutters of 
which were half closed, Louisa ven- 
tured to open them, that they might 
have a full view of the chamber, the 
half of which was veiled in obscurity ; 
and whilst she was endeavourin<r to 
effect her purpose, her foot accidentally- 
pressed a spring, and a door instantly 
flew open, a little to the right, discover- 
ing a narrow flight of stone steps, up 
which, the sound of voices were borne 
on the chill breeze that was generally- 
felt in every direction of this dreadful 
mansion. 

" Let us retire," said Alexena, timid- 
ly, '' lest those people we hear are 
Acasto and that vile monk ; otherwise, 
in the event of being discovered, he 
may conceive us guilty of the meanness 
of listening." 

"I approve of your advice," replied 
her friend, '' but should this be Acasto, 
you, doubtless, are the subject of their 
conversation; and however criminal in 
other respects, it is a virtue to seek 
self preservation ; and may it not bs 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. B3 

h\s;h\y probable, were we acquainted 
with the subject now in discussion, tliat 
it nniorlit enable us to avoid or defeat 
some plan, at present in agitation, for 
the destruction of your peace." 

" Then ! then !" exclaimed our terri- 
fied heroine, " you have heard of some 
dreadful design. Oh! let me hear the 
worst at once, and don't wreck the little 
fortitude I have yet remaining, with 
the tortures of suspense." 

*' Be not alarmed," said Louisa, 
'• I have heard nothing to justify your 
fears, I only meant to guard you against 
those that our common enemy may be 
induced to attempt; therefore, let us 
descend, as we are not yet prohibited 
from wandering where fancy leads ; and 
I assure you. it is probable our time 
will not be mispent." 

She then drew the arm of Alexcna 
within hcr's, who reluctantly sufTered 
herself to be led down the stairs, into a 
stone gallery of amazing length; at 
the further extremity of which, a door 
stood half open, and they timidly ap>f 

E U 



34 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

proachcd it. Whon about to enter^ 
they distincliy heard voices in earnest 
conversaiionj and Alexena instantly 
turned to fly, but was detained by her 
more courageous companion, who 
ventured to peep into the chamber; 
then desired our heroine to approach, 
as it was equally devoid of inliabitants 
as of furniture. They were making; 
observations on the probable use of 
this apartment, when they heard foot- 
steps approaching-, and Acasto con- 
versing- with Torquo, in no very 
gentle manner. Our adventurers list- 
ened for a moment, when Alexena 
heard her name repeated in a half 
whisper, and Louisa drew her nigher 
the postern door, tliat they might hear 

accuratelv. 

" We have a right," said she, in a 
suppressed voice, " to listen, since we 
are the subject of their tete-a-tete, and 
as this door is well secured, we need 
not fear intrusion." 

"Yes, but is it not detestable to 
pry into the secrets of any person. 



C ASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 0& 

parficulaily in this clandestine man- 
ner?" 

" Certainly/' replied Louisa, ''I feel 
conscious it is almost inexcusable, but 
trust, if ever it were pardonable, it is 
so at this juncture, particularly when 
our situation is considered/' 

The persons outside were now quite 
close to the door, and spoke loud 
enough to be distinctly heard within. 

*' I say, my lord," said a voice, which 
Louisa recognized as that of Torquo, 
" it rains violently ; had you not better 
enter the chamber of this tower? But 
now, I rt'coilect, it is fastened on the 
inside, yet it affords a shelter in the 
thickness of its walls; pray stand in 
this nitch, which offers protection from 
its violence." 

" 1 will take your advice," said Don 
Philip, " and now that I am sheltered 
from this rude element, will you inform 
me the exact time you last saw Belzo 
Carracci, for I am told that horrible 
robber often frequents tliis neighbonr- 
hood.' 



50 alexena; or the 

*' Most assuredly he does/' rrplietl 
Torquo, " and very shortly since, plun- 
dered Don Cerasco, whom he treated 
with the utmost barbarity; — not con- 
tent with the immense booty, he flogged 
him most unmercifully, for al tempting 
to seduce the daughter ot one of his 
own vassals, who, forsooth, the robber 
said he had promised to protect." 

''And did the bandits presume to 
inflict sucli disgraceful punishment?" 
demanded Acaslo, in evident alarm. 

" Aye, that tlicy did, and with savage 
cruelty , for they literally flayed him 
alive ; it is now two months since, and 
his medical attendants have not vet 
pronounced him out of danger," 

" Was the girl han<]some?" inquired 
Don Philip, carelessly. 

" 1 have heard she was, and accom- 
plished, as Carracci paid for her educa- 
tion in a convent, where Don Cerasco's 
mother saw her, and was so pleased 
with her, that slie invited her to spend 
a few months at her mansion, during 
^hich time bis lordship became intimate 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 37 

—promised her marriage — substituted 
his servant for a priest — accomplished 
his wishes — completely ruined — and 
then — deserted her for another beauty. 

" We wander from the point," re- 
plied Acasto, evidently disconcerted. 
*' I wish to know when you last saw 
that infamous villain Belzo?'* 

" About a month agO;, on ray re- 
turn from St. Sebastian, (where I had 
been to purchase necessaries prepara- 
tory to your return,) he galloped after, 
and being belter mounted, easily came 
up with mc. Ah! ah! Mr. Steward, 
is this you? What news from Don 
Philip? What infamous knavery is 
now brooding?" 

"Impudent rascal! — but proceed, 
Torquo.'^ 

" 1 dare say," continued Carracci, '' he 
would be vastly the better of a little cor- 
rection; just such another tickling as 
I lately ordered his neighbour who, by 
the bye, 1 am sorry I did not hang. Good 
Mr. Torquo, tell your worthyXovd^, 1 un- 
derstand his present intentions; he had 



58 alexena; or the 

better let the hidy remain with her 
friends, or I vviil feel inclined to roast 
him alive. Hark ye, do you hear me, 
you iniquitous hoary-headed old arch 
scoundrel, was it not for your i',Tey pate, 
and that I am certain you would bed — d, 
I'd blow you to the devil this instant; and 
take care you don't provoke my indifj. 
nation by taking an active part in the 
present infernal plans of your master, 
or I will positively put you to a cruel 
death." 

*' Speak lower," said Don Philip. 

'' There is no fear of us being- over- 
heard in this lonely spot," grumbled 
Torquo ; " as you are at the door of 
the stone gallery, which never was en- 
tered since the night I poignarded the | 
Lady Clarissa, for which act I forfeited 
all hopes of mercy — it was a heavy 
deed — she pleaded so hard — and cried 
so piteously— was so handsome too; 
her child, poor thing, it went the same 
way, long before ; yet, her last w ords 
were, petitions for mercy on the mur- 
derers of both," 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAnCO. 59 

'' Torquol Torquo! I can't }>ear 
ihis, 3'ou are growing- childish," said 
Acasto, faulteriiigly ; '' despair not ; 
hope th€ best ; you only did a charita- 
ble act, knowing she was a burthen to 
her own existence/' 

" Yes^ there is something in that; 
yet what right had 1 to deprive her of 
it/' growled the assassin. " But what 
signifies snivelling, it can't now be 
helped." 

Here Alexena and her friend were 
greatly shocked, but rennained motion- 
less. 

" Well ! well ! Belzo Carracci/' con- 
tinued Don Philip. 

" Oh ! he stabbed me with his fiery 
eyes, for I felt the pains of terror in- 
flicted by them, long after he disap- 
peared, and have not ventured across 
the draw-bridge since." 

'' Nor through the subterranean dun- 
geons," rejoined Acasto. 

" Only once, for the purpose of gra- 
tifying my curiosity about Geraldina^ 
the peasant's daughter." 



40 alexena; or the 

" And what became of lier ?" 

" Belzo Carracci, it is said, carried 
iier away, and she has not since been 
heard of." 

" I believe you mentioned," conti- 
nued Don Philip, clian^iiig- the sub- 
ject, " that you had somewhat to relate 
concernins^ the apartments leadin<^ to 
the north tower." 

''Yes," replied Torquo, in a lower 
tone, " I believe Satan has taken pos- 
session of them, for on ^oin^^ the other 
evening to Iioht the fire in Donna 
Alexena's chamber, accordini*; to Mar- 
garet's orders, I had scarce laid the 
wood on the hearth, before I heard a 
great noise in the picture gallery, but 
thought it was only Ihe wind that threvr 
down some of the old portraits ; and so 
was heedless about it, until it was re- 
peated with greater violence. I then 
instantlj' pushed aside the panncl, and 
beheld the fiirure of a beautiful lady, 
standing in the long passage. My hair 
stood uplike bristles — my blood froze — 
and every limb refused motion^ being 



1 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAHCO. 41 

stifFened with horror, and I am con- 
vinced it was the spirit of the unfortunate 
Signiora Clarissa. She sighed deeply — 
I groaned, and staggered back — the 
pannel flew into its place — shut her 
from my sight — and the next instant 
I fell senseless on the floor. As this 
was no delusion, I feel rejoiced that 
you have brought a good Jather to the 
castle, whose sanctity will prevent a 
recurrence of such horrible incidents." 

Here Acasto laughed at the satirical 
manner Torquo made this observation, 
which emboldened him to say, 

" I suppose he is a rare one — is he 
not?" 

'' Yes," replied Don Philip, " a va- 
luable acquisition." 

" Aye," observed Torquo, " better 
at the stiletto than his prayers." 

'' I ifisist you may speak lower,'* 
said Acasto. 

" Fear nothing," replied this agent 
of iniquity, "I shall not oflTend his 
reverence ; am I to suppose he has 
been brought hither to marry you to 



i2 A-LEXENA ; OR THE 

the Lady Alexena, who, in good faith^ 
is not only extremely handsome, but 
mild, gentle, and condescending; at 
least, Margaret says so; and if nothing 
more advantageous offers, why not 
really make her your wife. These 
fine estates require an heir, and should 
you tire of her hereafter, a dose of 
gunpowder will send her to sleep with 
the Lady Clarissa." 

''Savage!" muttered Don Philip, 
much displeased. 

Here their voices became so indisr 
tinct, that their expression was utterly 
uniatGlliiril.le ; however, in a few mo- 
ments, Torquo proceeded in a louder 
tone : — 

'' My lord, wliat induced you to 
bring that blustering son of Neptune 
here; — I mean Williams — he is always 
disturbing the domestics, and most 
likelv, will induce tlie creio in the 
kitchen to mutiny; always bawling, 
shiver my timbers but Lady Alexena is 
this, and Lady Alexena done that : 
allow me, and I will shiver his brains 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 4S 

out, otherwise I foresee he will be a 
trouhlesome guest. 1 hate those Eng- 
lish dogs, as it is more difficult to in- 
duce them to betray an old friend, 
though in rags, than burn and sink an 
enemy's squadron/' 

"He is an excellent seaman," re- 
plied Don Philip, " and until I have 
good grounds to believe him a traitor, 
shall remain unmolested ; but come, 
the rain is now over, and I wish to 
pursue my walk." 

Shortly after, they disappeared among 
the distant towers, and when their 
footsteps had sunk into silence, Alexena 
threw her arms round Louisa's neck, 
in the greatest agony imaginable. — 

"Oh! my friend," she sobbing, cried, 
"what will become of us? whither 
shall we fly to avoid the cruel grasp of 
those merciless wretches. Oh ! Heaven 
o;rant me strength to bear the dreadful 
trials to whicli 1 am doomed. Unfor- 
tunate Clarissa ! — wretched mother ! — 
thy cares are long since hushed in th« 
silence of an early tojnb." 



44 alexena; or the 

" My dearest girl,** said Louisa, 
^' let your reliance be firmly placed in 
your Almighty Protector, he never 
abandons innocence; though the vir- 
tuous, it is true, have their trials; they 
only add, when borne with Christian 
resignation, to their purity and lustre. 
Therefore, despair not ; for great as 
the apparent danger appears to be, 
yet I have formed the most sanguine 
hopes of escape, through the inter- 
ference of that terrible robber; for why 
may he not be an instrument of the 
Divine Will to save us. Report cer- 
tainly affirms he is cruel, though I have 
never heard of any particular enormity 
of which he has been i:ruiltv, thouG:h \ 
remember many of the generous acts 
he is said to have performed. But 
come, let us now retire to our apart- 
ment, if we can regain the way; and 
by 3upplication to the Throne of Mercy, 
obtain fortitude to meet our tormentors, 
without leading them to suppose we 
know more than they wish ; and have 
we not reason to be thankful, that 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 45 

Montano does not, as yet, enjoy the 
confidence of Don Philip ; so we have 
little to apprehend from his vicious 
inclinations." 

CHAP. V. 

" O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright! 
Her beauty hangs upon the cheek of night. 
Like a rich jewel in an ^thiop's car ; 
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear !'' 

Rom. & Jul. 

J\ FEW moments after Alexena and 
her friend reached their clianiber, Mar- 
g-aret attended with the key of an ad- 
joining- apartment, in which she pointed 
out a handsome wardrobe prepared for 
each, containing the most beautiful 
dresses then worn, and delivered a 
casket, in which were several sets of 
jewels for our heroine, with Don 
Philip's orders, that she sliould use 
them. While the ladies examined their 
new robes, they were much pleased 
with Margaret, from her attention, and 
wishes to oblige them. 



4® alexena; or the 

" Dear heart/' said tliis good crea- 
ture, " I hope you will not droop in 
this lonesome place ; it is now a long 
time since there was either joy or com- 
fort in it ; but I will try and make it as 
agreeable as possible ; yet my endea- 
vours will prove useless, unless you 
obey my lord. Beware, don't contra- 
dict him ; and, above all things, be 
cautious, lest you name Belzo Carracci_, 
as that alone is sufficient to irritate, 
nay, enrage him ; but, it may be, you 
have never heard of that dreadful man." 

Louisa nodded, significantly, to 
Alexena, to conceal their knowledge 
of the bandit, and then said, " What 
of him ?" 

'' Oh ! he is the greatest villain on 
earth," rejoined Margaret, '' since I 
came here, he assassinated my lord's 
sister." 

'' Don Philip's sister !" exclaimed 
Alexena — '' oh, horrible !" 

Again the eye of Louisa met that 
of our heroine, and she felt ashamed 
of her precipitancy ; but the late con- 
versation between Torqno and his 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 4f 

master struck her mind so forcibly, and 
so many confused ideas of Acasto's 
villainy crowded on her imagination, 
that, for a moment, she was inclined 
to believe he had murdered his own 
sister ; but the speaking look of her 
prudent friend, recalled her scattered 
thoughts, and she timidly demanded 
when the fatal event had taken place. 
'•' Some years ago. Donna," 
" And is the poor lady really dead," 
said Alexena. 

*' 1 believe so. Donna, but I did not 

see her afjer she was wounded, as the 

misfortune happened some miles from 

the castle, and after the lady Clarissa's 

wounds vrere dressed, she was sent to 

a cotfage higher up the cliffs, for the 

benefit of her health, but has never been 

heard of since. Toiquo, says Carracci, 

carried her off out of revenge, as he 

hates Don Philip, because he refuses to 

wink at his diabolical outra^.;es. But, 

heavefi bless me ! ladies, how pale you 

both are ! I fear we have continued too 

long in the chill air of this apartment." 

Margaret was far from being aware 



48 



ALEXENA ; OR THE 



that her auditors had overheard her 
master deliberately discuss that atro- 
cious murder; for when they heard her 
name — Clarissa, every doubt on the 
subject vanished, and they were then im- 
pressed with the conviction, that the 
inhuman Acasto, for some sinister view, 
had barbarously sacrificed his sister, as 
they had no doubt, but that Clarissa 
named by Torquo, was the identical 
person then mentioned by Margaret. 

When Alexena somewhat recovered 
her usual presence of mind, she begged 
to know was Donna Clarissa married ? 
" Oh, yes, Signiora ! though she was 
very young." " Had she any chil- 
dren 1" " Yes, one fine boy ; but Don 
Philip sent him away from her, when I 
was on a visit to some of my friends. 
On my return, I found my dear lady 
so sad, that she almost broke my heart. 
She was so mild, so beautiful, and so 
kind-hearted, that the greatest savage 
in this castle would not willingly in- 
jure her. Indeed, she then was what 
you are now^ but not quite so beau- 
tiful." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 49 

'' Did she ever complain of any par- 
ticular injury ?" said Louisa. 

" Oil, yeSj Signiora! she bitterly la- 
mented the unkindness of her brother,, 
and yet seemed angry with herself for 
conceiving a thought prejudicial to his 
brotherly affection ; but, as she never 
told her sorrows to any one within these 
walls, I could not be acquainted with 
the real cause of them." 

Shortly after, Torquo summoned 
Alexena and her cousin to the dining* 
parlour, which was sufficient to dispel 
the fortitude the former had endea- 
voured to collect, within the last few 
hours, and the moment Don Philip's 
messenger departed, she burst into 
tears. 

" My dear lady," said Margaret, " if 
you give way to this weakness, however 
justifiable from the cause, I fear you 
will, indeed, be very wretched. Come, 
have the goodness to accept the support 
of this old arm : though weak, it is 
willing to assist you ; and Signiora 
Louisa will also lend a little aid." 

VOL. II. c 



50 ALEXENA : OR TIFE 



She now led her along the gallery, 
almost enfeebled by terror, while 
Louisa, whose arm trembled violent- 
ly, proved she was not a whit less 
dismayed. As they approached the 
apartment, their apprehensions in- 
<;reased, and when Don Philip rose to 
receive Alexena, weakness had com- 
pletely subdued her, and she sunk to 
the ground. On reviving, she found 
Louisa kneeling beside her, and Don 
Acasto leaning over the sopha on which 
she had been placed, while Montano, 
who had already sat down to table^, 
gruffly exclaimed : — 

" Confounded nonsense ! are we to 
lose our dinner, by the afiected fears 
of an artful vixen ?" Then addressin"' 
our heroine, he continued, '' Let ms 
see you at this table in a very few 
minutes, or I possibly may induce you 
to wish you had complied with Don 
Philip's invitation, without using the 
unnecessary ceremony of fainting." 

'' Don't be brulalj I leg- of you. 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 51 

fatiier/' said Acasto, visibly enraged, 
'' you are now to respect this lady as 
my wife. Believe ine, my intentions 
are greatly changed since we met 
this morning, and your authority over 
Lady Alexena ceases from this mo- 
ment, unless her folly may induce me 
to withdraw my protection, which I 
sincerely hope will not be the case." 

Montano felt this rebuke, but did not 
choose to reply, otherwise than by a grin 
of demoniac malice, expressive of the 
most savage cruelty, and immediately 
after, requested to know *' whether he 
should, or should not, have dinner ?" 
Don Philip, though excessively disgust- 
ed, did not wish to irritate the monk 
further, and in a few moments, led the 
reluctant Alexena to the table, where 
he placed her at his right hand . Louisa 
occupied the seat opposite ; Montano 
sat at the bottom of the table; and 
the place on his left was filled by a 
stranger, who, before dinner was re- 
moved, was understood to be the captain 



52 ' alexena; or the 

of the guard, whose business it was to 
place proper sentinels^ and assign their 
different posts. He had the appearance 
of a gentleman^ though his countenance 
was of that order which excites dis- 
trust ; and his was strongly expressive 
of deep cunning; but though he spoke 
little, his words, and the subject of 
them, were well chosen, Fernandez 
marked the savage manner of Monta- 
no, and during the remainder of the 
evening, assisted Don Philip in his 
endeavours to tranquiUize the mind of 
Alexena. She observed his kindness, 
and felt <jrateful ; but to sooth her dis- 
tracted thoughts, at such- a moment, 
would have been' on absolute impossi- 
bility. The presence of Moiitano was 
an antidote against comfort, and not- 
withstanding her terrors were somew hat 
diminished, yet she shuddered with 
horror, when her eye met that of the 
ferocious monk. Tlie cliamber also, 
from its gloomy architecture, served to 
increase her terror; its lofty ceiling 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 53 

was supported by twelve pillars of jet 
black marble^ on which were engraved 
many Moorish devices. The windows 
were high, and of ihe Gothic order, 
adding a sombre hne to the entire of 
the apartment^ easier to be conceived 
than described ; but the bright glare 
of a tremendous wood fire, together 
with a profusion of wax-lights, in a 
great measure, dispelled its natural 
gloom ; and had its inmates been other 
than Acasto and the monk, Alexena 
would have admired it for its antiqui- 
ty, and the beauty of its structure, but 
their detested presence perverted everj 
object, and rendered those things hor- 
rible, vvliich, at another period, and 
under diiTercnt circumstances, would 
have appeared fascinating. 

Don Philip exerted his utmost pow- 
ers to dispel the fears of Alexena, and 
she could not avoid acknowledging, 
that his address, at least, was that of a 
gentleman ; and her fears of insult 
w^ould have, in a great measure, been 
tlispelled, had not the savage inuendos 



54 alexena; on the 

of Monfano, almost every instant, 
awakened tlie painful recollection of 
her lamentable situation ; ])ut her 
brutal tormentor seized every oppor- 
tunitv of increa^in": lier distress ; and 
had he not now and then been re- 
strained by a stern glance from Acasto, 
she could not, consistent with delicacy, 
remain in tjie room a momeut, nor 
would she^ on any account, had not 
her fears deprived her of the power 
of motion. Thus situated, our heroine 
impatiently looked forward to the hour 
when old Margaret should attend to 
conduct her and Louisa to their apart- 
ment, while Acasto gazed on her 
beautiful form with increasinij admira- 
tion. Her tall and graceful figure, the 
paragon of symmetry, was habited in a 
white figured muslin of the finest tex- 
ture, which admirably displayed the 
perfections of her shape ; her long 
and polished neck, stripped with ever 
graceful modesty, partially revealed a 
lovely bosom, which rivaled the snow 
in delicate whiteness ; her hair^ of 



i 

CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 58^ 

glossy blackness, played in sporting" 
curls on her shoulders ; her dark 
brows were beautifully arched ; her 
eyes, inexpressibly brilliant, blue, 
mild, and expressive, beaming; with the 
softest sensibility; her nose, inclining 
to the Roman ; her teeth, the most 
delicate pearl, inclosed by lips of 
glowing ruby ; her arms, whiter than 
polished marble ; her hands, beautiful; 
her ^v.et, small, supporting limbs 
every way exquisitely proportioned ; 
and her carriage, the emporium of 
grace, elegance, and dignity. Such 
was Alexena, then seventeen, a trea- 
sury of charms — of puritj^ — of good- 
ness — endowed with every grace, with 
every virtue, and with every attainable 
female accomplishment. — Such was the 
captive of Don Philip Acasto, a wretch 
Toid of feeling, insensible to pity or 
remorse: a monster, whose passions 
disgraced the man — dissrraced human- 
ity — and wounded the feelings of every 
honourable member of society. In 
saying thus much, few will find it 



56 ALEXENA; OR THE 



dilficuU to conceive the meaning — the 
intent — the wishes, conveyed in the rude 
and insulting glances^ directed by his 
eyeSj bnt which the genuine innocence 
and spotless purity of Alexena, saved 
her tlie painful task of expounding". 
Had she been acquainted with the 
wiles, the deceit^ the villany, of tlie 
world, her fears would have been ex- 
cited, her peace of mind dreadfully at- 
tacked ; nay, her own shadow would 
have -excited alarm, and every thought 
conjured up a villain ; but heaven saved 
this spotless votary of transcendent 
virtue those bitter pangs, and frighted 
th^ demons of suspicion, who wistfully 
hovered roimd, watching a favourable 
moment for wounding her bosom with 
the poison of torturing suspicion, 

Margaret, at length, entered to con- 
duct tho ladies to their chamber, and 
Don Philip permitted them to retire, 
but attended Alexena to the foot of the 
great stairs, where he reluctantly wished 
Iyer a good night, and then sighing 
deeply, slowly returned to his compa- 
nions. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARGO. Sj? 

CHAP. VI. 

'^■Tetchy and wayward was tUy infancy ; 

Thy school-days frightful, desperate, wild, and furious ; 
Thy prime of manhood, daring, bold, and venturous ; 
Thy age confirmed, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody. 

Richard III. 

v/UR heroine had been dreadfully 
as^ifated by the dis<:^nstin£^ attentions 
of Don Philip ; his si;^h at partino*, 
eonviiiced her she had everv thititr to 
fear from the effpcts of his detestable 
passion, and foiind much difficulty ia 
supportinjjj her totteriniij frame to 
her chamber, where, the moment 
she entered, she burst into tears* 
Louisa was quite low spirited, and for 
some time incapable of using' any en- 
deavours to reassure her weeping' friend; 
while poor Margaret, who had beea 
busily engaged at the fire, or pretend-d 
to be so, could not restrain her feelings, 
and as she wiped away the fast fallini^ 
tears, murmured : — 

"Alas! nlas ! this is the very cham- 
ber ia which my lovely lady Clarissa 

c 5 



58 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

used to take on so, and weep by the 
hour. Poor mourner ! many is the sad 
and solitary day have I «af by her on 
this bed, where she invoked the spirit 
of her husband to watch over and )n'o- 
tect her from the cruelties of Don 
Philip ; she would then fondly press 
iier dear babe closer to her bosom, and 
bathe his infant cheeks with tears, 
while I vainly endeavoured to sooth 
her griefs, though Heaven knows, ill 
able to bear my own. Oh ! ladies, 
this castle is sadly altered since my 
dear lord, Don Miguel's death, oh ! 
may a curse rest on the heads of hisyils 
murderers." 

''Merciful Providence!" exclaimed 
Alexena, ''was he murdered? Oh! 
how? when? and by what means did 
Don Philip become the owner of this 
mansion ?" 

Margaret shook her head, then gazing 
wildly round, in a low voice said, 
" Those walls have ears, !iay, mouths ; 
therefore, my dear ladies, let us change 
the subject, for I have reason to fear 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 59- 

tny own shadow ; not from any crimes 
I have committed, thank Heaven, but 
because such strange sights are seen 
here, that the idea of them has otteii 
ahnost froze my blood." 

'' What sights ? what do you mean?" 
^<3manded Louisa, fearfully. 

*' Why," replied Margaret, " I have 
more than once seen the spirit of Don 
Miguel, in the armoury, and several 
times, in the library, clothed in com- 
plete mail; but though he always, at 
those times^ carried a naked sword, he 
never looked fiercely on me; his coun- 
tenance was pale, and expressive of 
pity, but 1 never had more than a mo- 
ment's time to observe it. Indeed, I 
wonder I have not been more terrified. 
The first time we met, was in the north 
corridor, and I instantly informed Don 
Philip, who threatened to shoot me, if 
ever I again mentioned guch folly; so 
since that period I have been silent ou 
this dreadful subject, arid, I trust, you 
will never repeat what I have now com- 
municated. Should my lamented lordi 



CO alexena; or tiir 

cross your path, fear him not : he w«i» 
too kind, too religious, and too tender- 
hearted, in his life time, to excite any 
fears now that he is dead, except those 
which awe naturally iiispires." 

"I fear the living- only," said Alexcna, 
"from the dead I have nothing to fear; 
yet Heaven, I trust, will not put my 
fortitude to the dreadful trial of en- 
countering a wandering spirit, as I feel 
my strength would be unequal to the 
<ask." 

The castle clock now mournfully 
tolled eleven, and Margaret hastily rose 
to retire. She was surprised at the 
lateness of the hour; but had not the 
idea of her late lord, pressed on her 
recollection, she would willingly have 
remained some time lon^-er. After be- 
stowing her blessing on Alexena and 
her friend, she reluctantly retired, and 
hastened, with all the speed her age and 
strength would admit of, through the 
long ciescrted gallery, that lay between 
their chamber and the apartments be- 
low. Her words made a considerable 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 6i 

•impression on the minds of her late 
aiKlitors ; for althoiig-h they believed 
Margaret's fears had created a spectre, 
jet the murder of Don Miguel, and the 
mysterious circumstances attending that, 
event, impressed on their minds a sad 
conviction, that Don Philip was a 
villain. 

While Louisa's thoughts were thus 
eno'aged, she i^azed with all the fond 
'"solicitude of sisterly affection, on the 
beiiuteous form of Alexena, who, she 
felt ass'ured, was the most lovely of 
women ; but the conviciion was accom- 
panied with trie painful idea, that she 
was likely to fall Ji victim to the cruelty 
of Acasto, or dro<i^p under the unpro- 
'^'oked insults of the\mfeeling' Montano, 
unless rescued by the immediate inter- 
position of an Almi<i^hty Providence. 
'' What are we not both doomed to 
suffer," said Louisa, " from those un- 
relenting" barbarians? and if insulted, 
to whom are we to look for redress? 
io fly beyond those walls is impossible, 
iind who will protect us wjthin? — 



ALEXENA ; on THE 

Torquo, the at^sassin of Clarissa !— - 
Oh! horrible." 

Witli streaming eyes she now took 
the hand of Ah^xena, and then kneeling- 
together, their s[)irits sought the Father 
of Purity, whose Heavenly protection 
they earnestly iiitreated. Their orisons 
soothed their spirits, and hushed the 
agitation of their minds, which, by 
degrees, obtained their wonted serenity, 
and they retired to rest, confidently re- 
lying on the protection of Heaven. 

Not so Don Philip, he sought his 
downy couch, wearied with the rude 
contest of conflicting passions, and 
seldom slept. I)ut to awake in horror. 
The dreadful images which guilt pre- 
sented to his sleeping fancy, inflicted 
torments of the most terrible descrip- 
tion ; and when once awake, he feared 
to sleep again. The terrors of his. 
blood-stained conscience, compelled 
him to keep an attendant constantly ia 
his chamber ; for he often started from 
his bed, when labouring under those 
torturing illusions, and frightened his 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 63 

watcliful domestic with Lis terrifying 
cries, or deep and lengthened groans^ 
which threatened to rend his h.eart. 
If the lamp in his chamber chanced to 
expire dnrin<^ the night, either by ac- 
cident, or the heedlessness of his ser- 
vant, he was in a;^ony until its light 
iigain restored fancied secnrily, and 
£lare not allow his eye to wander over 
the gloomy expanse of hischamber, lest 
some horrible sliadow would start from 
its shade, to blast his sight, or reproach 
him for the crimes which he had the 
hardy barbarity to perpetrate. Yet, 
while the sun's vivifying rays were 
visible, none were braver or more de- 
termined than Acasto; but when en- 
compassed by the shades of night, he 
was a very coward, and never passed 
through the unfrequented parts of the 
castle, without torches, pistols, and his 
shadow— the merciless Torquo. 

Montano's reflections were not a whit 
more agreeable than those of his aban- 
doned lord ; he was nightly wrecked 
f' with the sling's and arrows of a guilty 



Qi ALEXENA; or Ti5E 

conscience." The most whimsical and 
extraordinary fears disturbed his repose; 
but they were not of the supernatural 
kind ; he dreaded the just vengeance 
of the injured Mortimer; and there 
^as no alternative that he was not pre- 
determined to embrace, fur the final 
extinction of this dreaded foe, whom 
he continued to hate with the most 
unbounded and diabolical malevolence; 
but the designs of Providence are as 
just as they are inscrutable, and the 
fabric he had raised for the destruction 
of the innocent, fell, at length, with a 
dreadful crash on his guilty and self- 
devoted head. Devoted, because he 
was the voluntnry slave of every guilty 
and baleful passion — avarice, hatred^ 
lust, ingratitude, roi;)bery, and_, at lengthy 
oh ! fatal ejects of sinful induli^rence — 
murder! Prom that hour, peace and 
mercy fled to Heaven, and never again 
visited liis guilty bosom Indeed, not- 
withstanding the enormity of his of- 
fences, they often held out the olive 
bra!ich ; often besought him to repent ; 
but he despised their wholesome admo- 



tJASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 65 

iiitions, and continued to pursue the 
broad and beaten path, leading to 
endless woe ; and, at length, ignomi- 
niously passed from this life into awful 
eternity, without pity, without remorse, 
without hope; cursing and accursed; 
each day of his hideous existence 
brought new torments; he slept to 
awake in that misery which he had not 
only the means, but the choice of avoid- 
ing; yet his uncontrouled and evil pas- 
sions hurried him from crime to crime, 
until the idea of repentance became 
dead within his iron bosom, and from 
that moment his feet appears to have 
received wind's, to waft him with "greater 
celerity to those scenes of infamy, dis- 
grace, wretchedness, and vice, in which 
he became a conspicuous actor. But 
the awful period approached, when his 
guilty life should be offered as an atone- 
ment to the outraged laws of his of- 
fended country, and in expiation of the 
almost numberless offences which were 
written in characters of blood, and 
etitercd in the book of fate against 
him. 



66 alexena; or the 

CHAP. VII. 

** Thou shalt be punish'd for thus frightening mj, 
For I am sick^, and capable of fears, 
Opprest with wrongs, and therefore full of feats 

With my vex'd spirits I cannot take a truce. 
But they will quake aad tremble all this day.'* 

King Johr. 

W^FIEN the receding footsteps of 
Mar«^aret were no lono^er distinnruish- 
able, Louisa securely fastened the door 
of their chamber, and shortly after 
joined Alexena in fervent prayer to the 
Akniglity; retnriiinj^ grateful thanks 
for his gracious mercies, and intrealing 
a continuance of his protection; then 
undressed, with the soothing reflection, 
that they had always strenuously en- 
deavoured to deserve it. The follow- 
insc morniniT, onr lovely heroine was 
much more composed than could be 
expected ; her mind had gained consi- 
derable strength from her intercourse 
with the Deity, and she trusted she 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 67 

would be able to bear future trials, 
with fortitude and resignation. Louisa 
was the most affectionate of friends, 
and felt inexpressible pleasiu'C, on ob- 
serving- the serenity of her fair cousin, 
and used every exertion to nnake it 
permanent. To her fine natural un- 
derstanding was added, a considerable 
share of beauty; lier hair black, her 
eyes bright, animated, and sparkhng", 
her figure that of the middle size, ele- 
ji;antly formed, her temper rather warm, 
her disposition gentle, yet when roused 
by injury or oppression, assumed a 
<3egree of steadiness, of fearless reso- 
lution, rarely found in woman. She 
quickly resented an olTence, but as 
speedily forgave one; her birth v^as 
noble, and she had been taught every 
accomplishment suitable to her high 
rank; but there was a something so 
peculiarly engaging in Alexena's every 
word, look, and action, which insensi- 
bly attracted our warmest affection; she 
gained our esteem, nay, our love, with- 
out being aware of her power, and 



68 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

generally found that admiration witliout 
seeking, which others often seek in 
vain. Louisa was at this period, 
twenty; Alexena only seventeen. — 
The former had experienced many of 
the disappointments of this world, and 
was able to form a just estimate of the 
interests which sway men in i^cneral, 
by which she often avoided misfortune, 
or derived advantage. Alexena, on 
the contrary, was unacquainted with tha 
perfidy of mankind, and willingly be- 
lieved those^ wliose professions were 
kind and specious,, wM'il bitter experi- 
ence convinced her of I he fallacy of this 
erroneous opinion. The last (en months 
had witnessed a variety of cruel dis- 
appointments, to which she had been 
exposed ; but in enumerating them, 
her heart N^liispered they were only 
trials of her patience, which, if borne 
with Christian resignation, would one 
day be compensated -for, by future hap- 
piness. Louisa frequently told her, 
those unpleasant occurrerjces were 
wisely allowed, to give a greater relish^ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 69 

a. higher zest, for future enjoyments; 
but those promised joys were yet far 
distant. The cup of sbrrow was pre- 
pared ; but she had j^et scarce tasted 
the baleful draught; her fortituJe and 
patience were about to be called on 
to support her through a scene of 
calamitous circumstances, which the 
impatience and uncontroulable passions 
of Acasto, and the inordinate avarice 
of Montano, promised to bring to a 
speedy and fatal conclusion. 

Durinij the three first weeks of Alex- 
ena's confinement in the caslle^ she had 
been exposed to the most cruel insults 
from Montano, accompanied by the 
fulsome and repeated declarations of 
Acasto's love ; and one evening that 
his preposterous suit had driven her to 
tlie solitude of her apartment, at an 
unusual early hour, she informed 
Louisa that it was her determination 
to explore every accessible pari of the 
castle that night. " 1 may," she said, 
" find some outlet by which we may 
cescape. If not, I will, at least, have 



70 ALEXENA ; on THE 

the consolation of thinking I left no 
means untried to effect our emancipa- 
tion." 

*' I annrcve of your' intentions/' re- 
plied Louisa, " and shall, if you are 
resolved, procure torches, and accom- 
pany you. I am acquainted with 
many passages of this horrible abode, 
long since deserted, and should we 
not be able, as you say, to discover 
some mode of escape, we may, at 
least, find a secure, though temporary, 
retreat, which will protect us for the 
present from any infamous attempt 
Don Philip may be induced to make ; 
and as we have nothing to fear from 
supernatural enemies, I see no reason 
why we should delay a search (hat 
may have the most beneficial ten- 
dency." f 

Elated with hopes of speedy enlarge- 
ment, they resolved the terrible in- 
vestigation should take place that very 
night, as there was a possibility it 
might deliver them from the tyranny 
and cruel persecution of their implac- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAKCO. 71 

able foe. Therefore, pursuant to llicir 
arran2:emerit. as soon as the irrcat 
clock of the castle tolled that dismal 
hour " ^YheIl church-yards yawn,' 
(twelve,) they stole forth from their 
chamber, with fluttering- hearis and 
cautious steps, enterinj^ that long and 
dreary gallery which led to the great 
stairs; but they turned to the left, and 
traversed a corridor, which, from the 
narrative of Margaret, promised to 
conduct them to the south tower, once 
the residence of the unfortunate Cla- 
rissa. As they moved through the gloom 
of those antiquated passages, their 
hearts trembled at the noise of their 
own footsteps. Sometimes they stood 
mute as statues, convinced they heard 
groans ; but in those moments, when 
fear threatened to conoeal our heroine, 
Louisa would represent the cause of 
their alarm to be nothins: more than 
Ihesighingof the night breeze, through 
those uninhabited and forsaken cham- 
bers ; and though almost torpid with 
unaccountable awe herselt^ she tried 



72 ALEXENA ; OR TUB 

to calm the agitation of her lovely 
friend. 

" Providence," she said, '' seems to 
have granted this terrible moment for 
our attempt, and if we neglect to seiz6 
it, we tnay never again have the same 
opportunity; therefore, I beg you will 
not allow your fortitude to be subdued 
by idle fears, but let us, assisted by 
heaven, proceed in this our arduous 
undertaking." 

Thus encouraged, the timid Alexcna 
advanced through innumerable suites of 
/desolate apartments, supported by the 
arm of her trembling friend, and after 
pursuing their lonely search through 
many dismal branches of this immense 
pile, they found themselves at the foot 
of a spiral stair-case, which seemed to 
lead to some lone and solitary tower. 
The chill air, extreme dreariness of 
the spot, and solemnity of the hour, 
almost forbade the trembling wander- 
ers to ascend ; but to return was as 
painful as to proceed. They beheld 
each other, in shivering silence, and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 73 

feared to trust their own voices, lest 
they should summon some horrible 
spectre ; but after a few minutes 
passed in hesitation and dumb show, 
they ascended, and on reaching- the 
landing place, found one solitary door 
half open, which presented an obsta- 
cle that fear made almost insurmounta- 
ble — as some dreadful sight might await 
them within its gloom. Louisa ven- 
tured to touch it, and raise her torch, 
that light might reassure her ; but 
nothing was discernible in its profound 
darkness. She again hesitated, and 
looked wistfully at the stairs ; but tha 
lower steps were lost in obscurity, and 
she resolved to enter the room. The 
dampness had removed the curl from 
their hair, which now hung in loose 
tresses on their necks ; death's pale 
shadows played on their counte- 
nances ; their trembling knees knocked 
against each other, and yet they 
ventured to enter the chamber. It 
was a square apartment, without fur*- 
iiiture, from which there was aji 

VOL. II. U 



74 ALEXE!^A; OR THE 

entrance into a long--neglected corri- 
dor, that was apparently situated in 
the attic story of the castle. Again 
fear opposed further research ; but 
triumphant curiosity impelled them 
forward : it was irresistible ; and with 
palpitating- hearts, and eyes ready to 
burst their sockets, they advanced into 
the deserted passage, and from thence 
wandered into an immense raui^e of 
apartments, whose decayed furniture^ 
and mouldering tapestry, proved the 
neglect in which they had been suf- 
fered to remain, while it also evinced 
the power of the all-withering hand of 
time. They were, at length, about 
to enter the last of those desolate 
chambers, when their fearful and at- 
tentive ears caucrht the sound of 
receding footsteps. Instantly every 
limb became motionless; every pore 
distilled cold perspiration ; unnerved 
and trembling, they stood in ghastly 
expectation, unable to fly ; each tleet- 
ing moment, in breathless agony, con- 
vinced tliat the next would present to 
Iheir inhorrid view^ the musty bones 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 75 

of some decayed skeleton ; but con- 
ceive their emotion and surprise, on 
heariu": the dulcet notes of the most 
delicate and soul-reviving harmony. 
The sounds seemed celestial, and the 
sensations of our truants were those 
of awe, wonder, fear, and astonish- 
ment. Firmly transfixed — every nerve 
unstrung — their late pliant limbs now 
stiffened ; how was it possible to 
move. They seemed spell-bound — 
rivited to the spot on which they stood. 
To advance was horror : the glare of 
their flaming, bickering torches, cast 
dark red gleams on the damp and 
obscure walls of this desolate chamber, 
raising in their imagination, figures 
flitting through the distant shade.— 
The music advanced — footsteps were 
again distinguishable — a distant rumb- 
ling noise increased their terror. Alex- 
ena, frantically, caught the arm of 
Louisa, who was scarce able to sup- 
port her own tottering frame; while, witli 
distended eyes, strained almost to con- 
vulsive agonv, and which seemed ready 

T)2 



76 ALElfENA; OR THE 

to start from their expanded palling, 
they anxiously watched the decayed 
and worm-eaten door at the opposite 
extremity of the apartment. '' Oh ! 
horror!" faultered Louisa^ '' it shakes 
— the bolts recede from their rusty 
fastenings." 

Unable to support themselves, they 
sunk on their knees, clasping each 
other's trembling waists, and the fol- 
lowing moment, the door slowly re- 
vealed to these astonished and terrified 
friends, the lovely form of one of their 
own soft sex. Surprise held them in a 
trance of silent wonder; their sensa- 
tions became insupportably painful, 
and a minhte almost elapsed before 
Alexena could summon courage to 
raise her torch, that it's strong light 
might give a more accurate view 
of the motionless 6gure before her. 
All doubts of the form being real, 
having vanished, she, in a low faint 
voice, apologized for trespassing on 
her solitude, and assured the stranger, 
that her intrusion did not arise from 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO; 7T' 

idle impertinence, or inexcusable curi- 
osity. The fair, unknown, seemed 
totally insensible to this address, and 
when Louisa ventured to rise from her 
kneeling posture, the door, which but 
a moment before discovered her, now, 
with a horrible crash, shut her from, 
their sight, and all again was vacuity 
and silence, 

" May God protect us!" said Alex- 
emi, fervently. 

''Anienl" ejaculated Louisa. Amen! 
lolled along the distant gallery — Amen! 
echoed the surroundin;^ chambers. — 
Louisa shook like an aspen : ngaia 
Alexena clung to the arm of her friend. 
" Let us retire from this scene of hor- 
ror ; we may yet reach our chamber," 
said the former. " 1 am ready," whis- 
pered her agitated companion. 

Almost petrified with fear, they slowly 
retreated backward, still keeping their 
labouring eyes fixed on the horrible 
door, which they were firmly persuaded, 
led to some gloomy sepulchre. At 
length they reached the spot where 



fS alexena; or the 

Ihev bad entered, and turned to leave 
the chamber ; but imagine their sensa- 
tions on beholding the door-way filled 
by the gigantic figure of a gloomy 
warrior ; his armour was black, which 
uas partly concealed by a mantle, and 
whose colour it was impossible to ascer- 
tain. The dark nodding plumes that 
waved over his brow, added somethins: 
awfully horrible to his martial appear- 
ance, and increased the agitation of 
Alexena, then amounting almost to 
frenzy. Though what could be distin- 
ffuished of the black kni^rht's counte- 
nance, was the reverse of frightful; 
■yet it was utterly impossible either of 
our terrified adventurers could sum- 
mon courage to address him. He 
appeared to wish to advance, but 
seemed unwilling to add to their ter- 
rors, which were increased by some new 
noise. The castle bell tolled one ; the 
sound was like the melancholy and dull 
note of a death knell. The fiijure 
raised his head — started from his po- 
sition — cast a look of the deepest 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 79 

interest on Alexena^ and stalking by her, 
vanished through a door adjacent to 
that which had so mysteriously closed 
on the female figuR?^ a few minutes 
before. 

Terror of the most alarming kind, 
now deprived Alexena of respiration, 
and, with a deep groan, she sunk sense- 
less on the floor, leaving Louisa iri 
indescribable agony. Her fall, which 
the latter was unable to prevent, shook 
the old chamber, and added terrors fov 
her personal safety. 

*' Oh ! heaven have mercv : she will 
perish for want of assistance !" ex- 
claimed Louisa, '' and I have neither 
volatile or water. Alas ! I am unable 
to bear her back to her apartment, if 
I should be even so fortunate as to find 
my way." 

Again the door, the frightful door, 
opened, and again the female appeared. 
She paused for a moment, and then 
advanced into the chamber. Louisa, 
conceiving she was a spectre come to 
bear away the insensible form of her 



80 ALEXENA : OR THE 



} 



friend, stood gazing on her in motionless 
horror ; but was quickly and agreeably 
undeceived, when the lovely' stranger, 
in a most plaintive voice, begged to 
know conld she render any assistance. 

*' Alas !" said Louit^a, whose idle 
apprehensions then vanished, '' I know 
not ; my friend has been overpowered 
by the damp air of those apartments, 
and has sunk into insensibility. 

'' I am extremely unhappy, lest my 
unexpected appearance has added ter- 
ror to the other sufferings of Lady 
Alcxena," replied this unknown, " and 
I feel distressed, lest fear may have 
occasioned her present indisposition. 

' Louisa, now delii»hted aiid encou- 
raged by this address, acknowleged 
that extreme timidity was really the 
cause, " and my inability," she conti- 
nued, " of affording her immediate 
relief, induced me to call so loudly; 
indeed I became quite alarmed, lest I 
should not be able to either restore 
animation, or convey her to our cham- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARC0. 81 

ber, \vliich is situated in a very distant 
part of this buildinj^/' 

" Very distant, indeed," said the fair 
stranj^er, " but I cari conduct you to it 
xvithout ditliculty, as soon as your friend 
is somewhat better." 
- Alexeua's deep si^hs, at the com- 
mencement of this conversation, gave 
the joyful assurance, that she was fast 
revivinji: ; her head rested on the bo- 
3om of Louisa, while the unknown 
applied volatiles, and used every pos- 
sible exertion to restore animation. 

" She will be quite well presently," 
observed the latter, '' but lest my un- 
expected appearance should cause a re- 
lapse, I will retire imtil she is satisfied 
her fears are groundless. Lovely, in- 
terestirjg girl! 1 am an unfortunate^, 
isolated, persecuted female, like your- 
self, from whom you have nothing to 
fear; and were you acquainted with 
the story of my life, you would find 
there are others in this world still morv'^ 
wretched than you at present can pos= 
sibly be." The stranger then hastened 

3 5 



82 ALEXEXA ; OR THE 

under the shade of one of the stately 
columns which supported (he ceiling", 
"Nvhile Alexena, who had indistinctly 
heard the latter part of the conversa- 
tion, without being able to recal the 
late events, raised her eyes to those of 
her friend, and in accents of the bit- 
terest woe, demanded had she seen 
the shade of Mortimer. *' Good hea- 
ven !" exclaimed Louisa, dreadfully 
ai^itated, " your mind wanders ; Lord 
Mortimer is well. Look up, my dear 
Alexena, and let your fears vanish. 
The lady who has been the innocent 
cause of our recent terror, is an unfor- 
tunate stranger, to whom lam indebted 
for that assistance which has restored 
you to animation." 

*' Oh ! where is she ? — where has she 
vanished V said Alexena, wildly — still 
in evident terror. 

" She has withdrawn, to give you 
a moment to recover your scattered 
thoughts." 

" I feel obliged by her delicacy ; but 
I wish to behold her again.'' 



GASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 83 

" Then I feel pleasure in gratifying 
your wish/' said the stranger, as she 
advanced from the gloom, ''and I trust 
you will have the goodness to forgive 
the alarm I unnitentionally caused.* 

Our heroine gazed on her approach- 
ing figure, with fear, awe, and yet 
with pleasure, and answered her kind 
inquiries with a trembling timidify, 
which she in vain endeavoured to sup- 
press. 

'' My dearest madam," said Alexena, 
" I sincerely thank you for your atten- 
tion. The chill air of those dreary 
apartments, aided by idle fears, of 
which I now feel ashamed, quite sub- 
dued my weak spirits ; but I have tres- 
passed too long on your kindness. IMay 
I in treat you will have the goodness to 
accompany us to our chamber, where 
there is a fire, which, I trust, you will 
find grateful, after being, for such a 
length of time, exposed to (he almost 
deadly coldness of the night breeze." 

The stranger was unwilling to refuse, 
yet hesitated ; but, at length assented. 



Si alexena; or tiiE 

on condition that her visit, tog-ether 
with her very existence, should be a 
profound secret. To this Alexena and 
her friend jjromised strict attention^ 
and instantly after, followed their un- 
known friend with all the haste their 
strength would admit of, towards their 
apartment. It was some time before 
they observed she led them by a direc- 
tion 'different from that by which they 
had reached the late scene of their 
terrors. Somewhat alarmed, they 
stojjped for a moment, and begged to 
know whether she was certain of the 
riuht direction. 

" Oh! most assuredly I am." she 
replied ; *' fear nothing-, and follow me 
in silence." 

The next moment brought them 
into a corridore, which terminated in a 
spiral staircase; this they descended, 
and their guide then produced a small 
key, which she applied to a lock inge- 
niously concealed in the wall, the bolt 
of which was no sooner withdrawn, 
than the party were admitted into 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 85 

Alexena's apartment, and to their in- 
credible surprise, found their mirror 
formed the door which they heretofore 
conceived was immovably fastened to 
the wainscot. This the stranger care- 
fully closed, and was then led to a 
chair by Louisa, while Alexena pressed 
her to partake of some refreshments 
which the attentive Marg-aret was al- 
ways careful they should be plentifully 
supplied with. Her appetite, however, 
was by no means better than that of 
her kind friends ; and supper being 
hastilv removed, she, in accents of the 
most touching sweetness, addressed 
Alexena, again apologizing for the 
fright her unexpected appearance had 
occasioned, saying, she sincerely trusted 
it w^ould not be the cause of any serious 
indisposition, and intreated our heroine 
to seek that repose, of which her pallid 
looks and weary eyes clearly indicated 
she stood much in need ; but the latter 
would not retire so precipitately, 
avowing, she felt perfectly well, and 
had not the least inclination to sleep. 



86 alexena: or the 

" Wellj then/' said tlie fair stranger, 
" may I suppose you are anxious to 
know who the person is that has alarm- 
ed 30U at such an hour in the desert- 
ed chambers of the Castle of Santa 
Marco? Believe me, I should feel 
miserable, if you were to form an 
opinion which might be inimical to our 
further intercourse, therefore, if not 
trespassing on your patience, I will 
inform you of the eventful incidents of 
my life, and trust, the relation will not 
depress me in your esteem, who I have ~ 
been taught to value so highly.'' Alex- 
ena looked anxiously at Louisa for an 
explanation of those words, which the 
stranger observing, said, " I liave been 
led to venerate the character of Alexena 
de Guzman; how, and where, I first 
heard of her, will appear in the course 
of that narrative which I am about to 
relate, and trust, she will have the good- 
ness to believe, that a dauijhter of the 
house of Santa Marco is in capable of 
uttering a fakhood." 

" Merciful Powers!" exclaimed 



y 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 87 

Louisa^ " is it possible, that one of the 
descendants of this castle yet exists?" 

" Yes, in me you behold one, 
and the most unfortunate of all my 
family ; but as morning approaches, I 
shall keep you no longer in suspense." 

She then gave her attentive auditors 
the foilowinq; relation. 



CHAP. VIII. 

" An honest tale speeds beit, being plalny told."^ 

Richard HI. 



FEEL convinced you will be 
surprised, when I tell you, lam that Cla- 
rissa, whom'Margarct led you to imagine 
was the sister of Don Philip, and who 
perished by the stiletto of Belzo Car- 
racci. Alas! lam, indeed, that miserable 
being, and to the merciless cruelty of 
Acasto I am indebted, for all the nume- 
rous evils which have, at length, reduced 
me to the humiliating alternative of 
accepting a shelter in the subterranean 
dungeons of this house, of which. 



S8 alexena; or the 

since my brother's death, I ought to be 
the ackiiowleged mistress. Most un- 
fortunately, however, that brother who 
would have protected me, fell an early 
victim to his open goodness of heart — - 
to the treachery and vile machinatioiia 
of a wretch, who, by false professions, 
was, for a period, honored by the sacred 
name of friend , but who really deserved 
no better title than that of villain It 
is almost needless to intorm you, this 
monster was Don Philip, who, under 
the mask of friendship, concealed the 
most corrupt of hearts. The first time I 
had the misfortune to see him, was with 
my brother in Madrid, to whom he had 
been introduced by my late unfortunate 
husband, Don Selib Del Harco, who 
was, at that period, acknowleged the 
most elegant and accomplished cavalier 
in the city. To him Acasto brought the 
most flattering letters of recommenda- 
tion, which he had easily obtained 
from m.y Selib's uncle, then residing 
in I/isbon. — Fatal, fatal, introduction! 
^t led to the immediate ruin of both my; 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. S9 

brother and Imsband^ which oflen since 
has impressed on my mind the convic- 
tion,, that we cannot be too circumspect 
in our inquiries relative to the charac- 
ters we introduce to our friends^ or to 
their families. Those who form hasty 
and inconsiderate opinions of men^ in 
generab are frequently erroneous, and 
are apt to regret tlieir want of prudence 
when too late. Many there are in so- 
ciety, who, from the speciousness of 
their manners, hide their vices under 
the dark cloak of dissimulation, and 
by that means escape detection ; but if 
exposed to public view, would be ob- 
jects of universal contempt, if not of 
abhorrence ; and such a character was 
Acasto, who, being- a perfect adept in 
the art of deception, " seemed the rose, 
but was the serpent under it." My 
brother was not lone: intimate with Don 
Philip, until he imbibed a partiality for 
gaming — that most detestable of vices, 
to which his hours, in a short time, be- 
came totally devoted, while his other 
amusements were neglected, iu ordei' 



90 alexena; or the 

that he might pursue, with unrestrained 
indulgence, this worthless propensity ; 
and, surely, oT all human pasBionsJtis the 
most despicable and degrading. How- 
ever, Don Philip contrived to draw him 
on by insensible degrees, desig-nedly 
allowing him to win small sums, as a 
bait, by which he might lure him to de- 
struction, and strip him of his entire 
patrimony — Acasto succeeded, and Don 
Miguel becameabcggar. The estate on 
which this castle stands, was the last 
remnant of his broken fortunes, and 
with it he lost his life, to insure to its 
present abhorred possessor, peaceable 
enjoyment. Thus it ever happens, that 
one crime draws on another, until the 
cup of infamj is full, which, at lengths 
overflow's, drowning the guilty wretch 
in its poison. Many are the sighs — 
many are the bitter tears, that Acasto 
has wruns: from the aijonized mothers 
of those children, whose fathers were 
irretrievably ruined, and driven house- 
less on a pitiless world, by that monster's 
rapacious villany. By gambling, how 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 91 

many has lie reduced to wretchedness — 
to despair— to self destrnction ; how 
many has he deprived of every earthly 
comfort; how many have perished in a 
loathsome prison ; how many fallen by 
the hand of the executioner ; hov*^ many 
banished from their native land ; how 
many from everlasting happiness, by the 
crimes that this vice, and his demoniac 
spirit drove them to the commission of. 
Oh ! my friends, 1 fear they are innume- 
rable, but an All-just Power, for a time, 
allows such wickedness, in order to 
accomplish its own unerring and im- 
mutable decrees." 

" Don Philip prolonged his visit to 
Madrid, by several petty pretences; un- 
willing to depart, until he and his vile 
associates should possess the last pistole 
of his two unsuspecting friends. Don 
Selib, indeed, had little to lose ; there- 
fore, a short period was sufficient to 
effect his ruin ; but the immense posses- 
sions of my brother, required more time ; 
they were a bait too enticing for the 
subtle Portuguese to relinquish, without 
using every exertion to obtain them ; 



92 ALEXENA ; OR THE 



beside, their acquisition opened a path 
to the promised completion of schemes 
of a most diabolical nature, which liis 
incorrigible villany flattered him he 
^vould be able to perpetrate. Don 
Miguel was every thing he could wish ; 
confiding, open-hearted, generous, and 
being a man of the strictest honor, was 
unsuspicious, believing those in whom 
he placed confidence, equally so. How- 
ever, the moment rapidly approached, 
when he was to be painfully awaken- 
ed from those dreams of imagined in- 
tegrity, in which he had placed a too 
ruinous reliance. 

" Already his gloomy and care-worn 
brow, loss of appetite, long fits of 
musing, and sullen pettishness, which, 
from my earliest recollection, were un- 
usual with him, awakened my fears, and 
induced me to seek the cause of his 
uneasiness ; but he refused to acquaint 
me with the real fact, and Selib, who 
had also grown gloomy, sullen, and 
discontented, was equally careful to 
conceal the source of his vexation. 



OASTLE OF SANTA MAHCO. 93 

though his aukvvard attempts, instead 
of quieting my fears or suspicions, only 
served to excite them; and such was the 
aspect of our affairs the third month 
after the arrival of Don Philip. One 
evening, on which Don Miguel returned 
some hours earlier than usual, he sum- 
moned me to his private study, where, 
with all the impetuosity of frenzy, 
vowed he was irretrievably ruined. As 
soon asgrief, surprise, and consternalion 
would permit, I anxiously required a 
relation of the particulars, and too 
soon learned the fatal cause. Don 
Philip and his emissaries, who it was 
more than suspected were vile sharpers, 
- had stripped him of all his vast posses- 
sions, even this ancient castle, which 
had for ages borne our name. Imagine 
my grief and terror — for some moments 
I was incapable of either making a 
reply, or offering my advice, but when 
somewhat composed, I begged his ac- 
ceptance of my fortune, then in the 
hands of a most respectable merchant in 
^Madrid, entreating he v,'oii!d purchase 



94 alexena; or the 

this oiir ancient mansion. He gazed 
on me for a moment in silent admiral- 
lion, then clasped me to his breast, 
and while the tears of brotherly affec- 
tion fell on my bosom, he, in the most 
solemn manner, refused to accept of a 
single crown. Recollect, said he, you 
promised your hand to my friend Selib, 
and with it he is entitled to your for- 
tune, besides, I fear my entreaties have 
reduced him to much the same situation 
in which I am at present, and should, 
therefore, think myself highly criminal, 
if I wilfully added further injury ; but 
do not despair, my dear Clarissa, there 
is yet a gleam of hope, as it is con- 
fidently affirmed by men of high re- 
spectability in the city, that Acasto has 
played foul, and should I be so for- 
tunate as to convict him of this infa- 
mous charge, I shall not only regain 
my property, but be avenged by expos- 
ing the villain to public scorn and con- 
tempt. I felt somewhat relieved by 
this information, and when I had ob- 
tained a promise from my brother^ that 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 95 

he would not act, except with the utmost 
caution, and, if possible, avoid resorting 
to violent measures, I reluctantly con- 
sented to his calling' on Acasto for an 
explanation of his conduct, and for a 
refutation of the baseness with which 
he w as charged, if in his power to 
give it ; if not, to demand the restora- 
tion of his property, accompanied with 
a command to leave the capital next 
morning, on pain of being exposed to 
ignominy aiul disgrace. Shortly after, 
Don ?rliguel hurried into the street, and 
1 watched the moment of his return, 
with anxious inquietude ; at length he 
arrived, accompanied by Don Selib 
and our confessor, at which I was 
much surprised ; but imagine my asto- 
nishment, on his leading me into his 
study, where he told me, he expected to 
see me the wife of his friend in less 
than an hour. In the utmost alarm, lest 
his intellect should have been deranfjed, 
in consequence of his late mi?fortunes, 
1 entreated him to retire to his chamber ; 
he guessed my thoughts, and in the 



SG alexena; or the 

gentlest accents of kindness, urged his 
request. * Believe me, my dearest sister,' 
said he, as he tenderly embraced me; 
'it is to insure your happiness that I am 
thus urgent, and not to gratify any 
whimsical or capricious desire of my 
own, nor to comply with the ardent 
wishes of Don Selib^ who, I pledge my- 
self, is in total ignorance of my resolu- 
tion ; for I could not possibly inform 
him of his intended felicity, until I had 
first obtained your approbation." I 
thanked him for this instance of delicate - 
attention to my feelings, but begged to 
decline an immediate marriage, unless 
he would satisfy me, that the urgency 
of his reasons were unexceptionable. 
*' Clarissa, said he, impressively, observe 
me, 1 can have no motive, save your 
welfare ; my reasons I will explain at a 
future period, and pledge myself, they 
are such as are entitled to, and must 
meet, your approbation ; but, notwith- 
standing what I have said, should you 
persist in your determination of delay- 
ing the happiness of your lover, I swear 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 97 

mo^st solemnly never more to hold con- 
verse, or have communication, with you : 
no! not durin«f the remaining period 
of my existence ; you can't have more 
than a few minutes to deliberate, there- 
fore, however cruelly circumstanced, you 
must determine quickly. Though thus 
reduced to a deplorable dilemma, a 
minute's reflection convinced me it was 
better to yield with a good grace, as I 
had nothingtofearorbedissatisfied with, 
except this mysterious haste; therefore, 
relying on Selib's love, and Don Migu- 
el's brotherly aiTection, I placed my 
hand within his, at the same time say- 
ing it was at his disposal : 'tis impos- 
sible, said I, you can injure my peace, 
1 confide implicitly on your honour; 
my hand and heart are both Seiib's, 
from this moment do with me as you 
will. He gazed on me in ecstasy, 
folded me again and again to his bosom, 
and bathed my pale cheeks with his 
tears. In the name of heaven I de- 
manded, what is the cause of this agita- 

VOL. II. E 



98 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

tion — this violent emotion? Oh! tor- 
lure me not with suspense. " Ask me 
not, I beseech you, my darling-, my 
beloved sister, I hope very shortly to 
explain my motives to your satisfaction, 
but at present it is utterly impossible." 
He then hurried away for the purpose 
of informinij Selib of his happiness ; 
but before he retired, said, it was un- 
necessary I should make any alteration 
in my dress. In a few minutes I was 
Jed to the saloon, where Selib, the good 
father, and a few of the oldest domes- 
tics of the family were already assem- 
bled, and from the violent agitation of 
the former, I felt assured he was unac- 
quainted with this sudden arrangement, 
even or his entering the house. After 
waiting a few moments for my cousin 
Isabella, we stood up, and I became 
the wife of Don Selib. This altog-ether 
was so like the vision of a distempered 
fancy, that I was unwilling to believe 
myself awake, but the gratulations of 
my family soon dispelled the idea of 
an illusion; and immediately after 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 99 

supper, my brother again embraced 
me, with a tenderness that excited 
fears — vague suspicions of — I know 
not what ; and when he retired, I felt 
very uneasy, as Selib could not explain 
liis mysterious conduct. On entering 
the breakfast- room the following morn- 
ing, I inquired for Don Migue], and 
became exceedingly alarmed, whcti 
informed by one of the servants, that 
he had been absent during the night. 
Selib instantly set out in pursuit of 
him ; but had scarce left the house, 
ere my maid brought me a letter, 
which she found in my cabinet. The 
superscription was the handwriting of 
Don Miii'uel, and I instantly broke the 
seal; then, with a fluttering heart, 
read those words, which are indelibly 
imprinted on my memory : — 

" My dearest Clarissa — Before you 
peruse those few lines, your unfortu- 
uate brother may be in awful eternity, 
or languishing in the gloomy dungeons 
of a prison. I am ruined beyond hope, 
by the vile artifices of that most 



100 alexena; or the 

detestable of villains, Acasto. In my 
interview with him last night, he had 
the presumption, the daring effrontery, 
to make an infamous proposal for you, 
my sister ; but I shall not wound your 
delicacy by an explicit detail. Let it 
suffice, the wretch demanded your 
hand, not as his wife, but, oh, torture ! 

as : conceiving I should sacrifice 

your honour to my interest. The re- 
sult is easily imagined. I demanded 
instant satisfaction. We drew, fought, 
and Philip fell! Conceiving him badly 
wounded, I sent for surgical aid; but 
judge my surprise, on being informed 
he only received a slight scratch, hav- 
ing feigned inability to tight ; relying 
on my honour for his forfeited life. — 
When the surgeons arrived, he sent 
a messenscer for an al2:uazeil and other 
officers, }]efore whom he deposed, I 
wounded him unfairlv, with intent to 
murder, bavins^ ur^j^ent reasons for 
wishing tlie removal of a man, who was 
so intimately acquainted with my trca- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. lOl 

soaaljle practices, and vvilli a conspi- 
racy which 1 had formed against the 
person of liis majesty, and for the 
sidjversion of the constitution. With 
the story of this pretended conspiracy, 
1 am yet unacquainted ; but warrants 
have been issued for my appreliensioii, 
and as Acasto, his steward, Torquo, 
and several others, have also sworn to 
the truth of this horrible fabrication, I 
am advised to retire to Portn:j;al or 
Italy, for the present, or until such 
time as the king can be convinced of 
my innocence. In half an hour, I will 
be on the road to the Italian States, 
and shall write to yon again on my 
arrival at Toledo ; which place 1 hope 
to reach by sun -set to-morrow. — 
Advise Selib to retire to Santa Marco 
for the present ; for if once within its 
walls, you may remain ia perfect secu- 
rity, as he is acquainted with all the, 
private and secret outlets. You are 
now, I trust, satisfied with the reasons 
which induced me to insist on your 



102 ALEXEXA ; OR THE 

r 

bestowing- your baud on Selib, as I 
have secured vou from the matchless 
villany of Acasto^ by giving you the 
sacred protection of a husband, a maa 
of honour — one uho adores, and is 
worlhy of your love. He will defend 
you from the artifices of such wretches 
as Philip, and I sincerely hope you 
will long enjoy the felicity which, I 
make no doubt^, your worthy husband 
will use every exertion to bestow. 
You have, inclosed, a draft on your 
hanker, for the entire of your fortune. 
Confide it to Selib : he is worthy of 
the trust ; and may all the heavenly 
angels take you both under their holy- 
protection." 

" It is useless to say what my feel- 
inij:s were, on readin"; that fatal letter. 
From a state of insensibility, I awoke 
to intolerable sufferings. Don Selib was 
supporting me in his arms, using every 
exertion to restore my peace, while I 
passionately demanded tidings of my 
brother; but my husband's frenzied 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 103 

looks forbade inquiry; yet, to withhold 
information, he was convinced, would 
only inflict the tortures of suspense, 
and, when suihciently composed, he 
explained the danger of remaining 
manv hours louijer in Madrid. Terri- 
fied by new fears, I urged our imme- 
diate fligiit, and though undetermined 
hovT to act, w^e left my brother's house, 
and retired to a small cottage, in a 
lonely part of the suburbs, where we 
resolved to remain until we had certain 
informafion of Don Miguel's destina- 
tion. On the fourth day after his 
departure, his faithful servant, Hen- 
riquez, returned with the fatal news of 
his death. He had been way-laid — 
inhumanly murdered — and when dead, 
the assassins carried oft' his body ; 
from which moment, all trace of him 
had been lost. Sorrows came not 
singly ; for very shortly after, Selib 
was proclaimed a traitor, and an im- 
mense reward offered for his apprehen- 
sion. To remain longer in Madrid, 
was to insure destruction. We, there- 



]0I ALEXENA ; OR THE 

fore^ left it in the shades of nighty 
accompanied by Henriquez, and made 
all possible haste towards Lisbon, 
Avhere we intended to reside, until we 
could ascertain the final determination 
of his majesty, who had confiscated 
the remaining property of my brother, 
which was very trifling. Selib had con- 
verted my fortune into gold, which 
was fully equivalent to satisfy our 
moderate wishes; bnt the fickle god- 
dess seemed resolved to persecute us, 
as we were plundered by banditti, and 
reached Lisbon in extreme distress. 
There was an uncle of my husband's 
residing in that city, named Felix Del 
llarco, who possessed immense wealth, 
and from whom my Selib had large ex- 
pectations. By this relative we were 
kindly and hospitably received, as he 
was then unacquainted with our dread- 
ful change of fortune ; and in his 
house my infant son first saw the light, 
who, for a short time, dispelled the 
gloom that was fast gathering round 
us. Some demon, who had heard our 



CASTLE or SANTA MARCO. t05 

cVisg'race in Madrid, blasted our hopes- 
and character, by the propagation of 
the most infamous falselioods, which, 
in less than three months after the 
birth of my boy, caused a visible plte- 
ration in the manners of Don Felix 
and his lady. The lalter was a woman 
of narrow education, brought up in 
the most g-ross ignorance by her father, 
one of the merchants of the city, 
who, by rigid industry, and strict 
attention to business, had amassed a 
large fortune. Donna Del Harco, by 
mearniess and ingenuity, found the 
true situation of my Seiib's circum- 
stances, and ever after, availed herself 
of every opportunity of insulting and 
torturing my feelings with a repetition 
of them. Before stranjjers, her rude- 
ness and vulgarity were insufferable : 
at one moment affecting pity for our 
misfortunes ; the next, displaying her 
generosity, in granting us the sheiler 
of her roof: frequently reviling the 
memory of my brotlser, and, ironically, 
praising the honour of Selib, which- she 

E 5 



106 alexen'a; or the 

affirmed was his sole motive for makin«' 
a beggar's sister his wife, tt were 
tedious to enumerate the insults and 
des^radino; insinuations of this ill-bred, 
ignorant woman ; but for a lenfrth of 
time, my husband's unfortunate cir- 
cumstances kept me silent, until re- 
peated injuries rendered my wretched 
life intolerable. Loss of cheerfulness, of 
liealth, heretofore so excellent, seized 
my whole system, and presented strong 
indications of a rapid decline. Selib, 
now seriously alarmed, had too much 
penetration not to discern the real 
cause, and in a very few days after the 
discovery, removed me to a cottage, 
about a mile from Lisbon, where we 
lived most happily, until the clamours 
of our creditors presented a new spe- 
cies of misfortune, the most heart- 
rendins: of all others. We had received 
their property ; were unable to pay, 
and thouirh Selib would have cheer- 
fully submitted to the rigours of the 
hardest labour, or the solitary gloom 
of a prison, if either of those terms 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. JOT" 

would satisfy their demands; but, alas! 
they would not ; and in the latter he was 
speedily confined, without havino^ the 
power even to pay for the few trifling in- 
duJgencies that are granted to wretched 
captives ; leaving his miserable wife, 
and infant son^ perishing for want of 
the necessaries of life, as a mouldy- 
crust, and a little water, was the only 
food which the wretched Clarissa could 
procure for many days; but these pri- 
vations gave nie little pain, while my 
husband languished in the noisome, 
foul, and contagious air of a dungeon. 
It subdued my pride — my reluctance — ■ 
and for my Selib's sake, I applied to 
Don Felix, who generously paid our 
debts, and gave me a few pistoles, ac- 
companied with his earnest wish, that 
we would leave Portugal, and retire to 
some private village in Spain, where- 
we might live in solitude, until the 
king's anger should be appeased, or, 
at least, until such time as he could do 
somethin<J: effectual to serve us. Our' 
finances were such as rendered our 



108 alexexa; or the 

compliance with this advice absoliitely 
iiulispensable, and a very few days 
after Selib's liberation, we set out for a 
small villa ire in Andelusia. where we 
determined to reside ; but the malign 
shade of Don Acasto hovered round 
us, to whatever clime we wandered, 
and the long-wished-for time arrived, 
in which he hoped to find us friendless, 
helpless, and forsaken. Our deserted 
and pitiable situation, softened not his 
relentless bosom. We were an easy 
prey, he had long determined to make 
sure of; not one ray of compassion 
for our late sufferings, ever warmed 
his chill bosom; his domestics received 
their bloody mandate from the inhu- 
man ruflian, and Selib fell beneath 
their munlerous sabres. The scene of 
this horrible tragedy, was a lonely and 
sequestered vale, where Acasto's vile 
emissaries had a litter prepared, in 
which they conveyed me, with my 
infant, after a long and fatiguing 
journey, to the gloomy walls of the 
mansion in which I was born ; but. 



^ CASTLE OF SANTA MAneO. 109 

oil ! how changed ; it had been once 
tlie scene of happiness, but was 
then of every crime. The distracted 
state of my mind, precluded the pos- 
sibility of my being able to recognize 
the country through which I was con- 
veyed, and I had been manj hours in 
the castle, before I had the slightest 
conception of the name or situation 
of it. T\ly inquiri'i.s were answer- 
ed by a kind old woman, named Mar- 
garet, the same that now attends yon, 
^^ ho informed me, 1 was in the mansion 
of Beizo Carracci, the robber. This 
was the first moment I had heard of tliis 
extraordinary man, and my first sensa- 
tions were those of disgust, abhorrence, 
and terror; to him I conceived myself 
indebted for the heaviest calamity of 
my life; but I was not long snfiered to 
remain in ignorance, as the morning 
after my arrival Don Philip was sighing 
at my feet; the monster avowed him- 
self the murderer of my S«Ub, and 
then pleaded ungovernable passion, in 
extenuation of the horrible deed. A 



IIG alexena; or the 

prisoner v/itliin the narrow confines of 
a chamber, I was obliged to listen, or, at 
least, hear the repetition of his detest- 
able love ; but his prayers, tears, threats, 
entreaties, or imprecations, served only 
to add hideousjiess to tiie horrible 
ruffian ; every mental torture that it was 
possible to inflict,! was doomed to suffer; 
but, I trust heaven, not one thought 
even swerved from the rigid path of 
virtue. My suiTerings were intolerable, 
and the invention of this fiend seemed 
on the rack; so persevering were 
his endeavours to conjure up new 
terrors, for the purpose of afirighiing 
me into a compliance with his savaga. 
wishes. At length — oh! horrible re- 
collection ! — Acasto swore — dreadfully 
pledged himself, that my infant's life 
should pay the forfeit of my obstinacy, 
and gave me but one short day to de- 
cide on the dreadful alternative. 1 
passed the hours of it in prayers and 
tears, and when the light of the fol- 
lowing morning rendered objects visi- 
ble, I shoqk like an aspea at the sound 



fiASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. lit 

of every footstep that eclioed tbroiig]i 
the castle; but noon beheld my 
murderous gaoler in my chamber, 
armed with a dagger, and a counte- 
nance so horribly portentious, that I 
shrieked, on his entrance, with despair 
and terror. A few frantic strides 
brought him to my side, and in despite 
of my struggles, he forced my lovely 
infant from mv arms; the innocent 
babe smiled on his assassiii, and play- 
fully grasped his curls. A momentary 
sensation of penitence seemed to soften 
the wretch, but an instar.t served to 
darken the gem of compassion which 
had brightened his visage; all the 
gloomy malignity of a diabolical ima- 
gination, added increasing terrors to his 
brow, as he agairj solemnly swore, my 
boy should be the irnmediate victim of 
his vengeance, unless I that moment 
consented to be his forever. Monster, 
begone ! I cried, with frenzied gesture, 
and harm not my babe. Heaven will 
save him from your grasp; but should 
Providence permit the perpetration of 



J 12 alexena; or the 

such a crime, behold, I am armed!— the 
moment I see my cbild expire, the 
same shall witness this poignard sheath- 
ed in your bosom." '' A dagger 1" he 
fiercely exclaimed, '' Oh! cursed hour' 
say, woman, where didst thou procure 
that weapon?" On the floor of my 
chamber ; behold it, has it not been an 
instrument of destruction? has it not 
been an abettor of your vile purposes? 
It may have committed murder, directed 
by your hand, but heaven has placed it 
now in mine, and has infused courage 
in a woman's bosom, and given nerve 
to her aim, to rid the world of a 
savage. At least it will preserve my 
peace, and punidi with death the cow- 
ardly wretch who would inhumanly 
anniiiiiate helpless infancy. 

*' Acasto gazed a moment in silent 
wonder, and then placed my boy within 
my trembling arms ; take him, he said, 
look, behold his smiles— consent to be 
mine, and he shall smile so still ; if not, 
on€ short, one fleeting hour, shall see 
him yield his inlitnt breath, in all tho 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 113 

(orture of convulsive agorsy, and his 
lastpani^Sj his kist sighs, will reproach 
you witii the obduracy that so cruelly 
sacrificed him. But why, he continued, 
sliould I lose a moment ; swear this 
instant to he mine, or by all the terrors 
of unrelenting- veni^eance, the brat 
now dies. He drew his stiletto — 
I pressed my boy closer to my bosom 
— he grasped my arm — then raising 
his — in a hollovt^ tone, said — " swear." 
Oh! my God! I cried, do not forsake 
me in this moment of agony; ' of un- 
utterable distress! "Swear," vociferat- 
ed Acasto ; never, no, never ! will 1 bo 
voluntary criminal; villain begone. 
He cast a ghastly look of horrible ma- 
lice, deadly expressive, and again 
raised his poignard. '* One moment 
more," he said, '' gives thoe to never- 
ending repentance — gives thy child to 
the tomb — say, murderess, shall 1 strike? 
The shades of evening already darken 
this chamber with gloomy shadows, 
so there's no time to lose — speak— I 



114 ALEIENA; OR THE 

have tiified too long.'* " Pity me, ob, 
heaven!" I exclaimed. Oh, yes! said 
Acasto,, in a voice of thunder, as he 
directed a deadly blow at my littl« 
darling — it fell — the point of his 
stiletto pierced my arra, and as he 
drew it forth, my blood sprinkled his 
dress. Again his hand was raised to 
strike, but a gigantic figure rushed be- 
tween the da^^^er and mv infant. Hold, 
murderer! said this awful visitor, in a 
hollow tone. Don Philip heard him not, 
as hewasah'eady stretched seriseless on 
the floor. Follow me, said this dread- 
ful figure. I obeyed, but with difiicully 
could keep within view ; with such 
rapidity did he measure the great cor- 
ridor which led to the apartment, 
where medicine and sur^•ical iustru- 
ments were deposited ; on entering, lie 
examined my wound, and dressed it; 
his hands trembled violently, and while 
thus kindly occupied, I beheld with 
wonder his colossal figure; but his face 
I could not distimxuish throuoh his 
visor, which was overshadow'ed bv an 



CASTLE OF SANTA IIAIICO. 115 

immense dark piumej that waved over 
liis helmet ; his armour ^vas covered 
with a cloak of dark crimson^ in ^vhich 
he wrapped my infant son, and when 
lie had dressed my arm, said, the wound 
was somewhat severe, but not danger- 
ous. Praise heaven, your child has 
escaped unhurt ; and it shall now be 
my care to save him from future peril. 
He then rose to leave the chamber. 
Oh! whither would you take my boy^ 

I cried in despair; perhaps, you too . 

The eyes of the stranger shot the fire 
of displeasure, but pity instantly suc- 
ceeded. ''Unfortunate mother! I hava 
not a moment to lose; say your infant 
is dead, and that you have hid the 
body. Acasto will be here instantly; 
but ere 1 depart, I solemnly swear to 
protect, to save, your child. You shall 
see me again to-morrow. Ilark ! ap- 
proaching footsteps — farewell — fare- 
well." I snatched a parting kiss from 
my lovely innocent, and the same in- 
stant this stranj^e beinn' vanislied with 



116 alexena; oh the 

him through the pannelled wails of this 
very apartment." 

Alexena and Louisa, who liad sat 
listening- in horror, now crept closer to 
the unfortunate Clarissa, who con- 
tinued : — 

"■ Scarce had the sliding v/cod sluit 
him from mv sisrht. before Acasto en- 
tered the chamber ; his countenance 
was lividiy pale ; his voice was hollow ; 
and he trembled violently. '' Where 
is the body?" he faltered, " that 1 may 
remove it." — Accursed fiend ! I ex- 
claimed, while tears of thankfulness 
and jfjy, at Lis escape, accompanied by 
convulsive sobs, almost deprived me of 
utterance ; you sha'n't have the bodv, 
I will ernbahn it with my tears, and 
then lay it in the grave, from whence 
his blood shall call for vengeance. 

" The wretch, misconceiving the 
cause of my tears, told me, conceal- 
ment was useless, as putrefaction, in a 
very few days, must ensue, and lead 
to a discovery of the corpse. Those 



CASTLE OF SAKTA MARCO. 117 

(TXpressioiis were intended to pierce mj'- 
heart, and tliey bad the d<3sired effect. 
i screamed vvitii terror, alarmed, lest his 
words should be prophetic, and my 
repeated shrieks, at length, drove him 
from the chamber. As soon as he re- 
tired, I threw myself on my knees, and 
petitioned for heaven's protection, for 
my infant; while the idea Acasto en- 
tertained of his death, considerably- 
relieved my mind, and sug^^ested the 
plan tJiat I afterwards resolved to ex- 
ecute ; which was, to assure Don Pliilip 
I had hriyself buried the body in the 
ruins of one of the fallen towers, that 
I might have the melancholy pleasure 
of weeping over the tomb of my mur- 
dered innocent. From the terror wliich 
Acasto had been unable to conceal, I 
felt convinced he was superstitions, as it 
was evident he had mistakeii the kni:>ht 
for a spectre, and believed I was utterly 
ignorant of the appearance of this 
supposed phantom. Oar next interview 
coiifnmed this idea, as (he hypocrite 
solemnly protested it was not his inten- 



lis ALEX.ENA ; OR, TME 

<ion to kill my child. " Elated with the 
hopes, said he, of making you mine, 
I pointed tlie dagger^ in order to terrify 
you into compliance, and unfortunately 
stumbled at the moment, which caused 
your infant's death; being shocked 
at the fatal accident, the violence of 
my feelings overpowered me, and I 
sunk to the ground. He then earnestly- 
requested I would discover the unfor- 
tunate babe, that he might have the 
body deposited in the cemetery of the 
castle, but, on my absolute refusal, he 
promised never again to mention the 
^subject, and, in this instance, punctu- 
ally adhered to his word, as for some 
\Yeeks after this interview I was per- 
mitted to enjoy comparative tranquillity. 
The black knight regnlarly attended, 
with the pleasing information of my 
boy's welfare, for whom he had pro- 
cured an excellent nurse, on whose 
fidelity he could rely, and removed 
them both to a place of safety. I was 
also assured of his protection, and en- 
tertained sanguine hopes of escape^ 



OAStLE OF SAXTA MARCO. 119 

through his interference, if I could 
possibly avoid the advances of Don 
Philip for a very few months, as it wsis 
necessary my champion should interest 
the See of Rome in my behalf, and to 
the Pontiff he had resolved to g-o for 
the express purpose. Before he de- 
parted, I was informed of the particulars 
of the plaUj and of the real nanie of 
my incognito, at which I was exces- 
sively surprised ; but a few days affer 
his departure, Acasto renewed his in- 
famous suit, and numberless were the 
tortures which he indicted; amongst 
others, he almost starved me into com- 
pliance, but Providence, assisted by 
his supernatural terrors, often saved 
me, in moments of the darkest pros- 
pect ; the accidental falling of a 
picture, the sudden clashing of a door, 
or the mournful sound of the wind, has 
deterred him from a deed of infamy. 
But the moment arrived, in which I 
was to be sacrificed to his safety. A 
letter from some of his agents in Italy, 
reached the castle about two months 



120 ALEXEKA ; OR. THE 

after the departure of tlie black kniglit ; 
and I remember the evening v. ell. Don 
Philip was busily engaged with some 
papers, which he was examining with 
more than usual attention, while I sat 
in a recess of one of the windows, 
gazing in despair on the gloomy ram- 
parts, when Torquo, thai most pitiless 
of demons, entered, with the fatal 
packet, of which Acasto had read but 
a very few lines, ere his countenance 
became convulsed almost to blackness^ 
and it was a considerable time before 
he could command articulation. The 
first use he made of his voice, was to 
order me to prepare for a journey to 
Saragossa, where, he intimated, it was 
his intention to send me the following 
day; then desired Torquo to accom- 
pany him to his study : of their con- 
fereiice I could not form an idea, but 
regretted my sable warrior's absence, 
and that, be the intentions of 
Acasto ever so savage, 1 had no alter- 
native, but submission. I passed that 
night in a variety of vain conjectures, 



CAHL-E of SANTA MARCO. 121 

•respecting the cause of tliis sudden 
and unaccountable determination ; for 
where could he effect his purposes 
with greater secresy than in Santa 
Marco : and it never occurred in course 
of this mental inquiry, whether Acasto 
was, or was not, to be the companion 
of my journey. Indeed, I had not an 
idea that he would even allow me to 
cross the court-yard unattended by- 
himself; then judge my surprise on 
finding that Torcjuo was to be my sole 
attendant. I shudder, when I reflect 
on the impatience with which I awaited 
the approach of the following evening 
— of the hour on which the heartless 
Acasto doomed me to death. But I 
had not the most indistinct idea of his 
bloody purpose, and joyfully prepared, 
blessing the moment in which I 
was to quit the castle — a spot where 
I had passed the most miserable hours 
of my existence. On entering Don 
Philip's anti-chamber, he seemed 
greatly agitated, and when he bade me 
adieu, I was seized with a fatal presenti- 

VOt. II. p 



123f alexena; or tiie 

ment of approaching evil ; but my 
emotion was such as forbade reflection, 
and 1 hurried to the portal, where the 
inhuman Torquo ira|)atiently awaited " 
my approacii. Acasto followed to the 
draw-bridge_, and when quite nigh me, 
drew his cloak round his person, in 
order to conceal his features, which 
were so obscured by its shade, that I 
could neither distinj^uish, nor judge of 
their expression. His voice was hollow; 
but he spoke little, and as he placed a 
heavy purse in Torquo's hands, cau- 
tioned liim to be steady, and let me 
want for nothing. " You have," said 
he, '' received every necessary instruc- 
tion. Now, Clarissa, f^irewell : and 
recollect that what has heretofore oc- 
curred, or may hereafter happen, of 
an unpleasant nature, has been solelj 
occasioned by your unrelenting obsti- 
nacy ; but reproof, at this moment, 
would be as unavailing as cruel ; I 
therefore wish you safe, for your jour- 
ney is likely to be a long one." " Am 
J not ^'oing to Saragossa?" said f. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 1'23 

" Yes, certainly/' was his reply, and 
again wishing' me all happiness, until 
Ave should meet again, returned to the 
castle, while 1 mechanically followed 
Torquo across the draw-bridge, into a 
little wood, through which we hastened 
at a round pace, as he informed me we 
had many leagues to travel, before we 
could possibly reach the place at which 
he intended to put up for the night. 
The shades of evening were rapidly- 
approaching ; but their gloom was en- 
livened by the rising moon, which then 
began to glimmer, and cast her faint 
rays over the dark brows of the neigh- 
bouring rocks. It was almost twelve 
before Torquo thought of slackening 
his speed ; but to proceed wilh the 
same velocity, became impossil)le, as, 
from the inequality of the ground, our 
animals were unsteady, and being weak 
with fatigue, stumbled every moment. I 
entreated my attendant to alight, which 
at first he was unwilling to do ; but on 
my again representing the necessity of 
the measure, he complied, and led the 

f2 



tf4 alexena; oh the 

liorse throiiji-h the narrow defile la 
which we then were, into an extensive 
glen, apparently sunk in the bosom of 
the mountain. I gazed from the height 
on this yawning abyss, and with an 
emotion of extreme terror, demanded 
whether it was absolutely necessary we 
should pass through that savage wild. 
*' Yes/' replied Torquo, " but our 
journey, for the present, tcrmifiates at 
the opposite extremity, where you will 
find a place of rest, of which, I feel 
-assured, you stand much in need.'' 
My thoughts now became confused ; 
J feared — I could not tell what ; but 
rode into (he glen, close by his side, 
who, as a man, I naturally looked to 
for protection, and for the first moment 
of my life, I beheld him without 
being dismayed. He proceeded at a 
quicker pace than I wished, and in half 
.an hour, we reached the opposite ex- 
tremity of that wild, but only for the 
purpose of entering a still more terrific 
one. These horrible vales were con- 
jaected by a narrow pass, apparently cut 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 125' 

©lU of the solid rock, where the road 
became so rug-^ed, that it was impossi- 
ble to sit the horses with safety ; we, 
therefore, dismounted, and I walked 
forward a few paces, while Torqiio was 
apparently employed in fastening their 
bridles, so as to enable him to lead 
I'neni thronijh the olen. On obscrvinj:r 
what he was about, I slowly advanced 
Ihronali the narrow defile, and rained 
the open plain, where I beheld the 
rising" moon, in all her glorious splen- 
t\oVi\\ I stood to gaze on the bright 
arid welcome Imninary, and my 
thoughts naturally wandered to the 
heaven, in which it moved. Willi 
fervency, 1 besought Almighty pro- 
lection ; but short space was allowed 
for my prayers : a quick approacliing 
footstep atarmed me, and on turning 
to ascertain the cause, beheld Torque, 
without the horses. A horrid convic- 
tion of his murderous intent, flashed 
across my affrighted imagination, and 
it was with much difficulty I could 
summon eouragre to demand where our- 



126 alexena; or the 

animals were. He hegitated for a mo- 
ment, tlien said, " We no longer want 
them, lady ; our journey is nii*!! 
finished. A few puces farther, at the 
next turning" on the road, you will see 
tlie house prepared for your reception." 
'' I breathed as:ain, and hastened for- 
ward, that I might see it, as I could 
not help fearing my uncouth attendant, 
who I wished to be rid of; as with him 
my fears of death would vanish. The 
rock that excluded the view of that 
home to which I was conducted, lay 
within a few paces of us, and as I 
touched its brown sides in passing, I 
peevishly exclaimed, *' What ! is there 
to be no end to (his pile of crags ?'* 
*' Oh \ yes," replied Torquo, " a little 
farther, and you will have an extensive 
prospect of a most delightful country.-*" 
I quickened my pace; but guess my 
despair, on turning round its projecting 
base, when, instead of an hospitable 
hearth, I beheld a barren and desolate 
plain, of great extent. My eyes were 
strained in vain endeavours to catch 



fiASTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 12T^ 

the form of a human dwelling-, in the 
hazy mists of distance; bat my scruti- 
nizing search was tVuilless, and in- 
accents of despair and poignant dis- 
tress, I turned to Torquo, demanding 
the home to which lie had promised 
to conduct me. He paused — seized me 
by the arm — then^ with a ghastly look 
of murderous exultation^ pointed to 
the earth, whicli had been freshly 
turned up, and presented to my af- 
fnglited senses — to my agonized soul — 
a grave, newly dug, at the foot of a 
rock. " This is the home — the couch — 
the mansion of repose^ — to which I have 
solemnly sworn toAcasto, to lead — and 
bury you and your griefs for ever." 
*' Oh, heaven!" I exclaimed, *' forsake 
me not, or I am, indeed, lost! Oh! my 
child, my darling child, intercede for 
your mother. Alas! are we to be thus^ 
thus cruelly separated ?" ''By no means," 
observed Torquo, " yor. will be with 
him presently; therefore, pray speedily, 
as there is no time to lose." I fell at 
the. feet of the assassin, and pleaded- 



ISS ALEXENA ; OR THE 

for life I so true it is^ tliat he our mise- 
ries what they may, we are unwilling: 
to part with it. I promised to change 
my name, to retire to whatever distant 
clime he might comuiand, and buid 
myself !)y a solemn oath, never to reveal 
the secrets of that night — my birth — 
my name — or my misfortunes. But his 
impatience to perpetrate his bloody 
deed, scarce allowed me time to make 
those promises. ''All stuif and madness, 
lady," grumbled Torquo^ "you must 
<}ie !" then dragged me to the mouth of 
that tomb, which gaped to receive its 
destined prey. I frantically belieid the 
narrow spot w hich was to receive me — 
and my fears. The moon-beams fell 
tiiintly on the cold clay, and instant 
death, with all its concomitant horrors, 
chilled my heart ; a sickly scream an- 
nounced my fast-fleeting strength; 
while the villain endeavoured to bind 
me, and stifle my cries, by placing his 
hand tight on my mouth. But what 
could he fear? what could render such 
caution necessary in such solitary wilds? 



CASTLE GF SANTA MARCO. 129' 

Yet he had fears, and not without rea- 
son, for the bands of Belzo Carracci 
wandered through those desarts, hunt- 
ing' in concert with beasts of prey ; tho* 
who among- them so savage as Torquo. 
He had forced me on njy knees — then 
pausing a moment — raised his glit- 
teriuG: stiletto — the liiiht of the moon 
added brightness to its terrors; and as 
it trembled in his grasp, annihilated 
hope ; the motion of my feet, in vain 
endeavours to rise, threw some of the 
loose earth, which had been hardened 
by the frosty air, into the grave, and 
it rattled in hollow sounds, similar to 
those formed by clay thrown on a coffin. 
I shuddered, and conceivino: it mv 
death-knell, once more turned my 
streaming eyes on my intended mur- 
derer, who seemed to hesitate ; con- 
ceiving this a favourable omen, I again 
pleaded for life, with the energy 
which fear, in such moments, always 
inspires. But at that terrible and trying 
instant, the sound of voices came sigh- 
ing on the breeze, accompanied by the- 

F 5 



m 



ALEXENA : OR TBE 



distant echo of horses' feet, which were 
easily distins^uished advancing'. Airain 
the inhuman Torquo raised his mur- 
derous arm : hope and fear induced me 
to scream, as assistance was evidently 
nigh; while my executioner, startled and 
alarmed at the piercing" wildness of my 
shrieks, with an execration, buried his 
poignard in my side — threw my motion- 
less body into the grave — and fled ; 
but to heap the earth on me was not in 
his power, as the horsemen were within 
ii few paces, and would have massacred 
him had he remained a moment longer. 
When I awakened out of insensibility, 
occasioned by my wound, imagine my 
surprise, on finding myself in bed, in a 
comfortable, though vaulted chamber, 
-attended by the black knight and a 
peasant girl. The visor of the former 
was down as usual, but I conceived his 
face was w^asted by long sickness, and 
his emaciated form confirmed my con- 
jectures. As soon as I had power to 
articulate, I demanded where I was? 
and under whose protection 1 [' You 



G-ASTLE OF SANTA iMAllCO. 131' 

are safe, and under mine, said this ex- 
traordinary being, but you must not 
speak, until such time as your perfect 
restoration permits; your wound lias a 
very favourable appearance, and a 
fi:ood sister from a neio^hbourin"- con- 
vent, who constantly attends you, will 
be here presently to dress it, and now 
that you are sensible of your situalion, 
I trust you will aid our exertions for 
your recovery, by taking- those medi- 
cines that are prescribed for you, and 
by strictly attending to Father Zelo's 
advice." He then, in accents of the 
fondest solicitude, wished me a speedy- 
recovery, enjoined silence, and with- 
drew." 

Here Clarissa was interrupted by the 
visible ajiitrJion of Alexena, which 
alarmed both her and Louisa. On in- 
quiring the cause, our heroine tre- 
mulously demanded, what sort of man 
Father Zelo was? Tl.is qur^stion sur- 
prised Clarissa, who entered into a 
description of his person, and which 
satisfied the former, that he was the - 



132 ALEXEKA ; OR THE 

identical priest who Ansclmo had pro- 
cured to m?dTy her and Lord Mortimer. 
But unwilling to interrupt Clarissa, she 
promised her an explanation ^.t some- 
ollier period, who then proceeded thus: 
'' The moment I found myself un- 
restrained bj any other than my female 
attendanJ, I begged to know how long" 
I had been confined in that apartment, 
and when I was brought to it ; to whicli. 
she replied, 1 had been there a month, 
and that the black knight had watched 
by me during that time with unceasing 
kindness and attention, but could not 
inform me where I was, as she had 
been led there blindfolded by Father 
Zeio, v.ho never suffered her to 
wander more than a very few paces 
from my apartment. It is useless ia 
enter into a detail of all those circum- 
stances which occurred during the 
period of my confinement. Let it suf- 
fice, I had the rapturous joy of again 
folding my infant to my bosom, and 
that I was treated with all imaginable 
care and tenderness, bv the kind fathej 



CASTLE OF SAXTA. MAHCO. 133" 

and the black knight, to whose un- 
remilting care 1 owe my life. In 
less than three months, I made an 
astonishing -i-ecovery ; for though tlie 
wound had not been dangerous, yet 
the fever brought on by the agitation 
of my spirits, reduced me to the hist 
extremity, and had it not been for the 
skill and unremitting attention with 
which I had been treated, it is a moral 
impossibility I could have survived. 
At length, when able to leave my 
chamber, I became anxious io retire 
into a conv^ent, until such time as I 
could acquaint Don Felix with my 
melancholy situation, who, I had no 
doubt, would provide for my child, 
and enable me to take the veil. On 
my next interview with the black 
knight, I explained my intentions, and 
requested his advice. He listened 
attentively, then, with a smile, said, 
'' Have you already forgiven Torque. 
From your ravings, when delirious, I 
am inclined to believe you are indebted 
t® that old ruffian for your wound and 



1-S4 a^exena; oa the 

late illness ; you may, Iherefore, rest as- 
sured, I will not lose the benefit of such 
an excellent witness; one, whose single 
testiniony is sufficient to brin*^ the 
assassin to that punishment, which it 
would bean insult to justice to let him- 
evade. Here you have nothing to fear, 
and am certain you will be astonished 
when informed, that you are, at this 
moment, in the subterranean dungeons 
of Santa Marco." I became almost 
motionless at this terrible information, 
which gave the black knight much 
uneasiness, and, in the kindest accents 
of pity, he assured me, I had nothing 
to fear. *' Acasto," said he, " has gone 
to Lisbon, and it is likely will never 
return ; I will, therefore, in the cojn-sc 
of to-morrow, conduct von throuo-h 
the secret passes of those caverns, with 
the secrets of w-hich, it is absolutely 
necessary you should be acquainted, 
and introduce you into the castle, wliere 
von are to reside, until such time as I 
can remove you to a convent, or some 
more agreeable residence." The fol- 



GASTLE OF SAXTA MARCO. 135 

lowing morning, he led me through 
the most terrible intricacies that, I 
believe, were ever formed, and witli 
the secrets of which I was before un- 
acquainted. Amongst others, he taught 
me the nature of the spring in the 
pannel of this apartment, whicli I am 
permitted to explain, and also to inform 
you of the name of my friend, in order 
that, by your knowledge of the first, 
you may secure an impenetrable retreat, 
if necessary, but to which you are not 
to resort on any trivial occasion — only 
in cases of dire necessity, should such 
occur; and with the second, that his 
name may inspire confidence, and 
banish ridiculous terror, should you see 
the hero himself ; yet it is necessary to 
observe, your life will pay the forfeit 
of your indiscretion, if you ever, with- 
out permission, reveal the name I am 
about to confide to your keeping ; but, 
to terminate your suspense, know that 
the black knight and Belzo Carracci 
are the same person. Yes; that for- 
midable robber;^ the terror of this 



13G- alexena; or tiis^ 

country, is that man — the best — and' 
"bravest of the brave." With his historv, 
or the former incidents of his life, 1 am 
unacqnninted ; but I have seen his 
horrible troop, and know him lo be 
their leader. Last nio^ht, thcv brouirht 
prisoners to their cavern, mIio, I un- 
derstand, are persons of distinction,. 
'VTith whom Carracci is acquainted ; yet, 
as he has, from some unaccountable 
motive, sworn to protect you, you have 
now little to fear from Acasto; for the- 
oalh of that bandit has never been 
violated. However, be watchful, as 
lie may be ab.sesit at the moment 
when his aid would be most wantins:. 
Recollect, I fell beneath Torquo's dag- 
ger, owing: to a similar circumstance: 
but I am inclined to believe Carracci 
is more watchful of your safety, as hc^ 
has informed m»e of every circumstance 
of yoiu' life, since your arrival from 
Enij;land, and expresses \\iQ. utmost 
interest in your welfare. Now, farewell ; 
as I sec tlie dawn bursts throuMi the 
eastern sky, and it is time to retire;. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 157 

tlioiigh 1 sliall, \vitli your pornsission, 
visit you as olten as is consistent ^vi{h 
safety and prudence ; yet, ere I go, 
let me caution you (o have special 
care how you wander through the de- 
serted chambers of this castle, lest you 
may be lost in their mazes ; and sliould 
you, at any time, encounter strange 
figures, carefully avoid them ; for wlieu 
Carracci conceives it necessary to in- 
troduce himself, he will do so in a 
proper manner, and however odd this 
advice may appear, you will, picrclanoe, 
find it valuable and worthy yo! r atten- 
tion." 

Clarissa now rose to retire, but 
Alexena would not permit her, until 
she partook of some refreshment, after 
the fatio:ues of the ni^ht ; then thanked 
her, in the most graceful manner, for 
her advice, kindness, and the gratiii- 
cation she had conferred, in the recital 
of her eventful story. 

Before she retired, Louisa ventured 
to inquire how she became acquainted 
with Margaret's mentioning^ her name 
to them. 



13S alexena; or the 

" I was behind that pannel," said 
Clarissa, pointing to it, " vvliere curi- 
osity led me to seek the captives of 
Acaslo, who Carracci had represented 
in such glowing terms, that, believe me 
VThen I say, you excited no small 
dejrree of interest. It was there I 
overheard Margaret repeat the tale. 
which Don Philip has impressed on 
the minds of his domestics." 

Alexena now mentioned the form 
she had seen, and which had been the 
real cause of her weakness ; at which 
Clarissa seemed surprised, and after a 
thoughtful pause, said, *' It must be 
Carracci Iiimself, whose curiosity has 
also prompted him to have a peep at 
your lady sJ lip ; yet I am inclined to 
believe he did not wish to be seen, 
though it is probable, he wished to see 
you, lest such knowledge might become 
absolutely necessary, when it would 
not be in his power to attain it." 

Clarissa then pressed the spring of 
the pannel, which was concealed in 
the carved wood, and in the secret of: 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 159 

Mliicli she initiated Alexena. AVlien 
touclied, it flew open, and discovered a 
-long narrow passage, contrived in the 
wall, at the farther end of which a 
lamp was burning. Observing the 
surprise of her new friends, she in- 
formed them, it was placed there by 
Carracci, who, doubtless, waited to con- 
duct her in safety to those apartments 
appropriated to her use. Our heroine 
smiled at tlie mention of so much atten- 
tion, which did not pass unobserved 
by Clarissa, who, v.ith smile answering 
smile, said, " It is necessary to the 
safety of Carracci and his troop, that he 
should be thus particular, lest I should 
stray and fall into some unforeseen 
danger which might prove fatal. — 
Believe me, Del Harco is not oblite- 
rated from my memory, and you 
cannot forget who my friend is. I 
owe him, it is true, a vast debt of 
gratitude ; Init nothing more/* 

Alexena became alarmed, lest she 
had unintentionaliv hurt the feelings 

ml ^.' 



110 alf.xena; ok uiE 

of her friend, and timidly eatrcaled 
forg;ivcnc5S. "Ob, my dearest love!" 
said Clariirsa, '' was I so captious, I 
should be unwortliy your favour. I 
merely made those observations, lest, 
by your enteilaining; such ideas, I 
might lose that place in your esteem, 
v»Lich I value so hig-hly;" then afFec- 
tionatelv saluted both her and Louisa, 
and \Tas about to enter the passage, 
when a gigantic figure appeared at 
the farther extremity, beckoning her 
to hasten, \vhose dark plume and 
glittering helmet announced Carracci. 

*' Is it hvn," said Alexena, in a low 
fiiint voice. "Yes," replied Clarissa, im 
a still lower tone, as she darted through 
the aperture, which shut with amazing 
rapidity after her. 

Louisa gazed at the spot where she 
had stood, lost in amaze and wonder^ 
until reminded by Alexena, that she 
was unable to sit longer. The former 
then apologized for her inconsiderate 
fhonghtlessness^ and thev hastened to 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 141 

their beds, wbere^ in ii few moments, 
their cares were buried in profound 
and tranquil ileep. 



-^~<-*^^i 



CHAP. IX. 

Whenwe in our viciou?ness grow hard," 
ti'.e wise gods seal our eyes; 



In our own filtli drop our clear judgments; rn;;ke vjs 
Adore our errors ; laugh at's, wliile we strut 
To our confusion." 

Ant. '< Cleo. 

At was noon ere our heroine or Louisa 
awoke, and then, from the darkness of 
the morning, occasioned by heavy rain, 
they had no conceplion it Was so late. 
The slintters of the windows remained 
closed, and they, therefore, lay con- 
versing on the extraordinary events of 
the last night, which seemed a fantasy 
of the brain ; but was, nevertheless, a 
certainty not to be doubted. 

" It is too true," said Louisa, " that 
Ave arc in one of the chambers of Santa 
Marco ; the actual prisoners of the 
Tilest of human beings ; yet a gleam 



M9 ALEX.ENA ; OR THE 

of light bursts tlirough the darkness, 

and encou raises hope, for are we 

not protected by heaven and Carracci?'* 
" Yes, 1 trnst, we are," Alexena re- 
plied, " and though I fear that man^ I 
feel I must respect him ; his power is 
great, and we have proof, that in one 
instance, at least, he has not abused it ; 
we are assured of his best wishes, and 
are we not desired to rely on his ex- 
ertions when a favourable moment 
offers? Clarissa says we, are, and may 
Providence grant it speedily; but at 
all events, while allowed to remain to- 
gether, I shall fear nothing from 
Acasto; for the instant he decides on 
any thing personally offensive, 1 fear 
we will be separated, and then to what 
trials may we not be doomed. For who 
can save us from the power of such 
wretches as Don Philip, his confessor, 
and steward ? — none, except that Being 
who gave us life ; therefore, let him be 
alwavs in our thouuhts ; let us call on 
him, and he will not forsake us in the 
hour of distress; no sickness or casualty 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 143 

can impede his will, and we should 
Recollect his late merciful interference 
in favour of Clarissa; his omnipotence 
directed the stiletto — mocked the ar^sas- 
sin's aim — defeated his bloody purpose 
— saved the intended victim from an un- 
timely grave — and, likely, will restore 
her to joys which will more than compen- 
sate for all her late grievous trials. There- 
fore, let us bear our misfortunes with 
fortitude, v.^ith patience, with Christian 
resignation, bowing humbly to the 
Divine Will, and we may calculate with 
certainty, on being- rewarded, if not in 
this world, surely in the next. Yes, let 
us imitate Clarissa, and, if necessary, 
like her, struggle for the preservation 
of our innoconce, to the last moment of 
expiring nature. We may be rendered 
miserable by the villany of others, but 
it rests with ourselves to be guiUy or 
not. Let nothiri": ever temnt us to do 
that by which we shall forfeit our own 
esteem, and we will insure the good 
opinion of the world. The wicked 
prevail for a given period^ but it is only 



244 alcxena; or the 

to accomplish the wise purposes of tli« 
IMostUii^h, \vho «>enera!Iy doon,s theia 
to be tlicir own executioners; punish- 
ment eventually awaits tiieir misdeeds, 
and (he !oni;er they delay, the more ac- 
cumulated the force with which it falls 
• — the more terrible the destructioii 
by which they are crushed." 

At this moment Margaret entered 
ihe'iv chamber, and represented the 
lateiicss of the hour. " Don Philip has 
breakfasted/' said she, " and i^one out 
on the ramparts, accompanied by his 
chaplain ; therefore. Donna Alexena, if 
you please, you can have the morning's 
repast in your anti-chamber, or in the 
parlour, before he returns, should his 
presence be disagTceable. My lord, 
however, is in good humour this morn- 
ing, nay, I do not remember when I 
have seen him so much so ; he would 
not allow you to be disturbed to day, as 
he wishes you to appear particularly 
charming this afternoon.'' 

" For what reason ?" said Alexena, 
whose colour at the moment vied 
with the lily. 



CAITLE OF SANTA MARCO. lij 

" I understand/' replied Margaret, 
*' there are to be strangers here, incon- 
sequence of some curious discovery 
Don Philip has made," 

"Of what nature?" demanded Louisa. 
' *' I know not/' rejoined Margaret, 
•' but suppose it is something that 
will lead to mischief, from father Mon- 
tano's looks, which have been unusually 
expressive of malice since morning." 

Alexena wished to change the sub- 
ject, as it was extremely painful, from 
apprehensions which tormented her, 
respecting Carracci and Clarissa, the 
latter of whom she feared had been 
traced to their apartment. However, 
firmly resolved not to give Margaret 
cause for suspicion, she carelessly de- 
manded, were there any musical instru- 
ments in the castle?" 

''Oh, yes! Doima, tliere are; and 
drawing materials in the library, besides 
a vast number of books of all laniruaires ; 
please, allow me, when you have finished 
dressing, and I will conduct you to it." 
' Alexena thanked her, but observed, 

VOL. II. G 



146 ALEXEXA ; on THE 

she conceived it necessary first to obtain 
Don Acasto's permission. 

" Shall I go ask him?" said Margaret, 
anxiously. 

*' No, by no means, I shall mention 
it after dinner, and to-morrow will visit 
it, if I am not denied that pleasure." 

^' Well, my dear lady, just as you 
please; but I would feel so happy in 
having it in my power to contribute to 
your amusement or comfort, that was 
lie to look ever so terrible, I would ask 
him for your sake." 

Margaret now retired to serve break- 
fast, and the moment the door closed 
after her, Louisa observed, she would 
give much to know the subject of con- 
versation between Acasto and the 
monk. '' I fear we are connected with 
it, and that such knowledge would ex- 
cite a painful degree of interest; for 
what could detain lliem on the ramparts 
so very long, except devif?ing mischief 
against us poor creatures/' 

" 1 sincerely trust you are mistaken,'* 
replied our heroine, with a smile, '' but 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 14:7 

^should they be employed as you sup- 
pose, 'tis likely they may (all the vic- 
tims of their own villany in the 
interim ; however, it is for us to watch 
with vigilance their every word, look, 
and action, that, if possible, we may be 
prepared to counteract or avoid them; 
and would it not be prudent to examine 
all the adjoining apartments, that in 
case of necessity, we may be com- 
petent to ascertain the situation of 
each, even in darkness ?" 

" I agree with you/' said Louisa, 
'' and let our second scrutiny commence 
at the top of the great staircase, that 
being tlie central point from which the 
galleries and corridors lead to the dif- 
ferent suits of apartments," 

They shortly after left their chamber, 
and on reaching a great arched win- 
dow, which commanded a view of the 
draw-bridge; they were surprised to 
find it lowered, and a number of men, 
advancing from the adjacent wood, 
"vrho, Acasto was waiting to conduct 
into the court-yard. 

q2 



lis ALEXENA; OR TIFE 

" Who can these be?" inquired 
Alexena, *'Am I to suppose they are 
people who Acasto has employed to 
guard the castle, in consequence of 
Torquo's information ? yet, if he be- 
lieves Carracci is in the vicinity, why are 
they not armed? but it is. unnecessary, 
as there are weapons in the armoury 
here sufficient for twice the number.'* 

The strangers were now fast assem- 
bling in the hall below, which rendered 
it unsafe for our heroine to remain 
longer, and as she was about to retire, 
beheld Acasto and his monkish sha- 
dow approach from the portcullis, the 
draw-bridije havinq; resumed its wonted 
station. 'In a few moments after they 
reached their apartment, Montano at- 
tended in their anti-chamber, and in 
the most unhandsome manner, demand- 
ed admission, Louisa, alarmed and 
enraged at his insolence, attended to 
-prevent farther violence, as he knocked 
with such roughness at the door, that 
it threatened to go to pieces, without 
any apology for his rudeness; he said 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 149 

*' it was Don Acasto's pleasure that 
Donna Alcxena should attend him in- 
stantly in the saloon, where he wished 
to inform her of the extent of those 
apartments chosen for her pleasure or 
amusement, and to prohibit all others." 

Louisa observed, " she could not say 
wliether Donna Alexena would attend 
Acasto exactly then ; but, she conti- 
nued, "'tis likely, to-morrow or next 
day, lie may be honoured with half-an- 
hour's attention; yet, even for the cer- 
tainty of this, I cannot promise." \ 

Montano was almost convulsed with 
rage, and with a look of ineffable scorn, 
vociferated, " Begone, insolent girl ! and 
tell your proud mistress, that Don 
Philip commands her presence, and 
should you ever presume to use such 
impertinence hereafter, know I have the 
power to punish — to effectually curb — 
your imperious^ audacious insolence." 

" Wretched minion !" retorted the 
passionate Louisa, " I despise your 
threats — your vengeance; and ere you 
go, allow me to prophesy that disgrace 



J50 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

awaits, at no very distant period, to 
compensate your exertions. And now,, 
do you begone, and tell j our vile em- 
ploy; r, that jni/ mistiness will not attend 
his sunnnons. Away! I say, \esti/our 
master may be induced to punish your 
insolent intrusion, and outrageous con- 
duct, within those chambers " 

She then bounded into the inner 
apartment, and bolted the door, before 
the monk could recover presence of 
mind sufiicient to impede her intention, 
and findiiiG: his endeavours to force 
the door iuefiectual, retired, muttering 
dreadful imprecations, which were dis- 
tinguishable as he passed along the 
gallery. 

Alexena was terrified for the result of 
her friend's rashness, and dreading the 
resentment of Don Philip, sat almost 
an hour, completely motionless through 
fear, and when her powers of reflection 
were restored, she teased herself with 
conjectures, how she should appease 
Acasto's wrath, without degrading her 
friend, or being contemptible in her 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. ]5i" 

own estimation. Her innocent heart 
pointed out the jewels which Don Philip 
had sent; — " if I wear them," she men- 
tally said, " our tyrant may take it as- 
condescension ; if so^ it will appease 
his wrath, though 1 certainly shall 
never use them again." Without fur- 
ther consideration she began her toilet, 
and dressed with more than usual care. 
Her agitation heightened her complex- 
ion, and whe!i the dinner bell sum- 
moned her, she looked exquisitely 
lovely, but descended to the drawing- 
room with a palpitating lieart. Not sp 
Louisa, she had determined to repre- 
sent the intrusion of Montano into their 
apartments, as an unpardonable insult, 
and call on Acasto to reprimand him 
for it. 

With these different ideas they en- 
tered the saloon, where they found 
Acasto lolling on a sopha, who took 
no notice of tliem, and though Alex- 
ena felt the insult, she remained silent ; 
but not so Louisa, who, beiuii.- enraired 
on our heroine's account, said, '' I will 



152 ai.exena; oil the 

order dinner in our apartments, as Don 
Acasto is absent; yet is it not strange 
that the ruffian monk affirmed he waited 
here; liowever, we are fortimate in 
being rid of him, for who would desire 
the company of a man who is ignorant 
of the respect due to our sex." " Sig- 
niora Louisa forgets she is my slave/* 
said Acasto, grinding i;o!>ically, as he 
raised himself on his elbow " but as I 
have no further occasion for her service, 
I will show my gratitude for the past, 
by granting her freedom; therefore, 
let her prepare, for before this hour to- 
rn ovrow, she shall be on the road to 
Madrid." 

" Yes, on the same road you sent a 
lady under the care of Torquo, but 
beware lest Belzo Carracci intercept 
your attendants." Louisa paused, she 
found she had said too much, as Don 
Philip's countenance changed from red 
to pale, from pale to livid blackness; 
in a moment he sprung from the 
lounger, and seizing her by the arm, 
said, " so, so, Signiora, you have been 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAHCO. 153 

listening — an honourable lady-like 
amusement; I suppose this was the 
cause of your drowsiness this morning ; 
has Donna Alexena been also as 
elegantly employed? — ah! I am right 
in my conjectures — very well — mighty 
well ; however, I shall take special care 
yourcuriosity shall, in future, have little 
chance to be gratified. Believe me, the 
scale on which you are to move, will be 
Yery confined; eh! what think you of 
one of the subterranean cells?" He 
now shook her violently, and with an 
horrid oath affirmed, had he proof she 
vi'as guilty to the extent of his suspici- 
ons, he would consign her to a death of 
instant torments. Alexena now inter- 
fered, and assured Acasto, that Louisa's 
words were merely the ebullitions of a 
hasty temper, and that she was sorry an. 
innocent tale of Margaret's should be 
the oriijin of so much uneasiness. 

" The old woman" she continued, 
*' mentioned a sad circumstance of 
your sister's having been carried ofl'by 
a captain of banditti, who had inhii-' 

« 5 



J54r alexena; or the 

manly wounded her, and Louisa felt 
Iiurt that you should threaten to expose 
Iier to the same danger for so trifling an 
offence as a few inconsiderate words/* 

Here Alexena blushed deeply, she 
had never conversed with Acasto before 
— never spoke to him, except in mono- 
syllables, and she was then obliged to 
prevaricate to save her cousin's life. 
Acasto in a moment forgot his anger, 
and, mentally, cursed his folly for using 
such language before the woman he 
adored ; arid in order to remove the un- 
pleasant impression from her mind, 
promised to prevent a repetition of 
Montano's visits, though he really had 
no such intention. 

That barbarian was awaiting their 
entrance in savaije "loominess, nursing 
a large portion of gall and passion, 
which he intended to torture those un- 
fortunate females with during the even- 
ing, as he was miserable when any liv- 
ing beingenjoyed tranquillity, even for 
a moment, where he had the means to 
prevent it, and they, therefore, shrunk 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAKCO. 155 

from his brutal scrutiny, but not until 
their pallid looks discovered all he 
"wished to know, as their agitation 
plainly told their interview with Acasto 
was of a most unpleasant nature. 

The desert was scarce served, ere 
Montano significantly asked Alexena 
had she been in the library or music 
room; she was unwilling to enter into 
conversation with her old enemy, as it 
Avas particularly disagreeable, but he 
adroitly placed her unwillingness to 
another account, and with a sneer said, 
" was I the friend of Donna Alexena, I 
■would commend more suitable amuse- 
ments, than those of meanly prying 
into the secrets of a family, or endea- 
vourins: to seduce a doatin"r old woman 
to assist in the brainless project of 
escape." Louisa started at those asser- 
tions, and Alexena seemed thunder- 
struck, while their wary persecutor 
continued, ''yes, yes! your evident 
confusion confirms your guilt; say was 
it not mean, detestably mean, to offer 
a bribe to a servant : denial is vain, for 



15d alexexa; or the 

in consequence of a sort of confession 
which I had from the talkative idiot, I 
find you were anxious to obtain an ac- 
curate knowledge of all the private 
apartments of the castle^ in order, 
should opportunity offer, to admit that 
EnHisli adventurer Mortimer, who is 
now loitering in this neighbourhood; 
but should our domestics be so fortu- 
nate as to capture him, he shall be 
han.Qred from the draw-brid^re, as an 
example to all such impostors." 

The latter part of this information 
was'Iost on the person for whom it was 
intended, as she had fainted from the 
j-liock which sudden joy had inflicted ; 
joy that her lover — her lord — her af- 
fianced husband, was in the vicinity of 
the castle; oh! it was an excess of 
liappiness that her agitated mind and 
delicate nerves were unequal to; and 
liad the effect of reducing her to a state 
of insensibility before the last savage 
expressions of the monk could possibly 
inflict the pain which he intended. 

Acasto darted an angry look at his 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 157 

chaplain, as he hastened to support our 
fainting' heroinCj and on her recovery 
summoned Marijaret to assist Louisa 
in bearing her to her chamber ; but she 
was unwilling to retire, until she should 
ascertain the truth of Montano's late 
assertion. Having drank a glass of 
water, she declared herself much better, 
and expressed a wish to remain a few 
moments; ''I cannot," she observed, 
*' leave this room, until I assure Don 
Acasto that I am not guilty ; I respect 
myself too much to allow any induce- 
ment to tempt me to corrupt the fidelity 
of a servant, was that servant corrupt- 
ible, which I sincerely trust is not 
Margaret's case ; however, had I made 
such an attempt, I should not reproach 
myself, when I reflect that I am con- 
fined here contrary to religion, to the 
laws of my country, and to my own 
will; but as to that good woman, 
when she offered to conduct me to the 
library, 1 declined the pleasure, until I 
should first obtain Don Philip's permis- 
sion ; and here is Margaret present^ le% 



158 albxena; or the 

her speak, should my veraf ity be ques- 
tioned." 

Moiitano instantly exclaimed, " ve- 
racity! — speak, old dotard! — tell the 
truth quickly." 

" I have little to say," replied Mar- 
garet, as she devoutly crossed herself; 
" what Donna Alexena has related, is 
no more than the truth, and as to mak- 
ins: confessions, God forbid I should 
make any to you, had I any to make." 

This irritated the monk not a little, 
who fiercely demanded, had she not 
informed him, that Lady Alexena was 
acquainted with Lord Mortimer's ar- 
rival in the neighbourhood, and the 
means by which Don Acasto had dis- 
covered that event? namely, by finding 
his lordship's baggage in the inn at 
the foot of the neighbouring hill ; again 
Margaret made the holy sign, which so 
enra.^ed Montano, that had not Acasto 
been present, he would have flung 
his glass at her head ; and in a voice 
of thunder, ordered her from the room ; 
— " begone, you old hypocrite! and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 159; 

no more of your miinimery ; had I the 
power, I should incapacitate you from 
babbling-, by cutting the tongue from 
your head." 

Acasto was now also enraged, but from 
a different motive. His chaplain's indis- 
cretion was the cause : for had he not 
informed Alexena of her lover's arrival, 
thereby holding out strong hopes of 
escape ; he also felt assured Margaret 
had not made the discovery, though 
he knew she had heard that some friend 
of our heroine's had reached the inn 
on the moimtain ; but on reflecting 
that Lord Mortimer had fallen into the 
hands of Belzo Carracci, and his ban- 
ditti, his anger subsided, as he made 
no doubt, that his rival was, in a very 
few minutes after, a lifeless corpse ; and 
wishing to crush Alexena's hopes at 
once, he observed, that Margaret's 
imprudent communication gave him 
little uneasiness, as a fortunate circum- 
stance saved him the disagreeable task 
of punishing the intruder. A few 
day? since^ he was captured by Belzo 



130 ALEX.ENA; OR THE 

Canacci, that merciless robber, and, 
doubtlesS;, has long since paid the for- 
feit of his life, as atonement for the 
blind temerity which induced him to 
wander into those solitary wilds, with- 
out sufficient force to protect him 
against the outranges of that blood- 
thirsty bandit, who universally sacri- 
fices his luckless captives to the safety 
of his abandoned crew. 

Alexena listened in raptures to this 
detail, which Acasto hoped would have 
had a contrary effect, and the emotions 
produced by excessive joy, were so 
violent, that Don Philip would have 
been quite blind, had he not observed 
them. Indeed, from the commence- 
ment of the conversation, he had nar- 
rowly marked the expression of her 
countenance ; and to his infinite sur- 
prise, discerned more pleasure than 
pain in it. His observations were suc- 
ceeded by sensations of delight, and 
he became infatuated by the idea, that 
Alexena was rejoiced at the destructioji 
of lier late lover. •' Lord Mortimer; 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. ISf 

lias had some strange tie on her gra- 
titude," he mentally exclaimed/' which 
his death has happily removed, and 
leaves her uncontrouled mistress of 
her wishes. May it not be, that she 
already looks on my passion with a 
favourable eye? It must be so. Oh I 
woman ! woman ! most undefmable of 
creatures, that can be thus won by 
cruelty !" His imagination presented 
visions of the most delightful descrip- 
tion, which he fondly encouraged ; and 
Avhen he rose to attend Alexena to the 
door, her gaiety, and the harmony of 
her features, were 



" Confirmatloni itrong 
As proofs of holy writ," 

that she returned his passion, and 
would shortly make him the happiest 
of the happy. 

When the footsteps of Alexena were 
no longer distinguishable, Acasto re- 
turned to the table, and fdling up a 
massy cup for himself, and another for 



162 ALEXENA ; on THE 

his chaplain, he drank to the prospect 
of his speedy marriage, and was hear- 
tily pledged by his worth]/ chaplain. 
Glass succeeded glass — Don Philip 
then had an inexhaustible theme. 
They soon became inebriated, and 
were shortly carried to their rooms^ 
in brutal insensibility. 

CHAP. X. 

"It g'lTes me wonder great as my content. 
To see you here before me. O my soul's joy ! 
*♦•*«****«»*« 

• — _ If I were now to die, 

'Twere to be most happy ; for I fear 
My soul hath her content so absolute, 
That not another comfort like to thi* 
Succeeds in unknown fate.'' 

Otbello* 

vIN Alexena's return to her apart- 
ment, slie embraced Louisa, and then 
sunk, sobbing, on her bosom. " Oh ! 
my dear friend," she murmured, " those 
are tears of joy, which 1 must indulge; 
they are strangers, and are twice 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. IGS 

welcome from the cause. They flow 
from the observations I have made on 
Acasto's manner, who reallv imagines 
Mortimer is dead, which gives me 
doable assurance of his safety. Is it- 
can it — be possible he is with Car- 
racci ?" 

" I sincerely hope he is/' said Louisa, 
" but what proof have we that he has 
been in those mountains? May not all 
this be a fabrication, to try what effect 
such information would have on your 
feelings.'* Alexena admitted the jus- 
tice of this observation, which, in the 
plenitude of her joy, she had over- 
looked, and now became distressed, at 
the idea of having entertained, what, 
on consideration, appeared little more 
credible than an idle dream 

As it was almost dark, Louisa rose 
to procure lighted candles, and found 
on the dressing-table, a billet, which she 
was about to destroy, when the light of 
the fire discovered the address, which 
proved it was intended for Alexena, and 
on examination, found it sealed. Much 



1(54 alexena; or TiiE> 

astonished, she hastily lit a lamp, with 
a flaming brand, and then presented 
^- the note to Alexena, who hastily read 

these words : — 

" Lady Alexena — I have much plea- 
sure in being able to say, that Lord 
Rlortimer is safe under my protection, 
and anxiously entreats an interview 
Avith you this night in the castle chapel. 
Should you grant this request, which 
I trust you will ; secure the door of your 
apartment, and when the clock strikes 
twelve, fearlessly enter the passage by 
the sliding pannel ; a friend will await 
your approach, and conduct you in 

safety. 

B. C." 

It is scarce possible to describe the 
sensations produced by the perusal of 
this note. Alexena pressed it to her 
lips in ecstasy, forgetting by whom it 
was written, though the signature de- 
clared it the writing of Belzo Carracci ; 
but that very circumstance enhanced 
its value, as it removed all doubt, and 



CASTLE or SANTA MAUCO. 16S 

on advising togetlier, Louisa was of 
opinion, that onr heroine shoiihl ven-. 
ture to the chapel. " I make no doubt," 
she said, " but it is Clarissa tliat is dele- 
gated to conduct us; therefore, what 
have we to fear? For my part, I should 
not shriiik, if I beheld the dread Car- 
racci himself." Alexena started at the 
name, as she never heard it without 
emotions, which were to herself un- 
dennabie, and notwithstanding all she 
had heard of his o^oodness, the tales of 
Margaret, and dark hints of Acasto, 
left a strong impression of fear, which 
was encreased by his mysterious know- 
ledge of all the secret passages in the 
castle. However, she resolved to risk 
every thing, and see her matchless 
lover. 

'' There is not another so true on 
earth," she mentally said. " What has 
be not already suffered for my sake? 
Has he not encountered the greatest 
hardships, the most cruel privations ; 
followed me from clime to clime, from 
kingdom to kingdom ; over stormy 



IQQ ALEXEXA ; OR THE 

seas ; through desarts, into dungeons; 
ventured life, fame, fortune, coufttry, 
friends, every thing — rescuing me from 
oppression's grasp, and more than 
once from the jaws of death ? and has 
he not now confided his life to the 
keeping of a robber, terrible from his 
crimes, and for what I — Urged by the 
enchanting hope of saving me from a 
degrading slavery, worse, a thousand 
times vvoi-sethan death. Oh, ^Mortimer! 
yon love me with unbounded confi- 
dence ; take my heart in return, it is 
all I have to give ; but should heaven 
smile, and one day unite us, every 
moment of my life shall be devoted to 
your happiness." Alexena now blushed 
deeply at the idea that her unexpressed 
thoughts conveyed. She found she 
loved his lordship with her whole soul, 
and would willingly resign her life to 
ensure him felicity. Was there any 
thing indelicate in meeting him in the 
castle chapel? Certainly not! as both 
Gbrissa and Louisa were to be wit- 
nesses ; and when every thing was ar» 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 167 

ranged, with a palpitating- heart, sh© 
waited the sullen signal from the clock, 
anxiously counting the minutes of 
dilatory time, and calculating the num- 
ber that must necessarily intervene ere 
she again beheld her Mortimer. 

Margaret shortly after entered with 
chocolate, and apologized for the un^ 
easiness her idle talk had occasioned, 
and mentioned that Montano endea- 
voured to induce her to accuse Louisa 
of an attempt to subvert her fidelity, 
by a bribe; "but I firmly refused," 
continued Margaret, and he then 
threatened to have me confined in the 
dungeons ; however, he is quiet for the 
remainder of the night, as both he and 
Don Philip have been carried to bed 
in a state of drunken insensibility, 
though it is not yet eleven o'clock." 

This was welcome news, as it pre- 
-Vented any uneasiness arising from fear 
of intru:^ion or discovery by those 
"Wretches ; and as the hour glided on, 
Louisa became wearied bv Mar<iaret's 
loquacity, and dismissed her under 



16S alexena; or the 

pretence of hciiig troubled with a hcad- 
aclie. When she had passed the anti- 
chamber^ Alexena assisted in securing 
their door, which they did effectuaJly. 
Louisa then trimmed their lamp, and, 
at length/ the great clock, in slow and 
solemn sounds, tolled twelve. Our 
heroine was greatly agitated ; she list- 
fined attentively — counted the length- 
ened strokes — asked if there was a 
possibility of miscalculating the time — 
cast a scrutinizing glance round the 
dark outline of the chamber — was by 
Louisa's side the next instant, who 
pressed the spring with a firm hand ; 
the yielding pannel retired, and the 
same moment the passage received 
our fair adventurers, who glided along, 
in trembling haste, to the first turning, 
where the kind Clarissa waited. After 
saluting, she requested to know had 
they closed the pannel, and was sur- 
prised on being answered in the nega- 
tive ; she therefore hastened to secure 
it, and then shewed the action of the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 169 

spring, with the means by which it was 
impelled back or forward. On touch- 
ing the movement in the wall, which 
was in its nakire extremely simple, the 
panncl flew into its place with amazing 
rapidity, and the ladies now instructed 
in the use of this valuable secret, were 
led by Clarissa through the passage, 
down a flight of narrow steps, into 
another passage much narrower than 
the former, and which seemed con- 
structed in the wall ; this led to the 
armoury, and into it they were also 
admitted by a moving pannel, where 
Alexena became terrified on seeimjr the 
rusty old suits of mail, long since ne- 
glected, but which her imagination 
animated with the spiritsof their former 
owners, and she trembled so violently, 
that Louisa could scarce support her. 
They hastened through this apartment, 
and entered a very spacious chamber, 
decorated with the likenesses of all the 
Santa Marco family; and as the ladies 
passed rapidly through the centre of 

VOL. II. H 



110 ALEXENA; OR -THE 

the room, the eves of each fi>>ure 
seemed to inquire the cause of theii- 
intrusion, or where thev were rambliiifr 
at such a chili and solitary hour. Hav- 
ing reached the library, they tripped 
along with light and cautious steps, 
as Clarissa informed them, they were 
then directly over Acasto's apartment ; 
from the library they entered the 
music room, out of which they quickly 
passed into a gallery, and it terminated 
in a corridor that led to the great 
stairs; these they hastily descended, 
and arrived undiscovered, and in 
safety, in the hall. 

Clarissa now shaded tlie lamp, as 
they were close to the servant's apart- 
inents, and it also became necessary to 
observe strict silence. From the hall 
they entered a small low chamber ; this 
communicated with the stone passage, 
that led to the tower, in which Alex- 
ena had overheard the conversation 
between Don Philip and Torquo. 
^lere Clarissa paused, and drew forth 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 171 

a key, by whose assistance they were 
admitted into anew range of extensive 
chambers, formerly occupied by the 
troops who defended the castle ; beyond 
these there was a passage of consider- 
able length, which terminated in a 
narrow flight of stone steps, that led 
to a vaulted passage, and at its extre- 
mity there were two ponderous folding- 
doors, which seemed to impede farther 
progress ; but on Clarissa's knocking 
gently, they were instantly opened, and 
they entered the chapel. The lamp she 
carried, cast a faint glimmering light 
round the long dark aisles, and dis- 
covered the receding figure of a man, 
whose nodding plumes swept the low 
jutting cornices, as he retreated under 

the gallery. 

Alexena said, ''That must be Car- 

racci, but where is Lord Mortimer?" 

"He will be with you presently,*' 

replied ClarissBj " if you conceive you 

have fortitude sufficient to support 

•an interview.^* 

h2 



17^ ALEXENA; ORfHt! 

''■ Oh ! yes, yes." exclaimed our hero- 
ine, " 1 am all impatience." 

Louisa smiled. Clarissa nodded sig- 
tiificantly, which covered Alexena's 
face with blushes ; she had involuntarily 
betrayed a secret, by the violence of 
her feelings, but of which she had no 
cause to be ashamed. They had then 
approached the altar, where Clarissa 
said, Beizo had orderetl her to remain 
until Lord Mortimer's arrival. '' Let 
us stand close to the holy sanctuary," 
she whispered, " and pray for Heaven's 
protection, as we cannot employ our 
time better, until the moment of your 
lord's approach." 

In a few minutes the organ sent 
forth one sad and melancholy note, 
the leno'thened sound of which almost 
froze the blood in the veins of Alcxena 
and her cousin, who then turned their 
eyes in horror on Clarissa, expecting 
every moment she would assume some 
frightfid shape, as at that instant, they 
believed her a spirit, who was permitted 
to lead them there^ in order to disclose 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. l?J 

some terrible and blocdy crime, Avhich 
Acasto had committed; and conjectured 
the figure which they conceived to be 
thatof Carracci, was no other than (hat 
of her murdered husband Selib. A 
moment's reflection, however, dispelled 
those ridiculous ideas, and thev smiled, 
and wondered how they could be so 
weak, as to allow them to intrude, 
Bnt the solitary hour — the place in 
which they stood — the solemn note of 
the organ — the peltin-^ of the rude 
storm wilhout — and the gloomy appear- 
ance of the chapel within, whicli the 
partial rays of a ^:ingle lamp served 
only to render more hideous — llie 
slight glimpse they had of the warlike 
figure of Carracci, flitting through the 
shades of the distant arches, then 
almost lost in misty obscurity, together 
with the chill damp air of that long- 
ne;Li'lectod spot — all these united, we 
should think, ought to be a sufficient 
excuse for the momentary terror which 
assailed the bosoms of those two agi- 
tated und unprotected females ; who. 



174r ALEXENA; OR THE 

from tlie nature of their situation, had 
every thing- to dread, from the cruelty 
or malice of a man, to whose power 
they were subject, and from whom 
there was no immediate prospect of 
escaping. 

Alexena, when somewhat composed, 
asked the meaning of the organ's dis- 
jnal sounds. 

" It is a signal that Lord Mortimer 
approaches," said Chirissa. 

Again, another and a more length- 
ened note was wafted along the lofty 
aisles, and the next instant the organ 
presented a sheet of livid fire ; each 
barrel seiit forth a blaze, while the re- 
peated sounds of the bass, roared like 
the thunder of destructive cannon. 
Our heroine caught the arm of Louisa, 
while Clarissa, pointing to the gallery, 
said, — *' He comes !'*^ 

They looked, and saw the pillars 
which supported the instrument, rend 
asunder, and Lord Mortimer, attended 
by Carracci, emerge from their bosom. 
The latter motioned to Clavissa^ to leatl 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 17o' 

Louisa to a dislance; his lordship ob- 
served them — flew rapidly along the 
gallery — descended the stairs, almost 
without touchiuir them— and in an 
instant was at the feet of his Alexena ; 
she sighed deeply — saw him not — but 
sunk into his expanded arms, over- 
powered by emotion. Mortimer clasped 
her to his heart ; the warm kiss of love 
restored her^ and their tears of mutual 
joy were mingled. Then might his 
lordship truly say. 



She is mine own ! 



And I as rich in having such a jewel, 

Ap twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl, 

The water nectar, and the rock's pure gold. 

As she gave him a short recital of 
all she had suffered since their parting 
in Bayonne; and in return, with wonder, 
learned, that she had been accompanied 
by him to the very castle gates. 

The wonderous Carracci was not 
forgotten ; he received from both, their 
most warm acknowledgments ; and 
the first bright tints of dawn had dis- 



176 ALEXEXA : 017 THE 

pelled tlip darkness ero the lovers 
thought of separating-. But to remain 
lon«>Tr in the chapel would be hii^hly 
im})nRlei)t; and after Belzo had 
given his word they should shortly meet 
airain, they unwillino^ly parted. Lord 
Mortimer following- his predaceous 
guide; while Akxena, supported by 
Clarissa and her cousin, slo\^ly re- 
traced her meandering way to her so- 
litary chamber. 



CHAP. xr. 



Can such things be. 



And overcome us like a summer's cloud, 
■Without our special wonder." 

Shakspearj. 

Vf E must now beg leave to lead our 
readers back to the crimson chamber^ 
where we left Lord JMortimer, the first 
night of his captivity. 

When Monfrane retired from that 
apartment, his lordship rose and ex- 
amined every crevice of it, and having 
secured the entrance with several arti- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 177 

<>!es of heavy furniture, sought his bed, 
where busy thought drove sleep from 
his weary eyes, Carracci was connected 
with every idea, and he vainly endea- 
voured to develope the cause of that 
robber's kindness ; kindness unsought, 
wnlopked for, and unexpected. All 
was yet a mystery — he was treated as a 
state prisoner; though Belzo promised 
his assistance, and had exacted an oatli 
from his troop, that they would destroy 
Acasto, and rescue Alexena, there was 
something unde(inab!y strange in this ; 
yet the elegant address, suavity of 
manner, noble figure, and animated 
countenance, of the freebooter, secured 
Ids lordship's good opinion ; indeed, so 
mucli so, that he was ashamed of the 
caution he had used, in securing the 
aperture to liis room, (for it could not 
be called a door,) particularly, when 
Monfrane endeavoured to enter the next 
morning. lie then apologized for his 
want of confidence, at which the latter 
smiling said, " Had any injury been 
iatendcd, his lordship's barriers would 

« 5 



1 

178 alexena; or tjzz- 

3iave been useless, as there were i^xn: 
other private entrances ; two in the 
walls, one in the floor, and one in the 
ceiling; through which the entire of 
the banditti might have entered, with- 
out disturbing his repose." 

Albert was then summoned, and felt 
happy on seeing his lord in safety^ 
and began to entertain a better opiniort 
of his late ferocious acquaintanceso 
When his lordship was dressed, Mon- 
frane informed him^ he had orders to 
shew him to the breakfast-room, where 
Carracci waited, and in a few moments, 
he was conducted through those pas- 
sages, which had excited so much 
wonder the night before, into the hall 
next the banqueting chamber of the 
troop, where they found four iron 
chairs, and Rourke already fastened 
in one of them. Lord Mortimer and 
Albert sat on two of the others, at 
Monfrane's request, and in a moment 
after, the vaulted roof of the hall rung 
with the signal whistle. Instantly, the 
chairs sunk through the fioor^ and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 179 

rested on a large marble table, in a 
chamber undenieatli, \\hich was hand- 
somely furnished, and where Carracci 
and the good priest, whom his lord- 
ship recognized as his friend Zelo^ 
waited to receive him. The former 
hastened to assist Lord Morlimer, while 
Monfrane rendered the same service to 
his lordship's domestics, which was 
extremely necessary, as the moment 
their weioht was removed from the 
chairs, they flew with amazing swift- 
ness into their former positions, and 
closed the cavil y in the ceiling that 
their descent had formed. There were 
six marble steps from the table to the 
floor, inlaid with curious devices, which 
his lordship afterwards examined with 
much satisfaction, and the morning' 
passed in agreeable conversation. The 
chamber they were in, was many feet 
below the surface of the earth, and the 
light of day never had visited it; but 
flaming torches, and an excellent fire, 
dispelled its natural gloom, and substi- 
tuted in its stead their light, heat, and 



ISO ALEXENA ; OR THE 

comfort. Carracci entertained liis lord- 
.ship by giving- him a description of those 
amazing subterranean vaults. "You 
are," said he, " in the dungeons of the 
castle of Santa ?vfarco, though half a 
mile from the building itself. This 
may seem ineredihlc, from the length 
of way you have been couvejed here ; 
but Dofhing is more certain, and I shall 
this day, if you wish, carry you to the 
very central chambers of it, and will, 
probably, be able to gratify you with a 
Qflimpse of your fair mistress, if you 
think you have fortitude to follow me 
through the most horrible caverns that 
ever yet were formed by nature, as- 
.sisted by man's ingenuity ; but should 
you be so Iticonsiderate as to discover 
yourself to ladyAlexena, your life shall 
pay for your temerity, and her misery 
ivill be endless." 

'' Dculit not my discretion,' replied 
his lordship, " lead on, and 1 will fear- 
lessly follow, even was death to assume 
a thousand frightful foruis to scare me 
from my purpose. I will proijiise to 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. }b:l 

he guided by your advice, and faitii- 
fully, nay sacredly, observe the most 
trivial of your injunctions^ if not in- 
consistent with my honour ; and allow 
me to say, nothing could give me 
greater pleasure, than wandering with 
you through the astonishing meander- 
ings of this subterranean world, and I 
shall feel doubly gratified, if you allow 
my servants to attend us " 

*' Oh ! certainly, my lord," said 
Belzo, " if you think they are as fear- 
less as yourself. 

" I never had reason to doubt their 
courage — father Zelo himself has had 
proof of it, and will, 1 should think, 
vouch for their firm and steady con- 
duct." 

" That I will, with all my heart/' 
observed Zelo, '* though I sha'n't be 
of the party to those solitary abodes, 
for I feel no curiosity to revisit them ; 
I prefer a book and a good fire to 
wandering through the gloomy pas- 
sages of the almost endless caverns of 
the castle." 



132 alexena; on mis 

Monfrane was now summoned to 
prepare proper torches for their in- 
tended scrutiny, together with two 
small lampS;, whieh he produced in a 
very few minutes. Carracci then girt 
on his massy sword, and placed two 
case of pistols in his belt. His lord- 
ship, Monfrane, and the servants^ were 
also armed, and after each had sworn 
to keep whatever he should see, a pro- 
found secret, they began their inspec- 
tion of those long-neglected abodes of 
gloom and darkness. The chimney- 
piece in the breakfast-roorn was made 
of black shining metal, to each side of 
which were fastened two large brass 
rings ; through these, Carracci and 
Monfrane conveyed a rope, and then^ 
assisted by the party present, who 
had to use their utmost force, they 
succeeded in drawing out the chim- 
ney-piece, grate, &c. into the floor^ 
disclosing, to the innxpressible sur- 
prise of his lordship, a door beyond 
the chimney, which stood half open, 
inviting them to enter a narrow rocky 



GASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. I§, 



s» 



cliamber, which terminated in a flio-ht 
of ahnost perpendicular steps. This 
his lordship entered — Carracci made a 
signal, by touching a small beil^ and 
in a very few moments, several of the 
troop attended, who pushed the grate 
into its former position, enclosing 
Belzo, Lord Mortimer, and his attend- 
ants, in the narrow cell, the stairs of 
which they ascended with difficulty,, 
and reachod a small platform, before 
a passage, secured by a strong iron 
grating, where the former paused, and 
drew from beneath his cloak a horn, 
with which he made the caverns re- 
sound — and echo answered from the 
farthest extremity. Figures were now 
observable moving through the gloom ; 
in a few seconds, the massive gothic 
door slowly receded, and they entered 
a vanity cave, cut out of the solid 
rock, through which they rapidly 
glided. This passage terminated 
in an oval chamber in which 
were a vast number of vessels, as 



i64; ALEXENA; OR THE 

Jarge as hog'sheads, with small lad- 
ilers placed against (he sides of them. 
'' Stop/ said Carracci, " and let each 
of you jump into one of those cisterns, 
Ihe bottoms of which will sink with 
your weight, and you will then be gra- 
dually lowered by slings, into a cham- 
ber underneath, and from thence we 
will proceed to the castle." In a mo- 
ment they ascended the ladders, and 
then leaped with all their force through 
the hollow sides of the vessels, which 
instantly sunk, not into a chamber, 
but into a cavern of immense extent, 
where they distinctly heard the hoarse 
roaring of a torrent ; and as the reflec- 
tion of the dark red gleam of the torches 
played on the black and rocky sides of 
this vanity oave, superstitious dread 
presented a thousand vague forms 
flitting through the distant gloom, which 
caused undefinable sensations in the 
agitated group, who moved forward., 
in order to ascend a long, rocky flight 
.pf rugged and irregular steps, that led 
io a still more irregular mass of crags 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 185 

— rough, difficult, and uneven, in the 
extreme. Over these they scrambled, 
with much pain and kibour, being 
sometimes obliged to creep on allt' ours; 
during which time they frequently were 
in danger of burning themselves with 
the torches, or extinouishins: them, 
and the latter would have ensured des- 
truction. These horrible vaults, how- 
ever, gradually widened, and the thun- 
der of a cataract, added terrors .to the 
savage scene. In a few minutes, our 
adventurers were able to walk upright, 
and rushed forward with unrestrainable 
impatience — often at the risk of their 
lives, notwithstanding the repeated 
cautions of Carracci ; but here their 
further passage was impeded by a black 
rock, immensely high, and perpendicu- 
larly steep ; it supported the cavern's 
roof, and apparently presented an im~ 
passable boundary. There the party 
paused, and Lord Mortimer turned to 
Belzo, with a look so expressive of in- 
quiry, that the former understood its 
meaning, without its being accompanied 



IS6 al^xena; on the 

by words, and instautly stooped io 
remove a scanty portion of earth from 
the surface of the spot on which he 
stood, and quickly discovered to his 
lordship's astonished eyes, a prodigious 
iron rin^^, fastened in a stone flag. 
This, with Rourke's assistance, he 
raised, and disclosed a flight of stairs, 
the lovvcr steps of which were enve- 
loped in impenetrable darkness, and- 
prevented the possibility of ascertaining 
their extent, or where they terminated. 
Carracci gazed on the yawning abyss^ 
and at that moment, the torch which 
he bore, cast a strong light on his coun- 
tenance, wliich was evidently agitated, 
by sensations that he wished to conceal. 
Lord Mortimer, though disconcerted, . 
made no observation ; but Albert could 
not suppress his fears, and, without 
liesitation, boldly forbade his master 
to venture into that horrible den. — 
*' Why should he not?" inquired Car- 
racci, in a voice that made the latter 
tremble. " Have I not pledged my 
honour for his safety? — Away with- 



GASTLE OP SANTA MAncO. 1ST 

cowardly fears, if any here entertain 
them ; follow me^ for hesitation is 
death/' he said, and plunged into the 
stony bosom of the gulph. Lord Mor- 
timer and Rourke fearlessly followed ; 
but Albertj always cautious, suspected 
treachery, and watched each move- 
ment of his guide, with the vigilance 
of an Argus. One minute was suffi- 
cient to descend those stairs, which 
brought them into a lofty hall ; this 
Ihey crossed, but were obliged to stop 
at a large heavy door, which, with con- 
siderable difficulty, they partly opened^ 
and then, the noise of the water be- 
came tremendous, exciting the great- 
est anxiety to learn from whence it 
came. At lengfh, when this impedi- 
ment was removed, a scene romanti- 
cally terrible, arrested their attention. 
At a few paces farther, there was a flight 
of six steps, cut in the solid rock, which 
were washed by water that fell from 
frightful precipices, elevated, at least, 
one hundred feet above the hall. The 
roof of this part of the cavern was of. 



188 alexena; oe the 

a variety of colours, formed by ihe 
reflection of the light on the petrefac- 
tions and spar, caused by the dripping 
of the water. The foaming torrent 
fell into a kind of natural basin, before 
the door of the hall, and from thence 
rushed, with irresistible impetuosity, 
until it was precipitated over anotiier 
riJge of rocks, which lay a trifling dis- 
tance below tlie steps, and tumbled, 
with the noise of the loudest thunder, 
into the rocky gulpli, that groaned 
as it received its weiirht. There were 
two tripods suspended from the roof, 
which, to Lord Mortimer's great sur- 
prise, v»ere lit, and faintly served to 
ilhmie this rude — this dread scenery, 
Carracci gazed on its rugged deformity; 
but to him its terrors were familiar. He 
smiled on itsfrowningcrags, and pointed 
to the opposite side, which presented a 
smooth upright rock, without any pro- 
jection, on which the roof of this won- 
drous production of nature rested. 

" We must cross this rivulet," said 
Belzo, sportively ; '' and here is a boat 
. ready for the purpose." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. I89 

'" Where?" demanded his lordship. 
" In this creek/' continued Carracci, 
as he pointed out. the little vessel, 
wliich lay lower down, between the 
rocks. Lord Mortimer observed it, and 
shrunk back terrified, as it was not 
much lar<^er than himself. The rob- 
ber's eyes now flashed displeasure, as, 
in a rough sullen voice, he said, " Do 
you doubt my honour? — Say, what 
have you to tear? Do you not ob- 
serve a stronn: iron oTalifisr across the 
torrent, which prevents the possibi- 
lity of our little bark tumbling over. 
She will be carried by the current to 
its edge, and we will push her along, 
with the assistance of the barrier, into 
a small cavity, not now discernible in 
the gloomy distance, and from thence 
there are steps formed in the rock, 
wliicli will lead you in safety from this 
place — the cause of your present fears.'* 
He then unfastened the boat-chain, but 
held it until Lord Mortimer and his 
attendants were seated, then springing 
on board, the vessel rushed, with the 



IBO alekena; or the 

liirhlniiiir's swiftness, towards the irou 
railing ; and as Hiey approached, Car- 
racci used a pole to prevent her striking 
violentiy agaiiist it; yet the shock, not- 
withstanding his utmost exertionj shook 
the grate with such force, as threatened 
instant destruction ; but it was merely 
momentary, and while the boat lay along 
side, her passengers stood up to observe 
the torrent as it fell with hideous din, at 
least seventy feet beneath them, into the 
stony gulph. From that rocky bed, it 
rolled under the draw-bridge, from 
thence into an earthy cave, which con- 
veyed it to the sea, and was lighted as 
it passed, by several lamps, fastened to 
the chains of the bridge, whose feeble 
rays served to show its many horrors. 

" Have we to cross that frightful 
bridge?" demanded Lord Mortim.er. 

" Yes," replied Carracci, '' the rock 
on which we are about to land, forms 
a kind of cave, and through it we will 
pass, and issue at its termination, on 
that structure which will asraiu enable 
US to cross these waters.'' 



CASTLE or SANTA MARCO. 191 

They then landed, and his lordship 
was surprised to see the boat return to 
its former station, without any visible 
assistance. On requiring- an explana- 
tion, Belzo informed him, there was a 
small chain fastened to her keel, one 
end of which was conveyed through a 
cavity in the rock, and secured in the 
hall opposite, where one of the troop 
tlien attended to draw her back to the 
little creek, that had been formed for 
her safety. 

Carracci now led them up a narrow 
flight of irregular steps, and passed 
through a small natural door-way into 
a cave of a conical form, slanting to<- 
wards its extremity, which they descend- 
ed with considerable difficulty from 
its steepness, and from the rock being 
excessively slippery. However, they 
reached the draw-bridge, which liad 
been lowered, and hastily passed over 
its half-decayed planks, to a projecting 
platform, scarce broad enough to ad- 
Bjit of six persons standing together. 



J99 ALEXENA ; on THE 

and from it there was no visible pas- 
saf^e, by which they could advance. 
Here his lordship stood j^azing in mute 
astonishment, admiring the cataract, 
whose spray, however, rendered his 
situation far from agreeable ; and he 
was about to request his guide to move 
forward, when Rourke laid his hand on 
his arm, at the same time pointing to the 
grim faces of several horrible bandits, 
whose almost bursting eyes glared mur- 
der, as they lay grinning and peeping 
through several holes in the cavern's 
dripping roof Carracci observed them, 
and ordered ladders to be instantly- 
lowered, which he had some pains to 
persuade his lordship to ascend ; but. 
the robbers assisted them above, and 
in a few moments, they were all drawn 
througli those nan'ow openings in 
safety. The scene now changed ; a 
gentle acclivity led them to a passage, 
formed by man's ingenuity, which they 
were informed, lay under the glen, 
where the rock stood Ihat supported 
tlie vast castle of Santa Maico. In it. 



KBASTLE or SANTA MARCO. 193 

at reirular distances, there were iron 
gates, fastened to its flinty sides, for 
the locks of which Carracci had a 
master key ; so they proceeded with- 
out interruption into the dunoeons. 
whose gloomy cells lay in every direc- 
tion. Frc.Ti thence they wound among 
an infinite variety of vanity caverns, 
until they reached the cemetery, where 
the bones of the Santa Marco family 
were deposited. Their coffins were 
arranged on large oak benches, which, 
like those they supported, were moul- 
dering into dust, and impressed on the 
minds of our wandering group, the in- 
evitable end of all human greatness. 
There lay the warrior, the statesman, 
the steady friend, and merry companion, 
whose — *' flashes of merriment were 
wont to set the table in a roar." — There 
forms, once beautiful ; but, alas ! 
their sweets had melted in the grave, 
leaving no trace, save a few marrowless 
bones, and a scanty portion of ofl^en- 
sive dust. Their virtues, however, were 
rescued from oblivion, and were inde- 
voL. n. I 



IS4 ALEXENA ; Oil THE 

libly engraven on the hearts of their 
mourning countrymen. Cenotaphs in 
the chapel, briefly recited the splendid 
achievements of those iJlustrious heroes 
'who fell in distant climes; but those 
mementos had long since ceased to be 
objects of public inspection — ceased to 
inspire the neighbouring youth with the 
wish to emulate their virtuous example. 
And the reason was obvious — Acasto 
was then lord over all. 

While they continued in the cem.eter)', 
Carracci was apparently much agitated^ 
and more than once wiped away the 
unbidden tear. His lordship was sur- 
prised, but held such feelings sacred, 
and made no observation until Belzo 
pointed to a cofHn, which, from its 
freshness, could not have been long^ 
tenanted. 

'' There/* said he, '* lies the dearest 
friend of my infancy; it was he that 
first led me through these subterraneans 
— pointed out the path to virtue, to 
happiness; but, alas! how have I 
•trayed; yet let me not disturb Jii* 1 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAHCO, I^J* 

shade, by the repetition of ray heed- 
lessness and ingratitude.'* 

Here a hollow groan seemed to rend 
the coffin, accompanied by an exclama- 
tion of — Heaven have mercy !— 

Lord Mortimer fervently ejaculated 
an amen ! while Carracci looked wildly 
round for an explanation of those 
words, but none there could give it. 
He now paused for some moments, then 
said, let us proceed, and instantly 
rushed forward to the foot of a stately 
monument, which touched the vanity 
ceiling ; Avhen at its base, he drew his 
sabre, and with its point seemed to trace 
the half obliterated inscription, for thft 
apparent purpose of developing its 
obscure meaning ; but the ensuing 
moment proved he sought for a spring 
concealed among its letters, which wai 
no sooner pressed than it burst open, 
with a tremendous noise, disclosing a 
spiral staircase of black marble ; tbii 
they ascended, and at the top found 
themselves inclosed in a hollow column ; 
here again Carracci touched a spring, 

I 2 






1% alexena; or xjic 

which instantly admitted them into a 
spacious chamber^ and the same mo- 
ment the pillar closed with a horrible 
crash; Belzo then cautioned his lord- 
ship and attendants to be silent^ as they 
were in the immediate vicinity of the 
castle chapel, at the same time pointing 
to the further end of the chamber, 
where there was a curtain, which 
reached from the ceiling to the floor, 
and this was no sooner drawn up fhan 
his lordship discovered the organ. 
Carracci then applied his torch to a 
small portion of cumbustible matter, 
which caused that extraordinary light 
that afterwards terrified Alexena so 
much. He then raised a small panneL 
touched, the keys, and the following 
moment was admitted through one of ^ 
its pillars into the gallery of the 
chapel, which he never entered without 
first using this precaution, being con- 
vinced were any of Acasto's people in j 
it, those extraordinary soimds and ap- 
pearances would be deemed superna- 
tural, and deter them from repeating 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 197 

Iheir visit. With all this Clarissa was 
acquainted ; and of course felt no un- 
easiness the night she led our trembling 
heroine to its mouldering- altar ; but was 
forbidden to elucidate the mystery for 
the present, lest some unforeseen fata- 
lity might oe the consequence. 

After his lordship had examined 
every thing worth notice which it con- 
tained, his kind guide conducted him 
into the adjoining chambers; explained 
their several uses; their private outlets 
and entrances ; and for what purposes 
they were originally contrived : from 
thence they proceeded to the armoury, 
banqueting rooms, and library; then 
crossed the hall ; ascended the great 
stairs, and entered a corridor, which 
brought them by a circuitous route, 
into the secret passage, behind the slid- 
ing pannel of Alexena's apartment, a 
part of which Carracci slowly and cau- 
tiously opened, and disclosed to tlie 
enraptured Mortimer the fair object of 
his alTections, reading to her cousin 
I^ouisa ; unconscious of the vicinitr 



J99 alexena; on the 

of such a dear and welcome intruder. 
While his lordship stood gazing, Alex- 
ena laid down the book, and after re- 
minding her companion of the lateness 
of the hour, prepared to dress for 
dinner. " My dear Louisa," she con- 
tinued, '' with what pleasure I should 
make my toilet, vras my Mortimer to be 
one of the party at table; but heaven 
forbid he should ever become an in- 
mate of this house; what would I not 
give to be convinced of his safety; 
though that is a pleasure I can scarce 
ever hope to enjoy ; for, ala.*! how is 
intelligence to be conveyed to or from 
ihis horrible castle; oh! my cousin, it 
is an absolute impossibility." 

^' Well," replied Louisa, with a 
playful smile, " I should never despair, 
particularly, were my lover as true as 
you represent your's to be; poor fellow, 
if he but knew what sighs, what tears, 
what prayers, he has cost you sinceyour 
arrival here, his heart would ache ; nay, 
lie would give worlds to enjoy Abdallah's 
ring for one short hour, that he might 



rAiTLE OP SANTA MARCO. I9ff 

gKJe on the sightless air, ami whisk 
through the key-hole to his sweet love. 
In faith, I fear he would assume soni« 
insect shape, and sip Ihe dewy honey 
of that panting lip; and if so, I kupw 
not where h*^ could find a more deli- 
cious banquet." 

** Fie ! fie ! Louisa, you really mak« 
nie blush/' 

'' Really ! — ah ! my fair cousin, if I 
mistake not, you would willingly hide 
those biuslies in Mortimer's fond bosom ; 
heaven preserve him, and restore you 
to each other." 

*•' My heart says amen to that," ob- 
served our heroine, " and may the 
Almiglity render him happy, should we 
never meet." 

** Amen," reiterated Louisa, " but 
I doubt the possibility of such an 
event; let me see if I could com- 
mand a wish, I really think, 1 would 
trust his lordsliip into the hands of that 
frightful cut-throat Carracci, for I am 
MO strongly prejudiced in the robber's 
favour, that 1 make no doubt, was he 



200 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

acquainted with the eventful story of 
your loves, he would hang Acasto, 
throw the monk out of the window, 
blow up the castle, and restore you ta 
each other." 

Again Louisa beguiled Alexena of a 
smile, who now playfully said, " I 
should not be surprised, if you wore 
next to wish yourself the wife of that 
predaceous captain. What a pretty- 
picture those taper fingers of your's 
would make, sporting in the dark curls 
that shade his brow, or when elegantly 
employed in buckling on his armour, 
ere he went forth to relieve the dis- 
tresscd of their last ducat ; yet, was I 
reduced to the dreadful necessity of 
accepting either he or Acasto, as a 
liusband, I should not hesitate to fix 
on Carracci. He might be reclaimed, 
hut as to the other — oh ! that were im- 
possible." 

*' Doubtless, Don Philip would be 
extremely obliged for this kind opi- 
nion," observed Louisa, '* and you, I 
suppose, say he is as welcome to, as he 



CTAStLE dP SANTA MARCO. 2<)l 

fs deservinj^ of, it; hut. hark! tlie hell 
gives the signal that Mar<^aret will he 
here presently, so let us hasten, lest 
<hat savage monk may eat us instead 
of his dinner. I wish Carracci were 
here, that he might march down with 
us to whet Montano's appetite, with 
>vhom he is already a great favourite ; 
at least it is but fair to suppose so, as 
the latter is most anxious to make the 
bandit a present of a brace of bullets ; 
lie tliinks two leaden eyes would be of 
infinite advantage — would, in fact, be 
an acquisition to the robber, much de- 
sired by both Acasto and himself For 
the truth is, Carracci sees too far with 
those bright crystaline orbs, which he is 
at present in possession of, and the 
former kindly ^Yishes to add about an 
ounce of that heavy metal to prevent 
the possibility of his discerning quite 
so much. 

The party in the passage had anxious- 
ly listened to this conversation; but Car- 
racci, through his impatience to catch 
every syllable, defeated his purpose l:»j 

lb 



!P02 ALEXENA; OR THE 

tlrawin^ bis liand from the spring, 
\vhich caused the pannel to slap too 
with considerable force, and nearly de- 
prived Alexena and her friend of mo- 
tion; they both screamed, and their 
late merriment was exchanged for the 
agony of terror; but, fortunately, they 
knew not from what part of their chan^- 
ber the noise issued, and after a few 
moments reflection, were inclined to 
believe it was one of the doors of the 
adjoining apartment, which had been 
s-hut by the violence of the wind. 

Lord Mortimer remained until Mar- 
fraret summoned them to the saloon, 
then followed Carracci to his retreat, 
and it was nigh eight o'clock before 
they recrossed the cataract, the sight 
of which was sufficient almost to para- 
lyze the stoutest heart, and when they 
aiiain found themselves in the room, 
where they had left Father Zelo, they 
were much in need of nourishment and 
rest, and when his lordship had partaken 
of the former, he joyfully followed Mon- 
frane to his chamber. 



CASTLE OF SANTA J^AHCO. 205' 

From that day forward. Lord Morti- 
5tner had permission to visit the castle, 
and joyfidly availed himself of it. In 
many of his solitary rambles, he recog- 
nized Acasto and his old enemy, and 
fervently prayed for the hour in which 
they should be delivered into the hands 
of justice. Belzo had already >Yritteri 
to his lordship's friends, and had sent 
trusty guides to convey them, in dif- 
ferent dis":uises to the castle, which 
hourly became the scene of riot and' 
confusion. Acasto had collected a 
number of desperate men to guard his 
mansion, and to seize all travellers 
who should pass in the vicinity of it, 
whom he detained until such time as 
he was able to ascertain their name, 
business, and whether they were ene- 
mies or not. In consequence of this- 
outrageous attack on the liberty of 
strangers, many had lost their lives, 
and more had been wounded; none,, 
however, were stripped of their pro- 
perty, except those few who were s*> 



S04: ALEXEV A ; OH THV 

unfortunate as to oxcito Acasto^s par* 
ticiilar suspicion or dislike. 

One evenin;^, on which his lordship 
returned from the castle, quite discon- 
solate, in consequence of not seein"^ 
Alexena, he was met and questioned 
by Carracci, who, in consideration of 
his disappointment, promised him an 
interview with her the followin!]: niiiht, 
on condition that he should have the 
ijnal arrangement of the time and place, 
llis lordsliip could scarce credit the 
evidence of his senses, at this most un- 
expected indu]«^ence, and ag-ain and 
a2;ain thanked Belzo for his many and 
repeated exertions in endeavourini^; to 
Biake him happy. " Say no more,'*^ 
said Carracci, *' or I shall feel ashamed. 
Compose your thouj^hts, and resolve to 
act with steadiness and resolution, 
while I shall, in the mean time, pre- 
pare your mistress, who will need your 
support, together with her own forti- 
tude, to bear, t!ie pain of separation, 
which must necessarily follow." He 
fbcn retired, and hit his lordship ta 



PASTLB OF SANT^A M\1lCO. 505: 

eliitle the lazy aioinents that wore to 
intervene, before the blissful hour in 
which he s!iould again fold his Alexcna 
to his bosom 

Carracci, in the letters he had written 
to Lord Mortimer's friends, stated the 
particular manner in which l^e was 
situated, and impressed the convictioji, 
that nothinii' less tlian the utmost can- 
tioiiand vigilance, would enable him to 
emancipate his lordship and the lovely 
Alexena; whom Clarissa had undertaken 
to conduct to the castle chapel the fol- 
lowing night, to meet her lover — to 
renew their vows of everlastina: con- 
stancy — to mourn over the unforeseen 
events which placed our heroine in the 
power of Montano and his infernal 
master — and to rejoice and praise hea- 
Yen for its kindness, in bestowing such 
a friend as Belzo Carracci. 



^6 ALEXEXA ; OR THE 



CHAP. XL 



If tht midnight bell 



Did, with hit iron tongue and brazen moutli, 
Spund one unto the drowsy race of night j 
If this same were a. church-yard where we itand. 
And thou possessed with a thousand wrongs ; 

Or if that thou couldst see me without eyes. 
Hear me without thine ears, and make reply 
Withont a tongue, using conceit alone, 
Without eyes, ears, and harmful sound of words;. 
Then, in despite of brooded watchful day, 
I would into thy bosom pour my thoughts: 
But, ah! I will not." 

KiKcJoBN. 

?T HEN Clarissa had seen her friends- 
to their apartment, she hastened away, 
and, as Acasto was unwell after the 
last night's debauch, it was almost 
noon before Margaret entered to an- 
nounce breakfast. On descending, our 
heroine found three strangers, whose 
appearance was far from prepossessing, 
but to whom Acasto did not think pro- 
per to introduce her. The conversa- 
tion was chiefly about the ramparts^. 
parts of which were rather in a ruinous 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 207 

state, and of intended alterations, pre- 
paratory to Don Philip's marriage, 
which he asserted was an event he 
looked forward to the speedy consum- 
mation of, 

" I cannot conceive," observed Mon- 
tano, addressing Acasto, " why you 
have been so long inattentive to your 
happiness, as I will confidently affirm 
the fault is not ladyAlexena's; indeed, 
she even values your wishes so liighly, 
that, I am certain, she would feel as 
little reluctance in bein"' led to the 
altar, hy you, this day, as in a month 
hence/' 

*' Oh ! I believe you," said Acasto, 
with a sneer ; " but I cannot exactly 
say I understand the meaning of the 
compliment you so good-naturedly in- 
tended for us both.'* 

*' Nor I, neither !" exclaimed Louisa, 
but please understand this, Alexena 
de Guzman will willingly perish, rather 
than wed that wretch who would insult^ 
or suffer her to be insulted, at his own 
table." 
/ 



563 AT.EXENA ; OR THB 

Alexcna blushed deeply ; her feelings 
were dreadfully shoeked at the insult 
offered in the presence of strangers, 
and held down her head to hide the 
starting tears, without makin*>" any 
reply, while Pvlontano, that brutal^ 
shameless selfish, loathed beast ; that 
slave of savages ; felt — I know not 
what. Could it be, that a woman'^s 
tears, a lovely, innocent, beautiful wo- 
man, whom he had injured, abused, in- 
sulted, maltreated, and would have 
murdered, for an assassin's fee — could 
it be, that those tears of her's, shed in 
the presence of others — dra'.vn from 
iier agitated bosom by his unfeeiing^^ 
expressions — awakened sleeping re- 
j-norse? or was it, that he now felt, for 
the first time, that a triumph over help- 
lessness, served only to render him des- 
picable in the eyes of those strangers ? 
be it what it may, he blushed ; but his 
^as liot ihe blush of conscious inno- 
xzence. It was not that divine emblem 
of purity ; it was the burning fire of" 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 209 

a guilty conscience, that blazed for a 
uiotnerit on his visage, theti faded into 
the yellow sickliness of deadly rage — 
rage begotten by the idea, that he even 
fell in the estimation of his villanons 
associates, by encrcasing the distress 
of that sex which he was created to 
sooth, to cherish, and to protect. The 
observation of Don Philip encrcased 
his confusion ; so much so, that he wag 
unable to reply to Louisa's pointed sar- 
casm, and the former, tliough evidently 
enraged, also remained silent. In fact, 
the feelings of all present were now 
painfully embarrassed ; but the monk, 
■who had rapidly regained his mental 
powers, with a languid laugh, in the 
imitation of which fiends v/ould fail, 
said, he begged pardon for his un- 
timely jest, and should he be so fortu- 
nate as to obtain forgiveness, he would, 
in future, carefully avoid matrimonial 
subjects. Alexena now rose to with- 
draw, but before she retired, overheard 
Acasto say, in low, dark, and broken 
sentences — " Montauo, follow iwo. to 



210 ALEXEUA; OR THE 

the secret chamber of the south tower, 
as soon as our friends depart, and I 

shall there communicate end of 

this triflinsr this niirht 

Alexena's chamber Do you 

observe , see Hugo ...... I am 

resolved on it." — Here his voice was 
lost in a murmuring whisper; but our 
affriMited heroine had heard enou^;h 
to make her wretched^ and with diffi- 
culty, tottered from the room, sup- 
ported by Louisa. When in the 
Eolitade of her apartment, she commu- 
lacated her fears, and the cause of 
i!iem ; but it was not in the power of 
her friend to point out the means of 
cither escape or safety, as Torquo was 
acquainted with the private passage, 
and all the adjacent chambers. To 
inform Carracci of their distress was 
i^-npossible, except heaven should send 
him to their apartment; and they were- 
yet consulting-, when Margaret entered, 
whose countenance was the picture of 
woe. 



CASTLE OF SANTA WARCO. 211 

*■' What is the matter, good Marga- 
ret?" said Louisa. — '' You are, I fear, 
unwell." 

•' Oh ! matter enough. Donna. There 
have been several prisoners brought 
here by my lord's savage people; 
anions: whom, there is a beautiful 
young girl, who, unfortunately for her- 
self, was dressed in man's apparel, and 
in a scuffle that took place between her 
lover and the monk, the latter, not 
knowing her sex, shot her." 

'* Gracious heaven! is it possible?'" 
shrieked Alexen.a. 

''Alas! it is too (rue," replied Mar- 
garet ; " Montaiio endeavoured to drag 
her to one of the towers, where pri- 
soners are confined, supposing she was 
a young lad, from whose terrors he 
might extract information ; but of what 
nature, I am ignorant. While they 
were yet struggling, a noble cavalier 
rushed to her assistance, and pushe#^ 
the monk backward, who tripped, and 
fell over some loose stones. This was 



212 ALEXENA; OttTUE 

-the fatal moment ; forMontano, in his 
rage, fired at him, and killed (he lady/* 

'' Unfortunate young creature !" said 
Louisa ; " is she dead ? — gone beyond 
all hope ? — Does not there yet exist a 
chance she may recover ?" 

" None >Yhatever, Donna ; she is 
already as cold as marble, and her 
remains arc lying on a table in the hall, 
exposed to the rude and unfeeling gaze 
of the brutal soldiery.*' 

*' Margaret ! Margaret V fauUered 
Alexena, *' you have rendered me very 
wretched ; but \\hile I yet have the 
power, let us hasten to the hall, and 
bear the body to this chamber, where 
it shall remain until it receives the last 
sad rites." 

'' From whom ?'* mournfully de- 
manded IMargaref, " is it from her 
murderer?" 

" No!" replied our heroine^ " I shall 
myself read the service, and this night 
her remains mav be inferred in the i 

cem.etery of the chapel. Come, I say^ 
iet us hasten to the hall, and save tbc 



:) 



GA.STLE OF SANTA MARCO. ^13 

body of the hapless stranger from far- 
ther insult." 

" My dear Donna, you talk wildly ; 
bless your heart, the cavalier is stand- 
ing close by, guarding her body \^i(il 
his bloody spear, and holding her clay- 
cold hand. His eyes are burning with 
rage and revenge, so none dare touch 
the body, nor approach within his 
spear's length. Heaven knows where 
this sad business may end ; for the 
monk is now in deep consultation with 
Don Philip, in the secret chamber of 
the south tower, plotting some direful 
mischief." 

*' It is immaterial to me,'* replied 
Alexena ; I am resolved to see this 
slrano'cr, and offer my services ; there- 
fore, if you decline attending me, I 
shall <»o alone." 

Margaret, finding her determined^ 
assented, and led the way, while our 
heroine slowly followed, leaning on 
Louisa. On descending the stairs, they 
SAW the mourning cavalier, leaning 



214: ALSIEM ; OR THE 

over tlie remains of the unfortunate 
victim of Montaiio's blind rage ; but 
as his back was towards them, it was 
impossible they could distinguish his 
features. A solemn stilhiess reigned 
around, uninterrupted, except by the 
sound of the distant laughter of the 
soldiery, who were regaling them- 
selves after the fatigues of the day. 
When Alexena reached the hall, she 
tyas ahuost paralyzed, on beholding two 
or three dead bodies, horribly lacerated ; 
and would have hastened back to her 
chamber, had she not been too near 
the stranger to retire; who, on hearing 
her footsteps, and those of her compa- 
nions, quickly turned. — Louisa scream- 
ed — " oh! my brother!" — Alexena — 
'* my cousin Bolerno!" — and the fol- 
lowing instant they were both folded to 
his bosom. 

After the first transports had sub- 
sided, he pointed to the corpse, and 
burst into tears ; " alas !" said he, 
behold this lifeless form ; in vain en- 
deavours to rescue her from Don 



. CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2 ii 

Philip's marautlers, I became his 
captive. She was crossing the moun- 
tain, attended by two stout guides, 
whose bodies you see here, when a 
number of those villains rushed from a 
thicket, and surrounded her, on whicli 
they fou*>^ht, and fell fighting bravely 
in her defence. 

During the contest, she several times 
called on some person named Carracci, 
and it was the wildness of her cries drew 
me to the spot, where I was almost 
jnstantly captured. 1 believe Montane 
has not recognized me, though we 
struggled for some moments, previoui 
to his firing that shot, which has de- 
prived this lovely girl of life. But as 
to where she was going, and for what 
reason she assumed this disguise, I 
know not, and it is likely it will remain 
a secret for ever, (at least in this world, 
as her attendants being both killed, 
prevents the possibility of a discovery.'^ 
Alexena then recpiested he would bear 
the body to their chamber, which he 



216 alexena: or the 

agreed to do, and they followed witk 
tearful eyes; on reaching' the great 
landing place, he proceeded straight 
forward, instead of turning to the left, 
and after wandering through several 
galleries, entered an apartment, the 
door of which stood half open, there 
Louisa discovered they had mistaken 
their way, and in endeavours to regain 
it, became more bewildered. Margaret 
had left them in the hall, and might not 
aeain seek tliem for several hours: this 
added to their perplexity, and Bolerno 
was so much fatigued, that he was un- 
able to bear the body further, therefore 
laid it on a couch, in the chamber in 
\vhich they then were. In this dileroma 
we must leave them, and return to 
Montano, who immediatrlv after Alex- 
en a left the breakfast room, went out 
on the ramparts, to await the arrival of 
a party, who had been sent to recon- 
noitre in the neighbourhood of St. 
Sebastian. In less than half an hour 
he saw them approach, and on their 
entering the court-yard, observed the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MATICO. 2 17 

extreme terror of the supposed youth, 
who lie instantly resolved to detain, as 
an attendant on his own person, be his 
rank or quality what it might. On 
questioning- the stranger, he perceived 
her confusion encrease, which gave 
birth to the ridiculous idea of her being 
a spy of Lord Mortimer's ; no sooner, 
therefore, did he conceive this, than he 
determined to carry his captive into 
one of the prisons of the keep, and 
strictly examine her as to that important 
point ; but her fears caused her death, 
as the moment she expressed her un- 
willingness to accompany him, he 
seized her by the collar, which led to a 
discovery of her sex. At this eventful 
minute, Bolerno shook the monk, up- 
braiding him with his brutality; then 
threw him on those stones, mentioned 
by Margaret, which led to the fatal 
catastrophe. When Montano saw the 
stranger fall, he retired, muttering ex- 
ecrations against his want of steadiness; 
but without making any further at- 
tempt against Bolerno, who would have 

VOL. II. K. 



218 ALEXENA; OR TH« 

killed him on the spot, had he not 
been prevented by the guards. But 
the moment he disappeared, Henri bore 
the body to the hall, and on the soldiers 
and domestics gathering round, he 
snatched a spear from one of them, 
with which he swore to annihilate the 
first who should presume to utter an 
indecent jest, or offer the slightest in- 
tiult to the body. The weapon being 
stained with the blood of her murdered 
attendants, increased the terrors of old 
Margaret, who had been a witness of 
this scene. 

Montano, in the mean time, sought 
Acasto, who then waited in the tower, 
debating with himself, whether he 
should or should not confide the secrets 
of his bosom to his chaplain's keeping; 
he knew him to be an agent willing to 
commit any crime, no matter how hor- 
rible ; but if he once employed Mon- 
tano, he would then be in his power; 
which was an alternative he wished to 
avoid. Here, however, his meditations 



CASTLB OF SANTA MARCO. 219 

were interrupted, by the entrance of the 
subject of them. 

" Montano/' said Don Philip, '' 1 
wish to have your advice, how I shall 
overcome the obstinacy of Lady Alex- 
ena: 'tis evident she dislikes me, and 
without some powerful incitement, to 
be produced either by the effects of ter- 
ror, or fear of dishonour, she will never 
consent to be my wife; and although I 
might now actually avail myself of her 
helpless situation, and compel her to re- 
ceive my hand, yet such a measure could 
not insure my happiness; and was 1 to 
appear in the world again, how would 
it be possible to conceal our present 
proceedings. That Englishman would 
demand vengeance at the foot of the 
throne; and 1 have too many enemies 
to risk such a trial. Her brother is in 
my power, and was it possible to in- 
duce her to accept my hand, he could 
be easily removed. — You understand 
me ?—" 

The monk nodded significantly, and 
Acasto thus proceeded : — " But you are 

k2 



f20 alexena; or the 

aware, that unless Donna Alexena pub- 
licly avowed she became my wife with- 
out compunction,, I could not enjoy a 
single ducat of her fortune, nor a crosvn 
of the immense revenue which Don 
Diego, Velasco's uncle, left him at his 
death. Now it is also evident, that 
Louisa has increased her dislike; I 
therefore wish to have her removed, 
and on consideration, think it were 
more merciful to give her to the grave 
at once, than let her linger in the 
gloomy torments of a noisome dun- 
geon; the longer she continues about 
the person of Alexena, the more dif- 
ficult it will be to remove the prejudices 
which she hourly instils into the inno- 
cent bosom of my fair captive. No\y 
what say you to this very night?'* 

. Acasto paused — but the monk spoke 
not — the former tried to summon 
courage to ask the reason, but his 
words were lost in tlicir struggle for 
utterance, and died away in unprofit- 
able sounds. Again he paused, and 
rthe silence was awful! — how to extei- 



tA'STLE OF SANTA MARCO. 221" 

tnlnate a human being, without leaving 
a trace of the horrid deed, was the 
subject of the thoughts of one, while 
the other calculated on what he should 
demand for the successful perpetration 
of the crime. At len^ith, Montano 
said, *' there has been too much blood 
shed here already; 1 like not the office 
which I understand you wish to assign 
me; but " 

" But/w'hat?" impatiently demanded 
Acasto. 

** I think my servant Hugo, with 
Torque's assistance, would be able to 
accomplish it.'* 

"Ah !" exclaimed .Vcasto, who pauped , 
then turned his piercing eye on tlie 
monk, and tried to read on his furrowed 
Urow the thcughis of his heart; but 
Montano guessed his intentions, and 
sm.oGlhed it even to the most calm 
placidity — aye — even at the moment 
when he had resolved to commit a 
delestablv^, foul, and horrible murder. 

'* Yes," said Philip, mentally, as he 
wondered at the monk's deep penelra- 



g2^ alexena; or tub 

tioii, '' lie wishes to avoid becoming a 
principal, tliat I may be subject to his 
power; (hat be may be able to sacrifice 
me in a moment to his ambition or his 
interest; bnt ill defeat his projects^ by 
pretending- i have given over the idea 
for the present ; and yet, Louisa^ this 
night shall be the last of your ex- 
istence. "^ Acasto now addressed Mon- 
tano, and said, "" I have turned this 
matter in my mind, and shall for a 
certain reason defer the arrangement 
for a few days longer; you can, in 
the mean time, think of it, and let me 
Ivnow the result; but not until you are 
rid of those consciencious scruples.** 
Here Acasto could not suppress an 
ironical sneer, which was not lost on 
bis worthy confessor, and the former 
then continued : " What is to be done 
■with the body of that youth that fell by 
your hand this morning?" 

" I am vexed at that unlucky inci- 
dent," replied the monk, " and shall see 
him decently interred." 



CA3T1.E OP SA>fTA MARCO. 223 

" He should be much obliged to you,'* 
observed Acasto ; " but I desire you 
may curb that fiery temper, as it ill 
becomes a prop of our Holy Church." 

Again Montano was disconcerted, 
and with an ill-feigned laugh, endea- 
voured to cliange the subject. Don 
Philip, however, enjoyed his embarrass- 
ment sometime longer; then dismissed 
him, in order to dress. 

When he had retired, the former 
summoned Torquo, who he commanded 
to dismiss the prisoners that had been 
captured that morning, and after dinnei' 
to assist the moijk in burying the re- 
mains of the lad then Ivinq; in the hall. 
Torquo observed, that Donna Alexena 
had removed the body to her own 
apartment ; at least, so Margaret had 
informed him, and that the stranger 
had assisted in bearing it there. Acasto 
was excessively enraged at this circum- 
stance, and desired Torquo to bring 
the cavalier before him instantly; but 
became infuriated, when he understood 
that Fernandez, captain of the guard. 



224 ALEXENA: OR THE 



had discliarged liiin a very few minules 
bcfore_, agreeable to his own order, 
which he (orgot had been issued pre- 
vious to his interview ^Aith the monk. 
Torquo represented the impossibility of 
retaking him ; and after a few moments 
lis became reconciled, by reflecting, 
that it was more than unlikely Alex- 
ena would inform an entire stranger of 
her situation, particularly a prisoner^ 
Avithout assistants, or hope of enlarge- 
ment. Acasto^ therefore, dismissed every 
disagreeable thought on the subject, and 
descended to the drawing-room with a 
placid brow, where he had not been many 
minutes, before Montano entered, who 
was not even then reconciled to him- 
self, for refusing to obey Acasto; but 
knew not how to recommence the con- 
versation ; and Don Philip was much 
in the same situation. He wished 
Louisa dead, but had informed his 
confessor, he had given over the idea; 
should he now renew the subject, it 
^vould betray an anxiety, which it were 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 225 

ioipossihle to conceal from the wily 
monk. They had been together several 
minutes before either spoke; their 
thoughts were merciless, stern, and 
bloody, and they feared to give them 
utterance. The cold perspiration of 
dire anxiety stood trembling on Acaslo's 
forehead ; his heart laboured with the 
secret of a black and savage deed ; he 
was bewildered by frightful thoughts; 
and the dark page of his foul intent, 
would have been lost in obscure con- 
fusion ; — rendered illegible, had not 
the murderous blazing of Montano's 
eye re-kindled and illumed it ; one 
moment was sufficient — thev under- 
stood each other — ]Montano stretched 
forth his hand — it was grasped by 
Acasto, who squeezed it — - 

" This night!"— said the latter. 

*vThis very night!" — reiterated tlie 
monk. 

"No idle, womanL-li, fears!" conti- 
nued Don Philip. 

•' None! the thought is unwoithv of 
my former services." 

K 5 



226 alexena; or the 

« Forgive me ! and I am bound to 

you for ever," said Acasto. The monk 

caught his hand — gazed expressively 

on his face; it was enough — that bond 

of their villany was sealed, which was 

to witness against them at that great 

and dreaded day, when we shall all be 

called to a strict account. Just then 

the castle clock struck seven, and Don 

Philip started at the sound; ''In a few 

short hours, Louisa," he said, *' shall 

sleep in death, and nought then can 

disturb you further; yet it may be, thy 

pure spirit will wander through those 

gloomy chambers in search of your 

friend ; perhaps, stalk across my path, 

and point to your gory wounds; what 

then ?— you will be a harmless shade, and 

cannot hurt me; but living, you thwart 

my plans, vex and mock my purposes— 

so die you must! the twelfth hour this 

night, shall ring thy death-knell; once 

done, it were well; — down pity, down 

• — but hiish! here she comes, innocent 

as the unconscious Iamb when led to 

slaughter; and there stands her unfeel* 



«ASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 227 

ing" butcher. Montano, I do hate thee 
now, thou art an ugly devil, yet I am 
blacker still; I can save — I will not, 
must not, cannot— cursed folly ! — where 
are my thoughts wandering? — but here's 
my love ; the cause, source, and spring 
of all my actions; I must speak fair, 
and swear, if there be need, I knew not 
of this morning's bloody work. Ah! 
here's Louisa, I wish she were again 
in her chamber; but no matter, her 
suspicions are lulled, she fears nought; 
then why should I tremble so ?" 

Here Acasto's reflections were inter- 
rupted by the presence of the ladies; 
and he had scarce apologized for the 
lateness of the hour, before Larco 
entered, to announce dinner. The 
same party that had breakfasted, met in 
the dining parlour, and they sat down 
in gloomy silence. Acastowas thought- 
ful; the Monk malicious; Fernandez 
sullen; and the strangers discontented. 
Shortly after the desert, Don Philip 
complained of a violent head-ache. 



SfS jllexena; on the 

and rose to withdraw; whicii was a wel- 
come signal to our heroine, as she was 
then suffered to return to her chamber. 
Montano continued at table with the 
remainder of the company, who drank 
pretty freely ; pouring libations to the 
rosy god until a late hour; but the 
moment they separated, the monk 
prepared to execute his direful mission ; 
and with a pistol in one hand^ and a 
torch in the other, he cautiously pro-^ 
ceeded towards Alexena's apartment, 
where his victim sat unconscious of the 
approach of her intended murderer. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 229 



CHAP. XI I. 



-Come, thick night, 



And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell ! 
That my keen knife see not the wound it makes; 
Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark. 
To cry, hold ! hold ! 

Macbith.'* 

tT UILE our lieroiiie and her friends 
fatigued themselves^ in vain endeavours 
to regain her chamber, Bolerno ac- 
counted for his appearance in the 
Pyrenuees. He had been in Spain some 
months, when business of considerable 
importance called him to Bayonne, 
where he was obliged to go ; and for 
the present give over his fruitless search 
after Louisa ; who he found, had been 
carried off by Don Velasco, Alexena's 
brother; and that neither had been 
heard of since the night of their de- 
parture from Madrid. On his return 
from France, he was captured by 
Acasto's people^ and to his inex- 



230 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

pressible surprise, found his sister in 
the castle of Santa Marco. 

Louisa had frequently been urged by 
Alexena, to relate the particulars of the 
misfortune which placed her in Don 
Philip's power, but that affectionate 
girl could not be prevailed on to inflict 
the pain which her sad recital must 
have necessarily given; however, to 
conceal the facts longer w^ere impos- 
sible ; she, therefore, told her brother, 
that Don Velasco had been a consider- 
able time her favoured suitor ; that she 
had listened to his professions, and con- 
sented to be his wife, without enter- 
tainins: an idea of a clandestine mar- 
riage. Velasco applied to her friends^ 
and was peremptorily refused, in con- 
sequence of which, he forcibly carried 
her ofFj assisted by a number of young 
cavaliers of the city, who accompanied 
them to the vicinity of the castle, wher« 
they were surprised by a number of 
Acasto's marauders, and made pri- 
soners. On the morning after their 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 231 

arrival, Velasco was escorted within 
a league of Fontarabia, and left to 
find his way back to Madrid, while 
Louisa was doomed to suffer number- 
less persecutions of the nature of those 
to which our heroine was then exposed, 
and from the first day of her imprison- 
ment, had not heard of her lover, ex- 
cept the vague account which Marga- 
ret had gathered from unconnected 
sentences dropped by the soldiery. 

Louisa had proceeded thus far, when 
the noise occasioned by the shutting of 
an adjacent door, attracted their atten- 
tion ; and in a few minutes after, Mon- 
tano came forth from Acasto's chamber, 
and hastened along a distant gallery, 
through which they cautiously followed 
him, until they regained the corridor 
that led to their own apartment, and 
where they had not been a moment 
before Margaret entered, accompanied 
by Fernandez. *' Signior," said the 
latter, addressing Bolerno, " I have 
received Don Philip's orders for your 



§32 alexena; or the 

liberation ; you will, therefore, please 
make all possible haste to the draw- 
bridge, lest he should countermand 
them, which, 1 fear much, he will do, if 
he finds you have been conversing with 
those ladies." 

*' For mercy's sake," said Louisa, 
" fly instantly, as in a very few minutes 
you may be too late, and you can ren- 
der us no service while you are here." 

" No ! nor any where else/' observed 
Fernandez." 

Bolerno nodded, significantly, to his 
sister, who felt the value of the cau- 
tion, and made no further observa- 
tion. He then led her to a distant 
window, where he most solemnly con- 
jured her to be unremitting in her at- 
tention to Alexena, whose liberation 
he confidently looked forward to, and 
was about to explain the reason, when 
Fernandez became so impatient, that 
(hey were obhged to separate; the pain 
of which we shall pass over in silence. 

When they were somewhat com- 
posed, JMargaret, who had remained, 
reminded them it was time to dress; and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2S5 

tliey had scarce finished their toilet, 
ere tiie bell summoned them to the 
drawing-room, where they found Acasto 
absorbed in those reflections, from which 
their presence had awakened him. 

On their return to their chamber, 
after dinner, they were surprised to 
find the fnrtiiture had been changed. 
Light and handsome chairs were sub- 
stituted for the old and heavy moth- 
eaten ones, and the entire seemed 
uew-modeiied. There were several en- 
tertaining books, of various authors, 
scattered on the tables, with drawing 
implements, and a few very fine land- 
scapes, which increased their wonder, 
and rendered them somewhat anxious 
to know to whom they were indebted 
for such valuable gifts. After they had 
inspected those new-found treasures, 
Louisa ben:i?ed to read one of the books 
to Alexena, who felt much obliged, 
and the subject being an agreeable 
one, they perused it with considerable 
satisfaction. Having read to each other 
alternately, they were not fatigued, and 



234; ALEXENA; OH THE 

after supper, continued to pursue the 
story with increasiuf^ interest ; so n^inch 
so, that the castle clock tolled twelve, 
before they were aware of the lateness 
of the hour. There was yet a few 
pages to finish, and Louisa gently 
wrested the book from our heroine, 
that she might ascertain in what man- 
ner it concluded, when her attention 
was attracted by a kip.d of rustling 
Boise, which seemed within the apart- 
ment. After listening some time, wilh- 
out hearing a repetition of it, they 
carefully examined every corner, par- 
ticularly nigh the door, and sat down 
again ; but Louisa had scarce touched 
her chair, which was opposite the pan- 
nel, ere she, to her inexpressible terror, 
beheld a human eye blazing through 
it, burning, and beaming on her with 
excessive brightness. She became as 
motionless as the woodpecker, when 
infatuated by the eye of a rattlesnake ; 
and Alexena, who observed her wild 
and palid look, without being able to 
ascertain the cause, cast a scrutinizing- 



CABTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2S5 

glance round the chamber, and also 
became horror-struck, on beholding, 
not the eye, but the arm, of a man, 
hangiiig from one of the pillars next 
tlie door; tise hand of which was 
placed on that of an emblematic figure 
of safety, that stood in an adjoining 
recess. 

'•^ Gracious heaven!" said Alexena, 
in a whisper, " what can yonder arm 
mean ?" Louisa heard her not, as she 
was attentively watching- the pannel, 
from which tlie eye was, in a few mo- 
ments, withdrawn, and — oh, horror ! — 
the muzzle of a pistol introduced in its 
stead. She saw it, but was transfixed ; 
her lips moved, but they produced no 
sound. Alexena did not observe her, 
being attracted by the arm, whose 
hand grasped that of the bust,, which 
it had no sooner done, than the diair 
that supported Louisa fell to pieces^ 
and she dropped at full length on the 
floor. The same instant, a bullet 
struck the distant wall, and the cham- 
ber was filled by the smoke of the 



S36 alexena; or thk 

murderous weapon, which heaven ren- 
dered harmless, though it terrified our 
}]eroine to that degree that slie shrieked 
many moments without intermission, 
and several had elapsed before she had 
power to raise her insensible friend^ but 
even then^ not having- strength to sup-^ 
port her, she fell from her feeble hold 
on the floor. Alexena was now incal- 
culably wretched, and her distress was 
augmented by hearing footsteps in the- 
passage ; but they were those of tlio 
inonk, who waited to ascertain whe- 
ther his aim had proved fatal, and 
en seeing Louisa continue insensible, 
retreated to his chamber, to rejoice 
over the sum he conceived he had 
secured bv her death. 

When all again was silent, Alexena 
raised her cousin, who, with much dif- 
ficulty, she placed on her bed, and w'as 
compensated for all her terrors^ by see-' 
ing her gradually revive. As soon as 
Louisa could articulate, she explained 
the cause of her fainting, yet had not 
beard the report of the pistol ; but 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 237 

'the cla'r having fallen so critically, 
-attracted their attention, Avhich they 
had scarce touched, before it rcsunned 
its former shape, and on examination, 
proved to be constructed on springs, 
which communicated Mith the bust, 
being- conveyed from it under the floor. 

*' It is now evident," said Louisa, 
" that we are protected by some person 
within the castle, who has resolved to 
save us from the murderous tyranny 
of Acasto, and this accounts for the 
chano-e of furniture. I suspect Fer- 
nandcz is that fric^nd ; if so, he could 
favour our escane, and I am resolved 
to use every inducement that is likely 
to have influence with him." 

Alexena assented to the necessity of 
the measure, without entertaining the 
sliijhtest idea of its success : but she 
wished to encourage the hopes of her 
cousin, as they were likely to prove an 
antidote against despair, and apparently 
entered into all her wild schemes for 
liberty, without making one observa- 
tion against the impracticability of ex- 
ecuting them, 



25S ALEXENA ; OR THE 

After two o'clock, they lay down on 
their beds, without undressing, having 
first earnestly entreated Almighty pro- 
tection, and rose next morning, pale, 
agitated, and unrefreshed. On de- 
scending to the breakfast parlour, Don 
Philip started from his seat, almost 
petriiied by amazement, on seeing 
Louisa, v/ho Montano informed him 
he had shot quite dead ; but on ob- 
serving the significant looks which 
the ladies could not avoid exchang- 
ing, he, with consummate art, placed 
his evident perturbation to the uneasi- 
ness, he said, he could not avoid 
feeling at the apparent indisposition of 
both ; but his surprise was trifling, 
when compared with the monk's, who 
had now entered the room, lie doubted 
the evidence of his senses, and for 
several minutes, actually believed he 
beheld a spectre. His blood thickened 
with terror ; his eyes were distended ; 
his breathing convulsive ; his frame 
paralyzed ; his knees smote each other; 
and the cold dew of fear trembled on 
his brow, until he heard Louisa speak ; 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. SS9 

but then, her voice had the effect of a 
talisman — he cursed his folly^ and was 
''' himself again." 

" Her escape is unaccountable, I 
must have wounded her, and that 
severely/' he mentally said, " if so, 'tis 
out of the power of medicine to save 
her, and she has only escaped instant- 
death to die in torments. The ball was 
poisoned by a most deadly drug, and 
her paleness says, it has ah-eady began 
its work of destruction ; but, Alexena 
is equally pale ; therefore, I must have 
failed; no matter, when I try again, I 
shall use my faithful dagger, and there is 
no avoiding that. Well, Louisa, you 
shall have a week's respite, and now for 
some plausible tale to drown suspicion, 
that I knew aught of this foul attempt; 
but, is it not time enough to make de- 
fence, when a man's accused ? certain- 
ly ; however, I will be ready with a few 
suppositions, if called on ; for, as to 
my having any knowledge of the trans- 
action, oh ! that's quite impossible." 
Thus did Montano ironically review 



SiG ALEXENA ; OR THE 

the recent attempt, and felt no remorse 
at Ills infamous cruelty; on the contrary, 
he looked forward to the repetition of 
it with nsalicious joy, and, with his 
deadly thoughts, already immolated his 
innocent victim, though he had re- 
solved not to execute his savage pur- 
pose, until her suspicions were lulled, 
and she again rested in fancied security; 
but Don Philip thought quite differ- 
ently ; he suspected the monk had no 
intention to murder 'Louisa, and that 
some powerful inducement had urged 
him to spare^her ; he, therefore, deter- 
mined to perpetrate the horrid deed that 
night himself, as it was likely she 
would sleep sound, after her recent 
fatigue'; and^ having thus resolved, he 
shortly after retired to his study, and 
ordered Torquo to attend him ; but 
^here he had net been many minutes, 
until he sent permission to Alexena, 
to walk in the court-yard, or on the 
ramparts, if she thought proper ; and 
that Signiora Louisa might accompany 
her. Our heroine was much surprised 



CaSTLE of SAXTA MARCO. 24i 



aJt this induli^ence ; but both gladly 
availed themselves of it, and in the 
course of their rambles, ascended a 
watch tower, which commanded a fine 
view of the sea, surrounding- coast, and 
the castle ; there they continued almost 
two hours, during which time, they 
made many observations on the im- 
possibility of escaping from their pri- 
son, without the consent or connivance 
of some of Don Philip's people. From 
the tower, they proceeded to examine 
> every thing worthy attention, and be- 
fore the shades of evening fell, were 
weak with fatisrue. On returninn: 
to their chamber, Margaret signified, 
*' it was her lord's pleasure, they should 
dress with particular taste that day, as 
he momentarily expected the arrival of 
several guests. He desires," she con- 
tinued, '* that you will appear in your 
richest robes ; and Donna Alexena, 
you are to wear all the fine jewels he 
sent you ; don't neglect to obey him, 
for if you do, he will insult you before 
VOL. n. li 



2i^ ALffXENA ; aR THE 

those strangers, and, perhaps, turn yon 
from the table." 

" I am very unwilling to comply vfith 
those commands/' observed Alexena, 
*' but, it is Tain to contend, as our 
tyrant is resolved to exact compensa- 
tion for the walk Miih which he in- 
dulged us this morning " 

** Yes," said Louisa, " and sent us 
out, merely, that the air might revive 
us after last night's alarm." 

The idea of that dreadful circum- 
stance, almost reduced them to despair, 
as they had no means to prevent a re- 
petition of such nocturnal visitors, and 
it was evident, that the life of Louisa 
had been aimed at, for some particular 
reason,of which neither could form any 
fair conjecture; however, being obliged 
to reconcile themselves to the necessity 
of appearing at dinner, they began to 
dress, and in compliance with Acasto's 
commands, Alexena chose a white 
sattin robe, fancifully trimmed round 
the bosom, with a train of purple velvet, 
beautifiilly embroidered ; her waist was 



•CASTLE OF SA5TTA MARCO. 24^ 

encircled with a zone of brilliants, 
while a tiara of diamonds confined her 
black hair, to which her polished brows 
-added lustre. 

*' I had not an idea," said Louisa^ 
*' that those jewels were so very pretty ; 
but, it is evident, their beauty is bor- 
rowed from the fii^ure they were in- 
tended to adorn." Our heroirie blushed, 
but did not reply ; and after the second 
bell, both descended to the saloon, 
where they found only Don Philip and 
his confessor. On their entrance, the 
former arose, and led Alexena to the 
tl in in 2:- room : his countenance was 
dressed in smiles, and he seldom or evef 
was so attentive ; but his attentions 
were too pointed, to be otherwise than 
distressing ; they inflicted torments on 
her whom they were meant to please; 
and when he found her inattentive to 
his protestations, his agitation betrayed 
the pain her evident disgust excited. 
While the visage of Montano was 
undefinable ; triumph, revenge, joy^ 
anger, and discontent, followed each 

L 2 



,344^ ,ALEXEN,A ; ©n TKE 

other in sucli rapid succession, tliat, li 
was -utterly impossible to say, by which 
he was actuated ; and^ in those mo- 
ments, Louisa was tortured by his 
dark insinuations, into a belief, almost 
amounting' to certainty, that it was he 
^vho had fired the shot the preceding 
niijht. Alcxena's charms outrivalled 
the queen of beauty's ; they were irre- 
sistible, and it is impossible description 
cculd do them adequate justice. Don 
Philip beheld them with the eye of a 
miser, who is fearful of losiui^ hiis 
treasure ; and he resolved to remove 
JLouisa, who was evidently inimical to 
Jiis wishes ; and as one, whose advice 
she observed with scrupulous ex- 
actness. 

About an hour after the ladies had 
retired, Margaret * attended in their 
chamber with coffee, and after she had 
setit on tlie table, said, *' a number of 
stranirers have just arrived, but whether 
they are prisoners cr not, I cannot say ; 
much confusion reigns below ; and I 
was obliged to get Torquo to cany t». 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARtO. SIS' 

huadle of dry fag-gofstoyoiiranti-cbam- 
hev, as these nights are so cold and' 
chill, unless you had a good fire^ vo^i 
must be very uncomfortable." 

''I entreat/' said Alexena, '* you 
will go for the wood, and dismiss Tor- 
qno ; he will he angry at being detain- 
ed, and I shall he in agony while he 
retnains so ni2:h/' ' 

" Oh ! Doj'.naj there is no fear of him, 
lie is i.i excellent humour, or he would 
not have carried the wood, particu- 
hirly when you recollect his shoulder 
is very badly hurt, from falling down 
stairs last night ; I assure you, he can- 
not move his right hand, notwitli- 
standing he contrived to hobble her« 
with the faggots, because I told him, 
you would be obliged to sit without a 
fire if he did not." 

" Well, I feel much obliged/" ob- 
served our heroine, "^^ but, good Marga- 
ret, do dismiss him, and should we 
want any thing, we will go to your 
apartment for it." At this moment, the 
Siounds of distant and tumultuous 



246 alexena; on the 

laughter roiled through the deserted 
corridores, and atmost shook the castle. 
Alexena \vas now considerably alarm- 
ed, and before Mai'garet retired, sought 
an explanation. 

** Be not alarmed, dear Dcnna, those 
are the centinels that have just been 
relieved, who their companions are 
welcoming : I saw the day when such 
boisterous mirth would not be suffered 
"wilhln those walls, but times are 
strangely altered. Don Philip seems, 
to have no power over his unridy 
houshold, or is insensible to their ex- 
cesses, and we are likely to have fine 
doings below this night, as he has given 
them a few flaggons of wine to enter- 
tain the strangers, who, from what I 
have seen, are little better than those 
who brought them here.*' 

" And who did bring them 1" inquir- 
ed Louisa. 

" My lord's soldiers, Signiora, who 
are the most abandoned set of wretch- 
es on earth. When I went to seek 
Torquo, to carry the fire wood, I was 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARSO. 247 

obliged to go into the hall where they 
now are, and there the savages were 
tonnenting a cavalier, wjio I never 
saw equalled in beauty. One begged 
to know was he hungry ; a second^ was 
he dry; a third, was he in love; a 
fourth, was he sleepy ; and so he wjrs 
teized by them all. To fh^ir questions, 
lie replied by contemptuous looks, and, 
it is well if they don't murder him be- 
'fore Don Philip is intbrmed he is in the 
castle." 

" For heaven's sake, fly, and tell 
Don Aeasto, he is in danger," saiil 
Alexcna, " lose not a moment, lest you 
may be too late." 

" I dare not. Donna, as my lord is 
now caroasini>: with the friends he 
expected to dinner ; but, I will try and 
prevail on Torquo, to save him from 
their fury, should he really be in dan- 
ger." Margaret now retired, and Louisa 
then secured the door of their 
chamber, and drew a heavy table 
across the pannel, in order to create 
alarm, should any person attempt t© 



fiS AT.EXENA ; OR THE 

enter l^y tliat passag'e ; but, Alexena 
observed, *' tliey had reason to believe, 
Acasto and the monk were too 
much eiig'a.q;cd, b}^ the arrival of the 
strangers, to tliinkof tliena ; and advised 
thej should instantly retire to rest; 
the former wilHnj^ly complied, and after 
they had soliciied Heaven's protection, 
undressed, and went to bed, having 
first trimmed their lamps, and set thein 
on the hearth. 

When Don Philip gave his captives 
permission to walk on the ramparts, it 
was for the purpose of adding^ to the 
tatignes of the preceding- night, that 
they miglit sleep sound ; for he was 
aware, the^ had not before seen the 
courts of the castle, except in then- 
passage from the draw-bridge, and 
knew they would examine every tower 
and projection about them with pecu- 
liar interest. '* That, '' said he, " will 
divert their attention, and assist my 
pan-poses ;" and he judged correctly, 
for they had been but a very few 



CASTLK OF SAN'TA MARCO. 249 

minutes in bed, ere extreme weakness 
sealed all their faculties in deep sleep. 

In the course of that day, Acasto 
mentioned his intention to Torquo^ who 
was unable to comply with his wish, 
from the pain of his arm, which was 
powerless ; but willingly consented to 
accompany him, and assist in disposing- 
of the body, after he had deprived it of 
life. Having' arranged every thing re- 
lative to the bloody business, Acasto 
met Torquo, a little after twelve 
o'clock, at the foot of a private stair- 
ease, that led to the pannel, with the 
secret of which that old villain was ac- 
quainted, and who had conducted 
Montauo to it the preceding night. 

A few moments previous to their en- 
tering the chamber, our heroine was . 
awakened, by a loud,, shrill, and wild 
^vhistle, which was succeeded by a low 
moaning uoise ; in an agony of terror, 
she called Louisa, but to rous(3 her 
was almost impossible, and after re- 
peating the attempt twice, she desisted. 

hile she lav trernblini;- in terror, tlie 
I, 5 



250 alexena; on THE ^ 

pannel was cautiously removed, and the 
foUowing instant, the lamp's feeble 
rays discovered the lengthened shadow 
of a man on the floor, who advanced 
towards her bed, but, when within a 
few paces, remained a moment motion- 
less, as if listening ; shortly after, he 
turned towards the aperture, moved the 
table, and beckoned to an assistant, 
who approached ; she then heard 
Acasto say, " they sleep sound, do you 
retire and close the pannel, while I 
close in everlasting sleep, the eyes of 
Signiora Louisa ; should you hear 
shrieks, and apprehend alarm, you can 
return in time to prevent confusion. If 
Lady Alexena consents, there is little 
more to be done, if not — to the cell next 
Velasco's." 

*' Sure you told me all this before," 
said a voice, which Alexena recognized 
as that of Torquo, " strike home ! — let 
the blow be sure ! — make as little noise 
as possible ; and before 1 go, ascertain 
which of the beds she is in." A cis to 



CASTLE GF SANTA MARC». 251 

complied, and first examined Alexena's, 
who shut her eyes, and breathed hard, 
as if in sound sleep. He hastily dropped 
the curtain, and with quickness raised 
his lanthorn over the other, where his 
"victim lay, tranquil and unconscious of 
approaching' death. A glance was 
sufficient for Acasto, who then softly 
retreated, and in the same lowwhisper, 
communicated his discovery. " Louisa 
is next us/' he said. '' That is fortu- 
iiate," replied the other. — '' Feel for 
her heart, and I wish you a steady 
hand. It grows late, and there is much 
to be done, so no musing — despatch 
her quickly." Torquo now retired ; 
but was recalled for the last time, and 
after some further indistinct whisper- 
ing", our affi'ighted heroine heard the 
fatal pannel resume its position, and 
saw Acasto draw nigh, grasp his sti- 
letto, and lift tlie hanging drapery. , 
She now endeavoured to scream ; but 
extreme terror deprived her of utter- 
ance ; her tongue was as motionless as 
hei' body ; and she lay watching th« 



252 ALiiXENA ; Oft THE 

relentless villain, who had then passed 
his hand along the bed-clothes, and 
felt for Louisa's heart ; but it l)eat so 
gently, that aln?.ost a nninute elapsed 
ere he discovered it. There remained 
little else to be done ; her life was not 
worth a moment's purchase. Acasto 
pressed his knee to the bed side, to 
give force and elasticity to the medi- 
tated blow, gmd raised his arm to 

strike. Nature could no more 

Alexena groaned — the assassin started, 
and impatiently turned to ascertain the 
cause, and that instant his throat was 
grasped by a hand as cold and as pow- 
erful as the bony one of death. His 
Fight was blasted by a spectre inde- 
scribably horrid ; its height was gigan- 
tic; it figure, lank and bony, covered, 
vvilh long black hair; its face, decayed 
and putrid ; its eyes glared like glow 
worms ; its temples were bound with a 
*bloody handkerchief, which seemed to , 
sparkle in livid flames ; maggots crept 
forth from the foam which surrounded 
its mouth, and sported in its eye-brows; 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 253 

its breath was hot and pestilential; the 
hands and feet, armed with Ioni»; nails ; 
the waist surrounded by the raw hide 
of an animal, and the remainder of 
the body naked ; one hand was armed 
with a short red-liot iron ; with the 
other, it clasped the almost strangled 
assassin ; then, with a yell which shook 
the castle, it stamped his pale fore- 
head with the fiery metal, and dashed 
him, shriekins:, on the floor. The 
monstrous phantom then shook his 
• dagger over him, in a threatening pos- 
ture, gave a second yell, more terrible 
than the first, boilnded against the ad- 
jacent wall, whose solid stone-work 
vent asunder, and received him wiiliiri 
its bosom. 

Louisa started from her sleep, on the 
first appearance of the spectre ; but 
instantly fainted, and its second cry 
recalled her to life. Alexena remained 
torpid with horror; she had witnessed 
the entire of the recent scene ; and 
v/hen the apparition vanished, her fears 
were renewed by the expected entrance 



§54 alexena; on the 



ofTorquo; but his shrieks were also 
distinguishable, and Acasto had yet to 
suffer another horrible rencounter; for 
the moment he awakened from the 
trance to which his fears had reduced 
him^ he saw the pannel move, and 
staggered towards it, for the purpose 
of availing himself of his servant's arms, 
as he was unable to walk, without the 
greatest difficulty ; then judge his ac- 
cumulated horror, on beholding the 
gjiastly form of a female — a dagger 
sticking in her side, from which the 
blood seemed to flow afresh ; in the 
])assage behind her, Torquo extended 
at full length, his torch blazing beside 
him; and, in the distance, the collossal 
form of a black knight, grinning hor- 
ribly, with his sabre raised in a threat- 
ening posture. Acasto saw, groaned, 
and again fell senseless. The female ap- 
proached the beds ; a door flew open 
close to thatof Alexena, tln^ough wirich 
she passed, and then shut with exces- 
sive violence. Again it opened, and 
Torquo appeared, pale, agitated, and 



©ASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 255 

^almost convulsed with terror. He lifted 
Ihe body of his master from the floor, 
who slowly began to revive, but the 
former not having strength, was obliged 
to drasr him from the chamber. Aijain 
the pannel closed, and many minutes 
elapsed before our suffering heroine or 
Louisa found the power of articulation. 
The latter, however, left her bed, and 
crept into Alexena's, where she had 
not been a moment, until they were 
asrain alarmed by a rustlinij noise at 
the door, which a large, rough, and 
shaggy dog forced open, and shortly- 
after, jumped upon the bed, to their 
^reat terror. Fear, however, was suc- 
ceeded by joy, when they heard a low, 
plaintive voice call — " Lion ! — Lion 1" 
but Lion would not stir, and in despite 
of Alexena's struggles, he licked her 
face and hands. She, fortunately, re- 
cognized the faitliful animal, and chid 
him gently, until Clarissa entered, and 
pulled him from the bed ; then our 
heroine became angry with herself for 
her recent terrors, on finding that Don 



536 ALEXENA; OR THE 

r\Iiguers sister was the idcMitical ap- 
j)arition that had passed through the 
chamber a few niiiiuies before, and who 
Iiad terrified Acaslo so much. She was 
attended bj a pretty peasant girl, with 
a tray of refreshments and cordials, 
\vhich Carracci had ordered, who was 
greatly alarmed, lest her appearance as 
a spectre, might have been attended 
by falal consequences ; but on Alex- 
ena's mentioning the hairy savage, 
Clarissa became terrified, and said she 
could not account for it otherwise, tlian 
by supposing Providence had sent some 
dreadful messenger to deter Acasio 
from his bloody purpose. " But i think," 
she continued, '' that you may calcu- 
late on one certainty, which is, that 
Don Philip will never repeat his horri- 
ble visit, and you have reason to be 
thankful to heaven for its peculiar 
kiucIViess, in sending Carracci to your 
assistance, wlio, by some extraordina- 
ry means, became acquainted with 
his intentions, and adopted that stia- 
tigem, which alarmed both so much. 



CASTXE OF SANTA MARCO. 257 

Lord Mortimer is with Beizo at pre- 
sent, in the subterranean chambers, 
deliberatina: on what will be most likely 
to ensure your future safety. His ser- 
vant, Rourke, is there also; and as I am 
a great favourite with Lion, he has 
been induced to follow me here, where 
I intend to remain durino; the niarht." 

Clarissa now secured the pannel 
w^ith a small iron, which she had 
procured for the purpose, and fhey 
then conversed until the return of day; 
but when Lion became restless, Alcx- 
ena was greatly alarmed, lest liis 
whining should be overheard, and lead 
to a discovery, the result of which 
would be inevitable destruction. Cla- 
rissa was, therefore, obliged to retire 
much sooner than she would otherwise 
have done ; but left onr heroine and 
Louisa, if not perfectly composed, at 
least confident that Carracci was zea- 
lously watchful, and, if necessary^ 
would sacrifice his life to insure theio 
safety. 



2j8 ALEXEIf a : Oil THE 



CHAP. XIII. 



Ere the bat hath flown 



His clolster'd flight ; ere to black Hecate's summoa!, 
The shard-borne beetle, 'with his drowsy luian, 
Hath ru'.ig night's yawning peal, there shall be done 
A deed of dreadful note." 

Shaksfeare. 

At v.as past two o'clock in the lifter- 
noon before Margaret made her ap- 
pearance with breakfast ; but apolo- 
gized for her delay, by saying she could 
not steal a moment from Don Philip's 
chamber, who was so extremely ill, that 
a phj'sician had been sent for. '' He 
lias been in a state of delirium the 
entire of the morning," said Margaret^ 
" and Father Montano says it is a fever, 
brought on by a severe cold. Torquo 
is much in the same situation; Fernan- 
dez is absent on particular business, 
and confusion seems the order of the 
day. The soldiers are drunk, and are 
squabbling with the servants; Williams 
has pounded two or three of the most 
ungovernable into a jelly, and if my 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 259 

lord is not better in the evening, I fear 
there will be murder committed. Larco 
is the only domestic in the castle that 
can be depended on, or is any thing- 
like a Christian ; but he is always 
mopini^ about those solitary rooms 
like a i;!iCst, and I am certain, if Don 
Philip Jinds him in the vicinity of this 
chamber, he will make one of him in 
good earnest.'* 

'* What can he po!?sibly be about V' 
demanded Alexena, evidently alarmed. 

'' 1 know not. Donna ; but you may 
rely on it he is not mischievous, and as 
to you, I am certain he would serve 
you with all his heart, if opportunity 
offered. I met him just now, and he 
desired me to caution you, to keep your 
chamber all this day, or at least until 
such time as Fernandez returns. In- 
deed, I almost forgot, that Montano is 
to call on you with a message from Don 
Philip, to the same effect, as he is 
aware, the soldiers have acted verv , 
badly those some days past." 



SCO alexeva; or TiiU 

*'Then, why not punish them?" in- 
quired Louisa^ " or turn them from his 
service." 

• "'/The latter he has resolved on," re- 
plied !^!nrgarct/' when Fernandez can'^ 
procure others." 

Here they were iiilerrnpted, by a"- 
loud knocking at the anti chamher, and 
Margaret hastened to ascertain the 
cause. When she was gone, Alexena-' 
said, " this is the monk, who comes for^ 
the purpose of learning how far >yg 
are acquainted with the occurrences of 
last night ; therefore, conceal every 
circumstance v^hich may induce him 
to conceive we know aught of it ; aad 
Acasto will be convinced we are pro- 
tected by supernatural agents, wliich 
should he once firmiy believe, nations 
would not induce him to repeat bis late 
alrocious attempt, lest it n)ight prove 
fatal. You can evade his questions, and 
confuse him, by soliciting an explana- 
tion of the reasons which has led him 
to imagine we were disturbed last 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAllCO. §64 

night ; that is, in case I am right in my 
conjectures, and that he has actually 
come for such a purpose." Alexena 
was perfectly correct; the monk had 
been sent expressly to hear their ac- 
count of the recent transaction, and (0 
learn whether they knew the extent of 
Acasto's intentions. On his entry, he 
endeavoured to read their thoughts, by 
a deep scrutinizing look — but they 
were prepared, and he vyas defeated. 
Their minds being perfectly collected, 
were proof against his most wily strokes 
of cunning ; and though his efforts 
to obtain his desired information were 
admirably ingenious ; yet, the vacant 
stare of Louisa, or the wondering gaze 
of Alexena, deceived this father of de- 
ceit ; and, in the course of their con- 
versation, the former archly inquired^ 
*' had he been wandering the preceding 
night? I suppose you have," she 
sneeringly said, *' and while on your 
ramble, determined to bestow your 
fatherly bcncdiclion on us — your daugh- 
ters ; but found the lazy colts un\\illin«,' 



263 ALEXEXA ; OTl tKE 

to admit your reverence ; nor could 
your most earnest prayers, prevail on 
the iron-hearted rogues, to allow you 
to steal even one glance." 

Thousrh Montano knew Louisa 
mocked him, he yet felt pleased, that 
Acasto had not been discovered ; but 
threatened to confine her in a dungeon 
for her ininertinence, and then hastened 
to Don Philip's chamber. As he tra- 
versed the south gallery, he had time to 
reflect on the late extraordinary occur- 
rences, and became almost convinced, 
that Acasto had seen a spectre, or was 
deranged. ''If the latter," he said, 
" Torquo must be mad also ; if the 
former, it accounts at once for the 
ladies not knowing any thing of the 
matter; but the marks on his forehead 
vrere never placed there by a shadow ; 
there is treachery in the castle, and I 
will find it out." Influenced by this idea, 
he hurried to his friend's apartment^ 
where he relieved his mind, by as- 
suring him, that his visit to Alexena's 
chamber, was entirely unknown ; and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAECO. 233 

that both her and Louisa were totally 
unconscious of any of the dreadful cir- 
cumstances attending' it. 

The moment Acasto had regained 
his chamber, he sent Torquo for the 
monk, to whom he related with minute 
exactness, each particular circumstance, 
and dwelt, with horror, on the descrip- 
tion of the dreadful spectre he had seen ; 
but the pain of his head was for<^otten, 
until his steward besran to ^urse the 
hour in which he had accompanied him. 
*' My bones," said the old ruffian, •' are 
reduced to an olio ; the marrow, blood, 
and splinters, all jumbled together; and 
my shoulders are reduced to jelly ; but 
I would rather be pounded in a mortar, 
than have another interview with the 
lady Clarissa." 

*' Who ? who ?" demanded Acasto, 
in the utmost agitation. 

" Donna del Harco, I affirm ; and 
exactly as I left her, under the rock 

of -r 

" Hush, hush !" said Montano ; 
while every joint trembled. *' Do you 



2u4: ALEXENA ; OR TK^ 

not hear a moaning noise in the adjoiir- 
in*^ corridor?" 

"' No/' — replied Acasto, who then 
grew deadly pale ; " I trusty it is only 
the wind." 

*' Let us pray/' observed the monk." 
" No mockery, I beseech you/' 
fiiultered Don Philip, " lest we call 
down the immediate ven£:eance of 
heaven ; Toftpio retire, and order 
i^Iargaret to rise, and send refreshments, 
as my confessor will remain with 
me the remainder of the night." Torquo 
reluctantly obeyed, and with difficulty 
hobbled from the chamber; while 
Montano joyfully acceded to Acasto's 
wish, as he vYas extremely unwilling to 
encounter the solitude of his own 
apartment. Thus were these aban- 
doned men haunted by the terrors of a 
guilty conscience ; their own shadows, 
or the noise of their footsteps, threw 
them into agony. And so may it ever 
be with the merciless wretch, who 
would wilfully, and remorselessly de- 
stroy the peace of mind^ or daringly 



CAStLE OF SANTA MAnXJO. 2C3» 

rfvise his hand against the life of his 
fellow-being. 

Acasto felt considej'able pleasure on 
beholdinnr the first tints of returning* 
day, as they, in a great degree, dispelled 
the vapours with which fear and dark- 
ness had oppressed him ; and on re- 
flection, was not displeased that Louisa 
yet lived ; but her he could not think 
of without horror, and determined 
never to permit the renewal of the 
attempt against her life. Having thus 
made a kind of compromise with his 
conscience, he ordered the physician 
to be paid handsomely on his arrival, 
and dismissed, as he resolved neither 
to admit, or be »seen by him. 

Fernandez returned early the follow- 
ing morning, and restored order in the 
castle; but Don Philip was unable to 
leave his apartment, or was unwilling 
to do so, until the wound on his tem- 
ples should be quite well. During the 
period of his confinement, which was 
some weeks, he had many long con- 

YOL. II. M 



'266 alexena; or the 

* . ' ' 

ferences with the monk, and several 

couriers, who were constantly em- 
ployed in conveying- intelligence to and 
from INIadrid ; many strangers had 
been brought prisoi^ers to the ca'-tle, 
' but with Acasto's heallh, returned the 
persecution of our heroine, who the 
former, for some cogent reason, re- 
solved to sacrifice, if she persisted in 
refusins: to become his wife. Louisa, 
at this time, observed numbers of work- 
men constantly employed in putting 
the fortifications in the best possible 
repair, with all other preparations that 
are necessary, where a garrison intends 
to make a desperate resistance; and 
informed Alexena that she had little 
doubt of the government having re- 
solved to punish Acasto for his many 
and repeated outrages, but whom he 
determined to resist. The idea of 
being exposed to all the horrors of a 
regulair siege, inflicted no slight pain 
on the susceptible mind of Alexena, 
while the number that must necessarily 
fall in the conflict, with the consc- 



OASTLE or 9A!fTA MARCO. 



oaT 



quences of (lie probable rcsaltj rendered 
her miserable, and she watched the 
progress of the works with anxious 
terror, devoting- ahnost an hour of 
every evening to the inspcciion of what 
had been done during the day. When 
every thing had been completed, and 
the workmen discharged, she ventured 
to the rvimparts, attended by Louisa, 
and fouii.l new guns mounted, with 
other considerable alterations, which 
rendered tlie castle formidable as a 
fortress : and on reiiainin^ the corridor 
leading to her chamber, the latter de- 
tained her some time, in order to point 
out the peculiar beauty of the land- 
scape, from a noble gothic window, 
which commanded a fine view, and 
overlooked the deep ravine below. — ► 
The sun had gilt, witli golden beams, 
the tovveri'.ig projections of the neigh- 
bouring rocks, and the sm^ll western 
turrets that sat perched on the gloomy 
ramparts, nodding to the deep, which 
lashed, with foamy wrath, their solid 

m2 



268 ALEXENA; OA fUE 

foundations, while the tops of the clifi^ 
reflected the red glare on the tall pine, 
as they rose from the glens^ ])resenirng" 
to the imagination a blazing forest ; 
but adding a deeper shade to the dis- 
tant vallies, from which the growl of 
the wolf, or shrill cry of the chamois, 
were distinguishable. As the dark 
drapery of evening fell fast round the 
scene, the wind moaned through the 
groaning woods, and swept the dizzy 
erases and rustlina: foilaije, v^iih risinij 
impetuosity. The clouds rolled rapid- 
ly along, the lightning glared in (he 
distance, while the siij-hins: breeze stole 
throuiihthe Ion*? deserted oalleiies and 
neglected corridors, mournfully an- 
nouncing an approaching- storm. Alcx- 
ena eiijoyed the scene ; it was suited 
to the tone of her mind ; yet she beheld 
its accumulating terrors with awe, as 
the consequences promised to be fatal, 
particularly in those tremendous moun- 
l.ains, where the weary pilgrim, or lone 
'traveller, are so often bewildered ; 
where they frequency fall headlong- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 



SG^^ 



from some rude cliff, or Avalk^ micon- 
s^ciously, into the lair of the savage 
beastSj rendered furious by hunger, and 
who prey on their agonized forms. 

There was a paUi which led to a 
distant monastery, and wound througli 
the craggy heights : this road attract^ 
ed the altentiosi of our heroine and ' 
Louisa, who watched the gathering 
tempest, and anxiously bent their eyes 
on the f»inty pa'shway, in order to as- 
certain whether any luckless wanderer 
traversed its barren windings, unpro- 
tected from the [)ililess pelting of the 
storm. The rain fell in torrents, and 
pattered, with amazing fury, against 
the stony heads of the proud buttresses 
of Santa Marco. The blue and livid 
liglitning blazed in fiery splendour, 
now partially revealing the dark out- 
line of the mountai;is, next instant 
illuminatins: forests, from which their 
arrowy flames plunged, hissing, into 
the deep morass, or rushed along 
Ihe £:round, scorchinij:, with blii^htinir 
iury^ each tender plant, and prying. 



S70 ^lexena; or the 

with bnmijig gliuices, info the gloomj 
cavities of the projecting clifFs. The 
storm's intpetuosity became irresistible., 
and ^hook the strongest tov.crs. Lar-je 
branches of the adjacent trees were 
rent from tl)e parent sfeip^ and swept 
thrGn<;h the air; cataracts diished, with 
foaming madness, over the hoary and 
Sveather-l^eaten heads of ancient rocks, 
•while every succeeding blast carried 
away a poilion of their late verdant 
covering; the sea birds screamed wiih 
terror; the wolf gnashed his teeth in 
idle rage, and slunk to his den ; the 
fox forgot his cunning in his fears,, and 
gladly sheltered in his earth. All ves- 
tages of nature were lost, while chaos 
and confusion governed the frantic 
elements. Alexena shrunk from the 
contemplation of the scene, deeply im- 
pressed with the idea of that Almighty 
power, which could hush the roaring 
wind into peace, and was mentally 
invoking his protection, when a tre- 
mendous flash illumined the rocky 
path, and discovered a number of 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2Tl 

liorsemeu riding furiously down ils 
projecting sides, and apparently ap- 
proachinj;' the castle. A;>ain they were 
distinguishable, by the lightning'^ 
vivid glare, and again lost in darkness.. 
Loud whistles and shoiUa were inter- 
minii'led with the blast, and were dis- 
tinctly borne by the storin, to the ears 
of our alirighled heroine, who recog- 
nized them, not as signals of distress, 
but rather of rude and boisterous mer- 
riaient. She turned to Louisa, to hetx 
an explanation ; but was answered by 
a voice behind them, wlio said, '^' those 
are the troops of Oelzo Carracci, re- 
luming from plunder," They both 
screamed ; but on observing Margaret, 
were ashamed of tiieir weakness, and 
apologized. 

" Dear ladies," said that affectionate 
creature, " it is I who should beg par- 
don for my unlucky intrusion ; may 
1 hope it is only the storm that has 
awakened such painful fears, and en^ 
o'eased your timid it v." 



272 alexena; or the 

''Indeed yon may," replied Loui«^a; 
"but now allow me to inquire «hy 
you affirm tliat Ihose horseu^jCM are 
Carracc'i'cs band." 

" Because my long- residence heve 
lias made me familiar with the si^i'nal 
whistle you have just heard ; and it is 
i^enorally used, cither to collect the 
troop, or to express their joy on the 
success of some enterprise, such as the 
destruction of a village, murdering' 
some great nobleman, or carrying- off 
a lovely damsel. But, hark ! — oh, holy- 
virgin ! — the castle is attacked by 
them. — Behold their savage counte- 
nances, when partially revealed by the 
fire of their guns. We need not expect 
mercy, if they succeed ; — fly. Donna 
Alexena, fly to your chamber, as you 
may be she , if you remain here." 

Volley now succeeded volley, in quick 
succession ; torches blazed on every 
part of the ramparts, and the cries of 
the soldiery were drowned in the noise 
of the cannon. Curses and shouts 
iilled each interval, while a most horrid 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARVO. £73 

scene of coijfuslon reigned in the liall 
and courts of the castle. 

Alexena hurried to the gallery which 
overlooked the hall, and she had scarce 
arrived, ere she saw Montano rush into 
it, wilh a glittering faulchion in one 
hand, and a torch in the other ; his 
voice rolled like thunder throuirh the 
arcades, as he vociferated — " We are 
attacked by the king's troops — massacre 
all prisoners — and if the enemy scale 
the walls, off with Alexena's head — 
•she is the cause of this misfortune, but 
never shall triumph in victory. Awaj, 
slaves: and hurl destruction on the foe!" 
The monk now ruslied into the thickest 
of the fight ; the castle shook with the 
tremendous tire, while each succeeding 
moment, the wounded soldiers were" 
carried into the hall, iiroanino: with 
anguish. Cries of "victory" now, and 
" treachery" the next instant, were 
clearly distinguishable: and our heroine, 
with Louisa, remained trembling in 
Ike gallery, awaiting the event, No<^ 

M 5 



S74 ALEXENA ; OR T?IE, 

many minutes^ however, had elapseJ, 
before Acasto ordered the f]rin:>: lo 
cease, and (he torches to be extin- 
guished. '' We are fighting the pinn- 
derino; hands of Carracci," he exclaim- 
ed, " and our lights serve to point us 
out. AVhcre is the traitor who first 
gave this false alarm, that I may sacri- 
fice him V One of Acasto's savage 
domestics, named Juan, said it was a 
cavalier, who had been captured the 
preceding- day, and offered to bring the 
culprit before hira. Instantly, shouts 
of revenge, and demands for vengeance, 
were made by the infuriated scldier}^ 
and Juan hastened to conduct his pri- 
soner into Don Philip's presence, while 
Alexena became anxious to see the 
stranger, and if any violence was offered^ 
she resolved to save him, or, at least, 
endeavour to do so. There was, at 
this moment, a deep silence, every eye 
bei? g turned towards the passage that 
led to the dungeons ; but the next, the 
rising murmur of countless voices, an- 
iiounccd his approach. Montano stood 



CA6TLE OF SANTA MARCO. 275 

'with Yulture eyes^ ready to feast on 
hlood ; and the moment the noble cava- 
lier entered, he frantically shrieked — 
"It is Mortimer, by heaven ! down 
"^vith him — hew him to pieces !" Our 
heroine heard, saw, screamed, and 
wildly flew towards the hall. The 
monk now fired at his foe, who stooped, 
and the ball having passed him, he 
snatched np a wooden rail, »vith which 
he defended himself from numberless 
blows that were aimed at his breast. 
Larco and Fernandez were foremost ; 
but an attentive observer would have 
perceived their intentions were not 
hostile, as their swords received the 
repeated strokes which were intended 
for the devoted victim of the monk's 
malice. 

Durin<^ the conflict, Alexena vainly 
endeavoured to reach the hall; however, 
a door at the extremity of the gallery 
preventing the possibility of he- pas- 
sing that way, she desisted in despair; 
but on turning, was snrprised to see the 
ebject of her solicitude enter at the 



^7G ALEXENA ; OR THE 

opposite end, and turn into a corridor 
which led to the centre of the castle ; 
as his pursuers were quite nigh, she 
hastened to mislead them, and met Mou- 
tano breathing revenge; at once he con- 
ceived she had concealed her lover, 
and pursued the direction from which 
he had observed her approach. By this 
fortunate circumstance, the stranger 
gained ground ; but in a few moments, 
he was hunted by an host of assassins' 
led by Acasto, and the cry of *' here ! 
here !" almost deprived our heroine of 
life, who now frantically called on heaven 
and Carracci, as she rushed forward to 
the scene of carnage. The unfortu- 
nate stranger was overtaken in the 
passage leading to the library, and de- 
fended himself with surprising bravery, 
while the humane Fernandez again 
sought to save hira, and it is probable 
he would have escaped, had not the 
furious Montano arrived at this unfor- 
tunate juncture. Acasto was strug- 
gling to ward off the blows, and re- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 277 

peatedly shouted, ''don't slay liim — 
take him alive:" but his injiuictioiis 
"vvere disregarded when the monk 
pressed forward, who commanded the 
crowd not to impede each other, ant] 
(he combat could not last more than a 
few moments. The door of the cham- 
ber was now flung open by Alexena, 
who had rapidly pressed through the 
armoury, for the purpose, hoping to 
save her lover by that means ; however, 
the die v/as cast; Montano cut the frail 
wood, which had so long protected him, 
asunder, but received a violent blow on 
the temples from the remainder, which 
stunned him. Acasto tlien seized his 
sword-arm, and shrieked, "save him, 
save him !" "Hell gape for him !" cried 
the bloody monk, as he levelled a 
pistol, which instantly sped a fatal bullet 
through his head, and he fell lifeless 
into the arms of our fainting heroine. 

"■ Oh, cursed hour !" exclaimed Acaslo, 
'' this is not Mortimer, it is my neigh- 
bour Cerasco, Mho chose to die, rather 



273 alexena; or the 

than beg his life from an old enemy. 
Bear his body to the state chamber, 
and there let it receive every honour ; 
then carry this wretched, insensible, in- 
fatuated girl to her apartment,*' Louisa 
and Margaret now appeared, and our 
heroine was committed to their care, 
while the soldiers bore the body to the 
apartment, mentioned by Don Philip, 
andMontano retired to dress the wound 
he had received, breathing impreca- 
tions against the blind fury which so 
repeatedly led him to the commission 
of murder ; but totally regardless of 
the opinion of those who had been 
witnesses ; and being lost to every 
fading of remorse, he consoled him- 
self with the idea, that the man whom 
he had slain, was obnoxious to Acasto. 
Shortly after Alexena revived, Louisa 
informed her, that Don Cerasco had 
been mistaken for Mortimer, and had 
fallen in his stead; but she found 
it impossible to convince her, until 
INIargaret ofTered to conduct them 
to the room where the body lay; this^ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. S7J> 

however, was unnecessary, as a little 
reflection pointed out the folly whicli 
had led her to believe, the possibility of 
his lordship's being a prisoner, as 
nothing could be more unlikely. Car- 
racci was his friend and guardian, never 
suffering him to leave his cavern^ or the 
castle, no, not for a moment ; yet it was 
strano:e, that he had not entered the latter 
to her knowledge, for the last ten days, 
and it was a circumstance which gave 
birth to many doubts of Belzo's fidelity. 
This night was passed in vain conjec- 
tures as to the cause, and day returned 
without either Alexena or Louisa's 
being able to form any decided opinion 
on the painful subject. Morning 
brousrht with it new cares — new sorrows. 
Acasto, irritated and enraged at the 
events of the preceding night, ordered 
Alexena to attend him in the library, 
where she was oblii::ed to follow Mar- 
garet, accompanied by Louisa. On their 
entering, Don Philip was leaning on his 
hand, his face pale and thoughtfully ex- 
pressive; and they had been in the room 



^SO ALEXENA; OR THE 

some moments, before he was aware of 
liis inattention, but on perceiving- them, 
anolo2:ized, and led our heroine to a 
seat. Montano lay in a recess, extended 
on a sofa, his cowl drawn close round 
his features, through which his eyes 
were scarce distinguishable, and was 
carelessly tossing over the leaves of a 
Ijook, apparently searching for some 
particular passage. Louisa stood ])ehind 
Alexena's chair, while Margaret slowly 
and reluctantly retired. After a painful 
pause, Acasto reverted io the confusion 
of the preceding night ; lamented the 
fall of Cerasco ; appealed to both 
ladies, whether he had not used his 
utmost exertions to save the unfortu- 
nate man, when he believed him to be 
Lord Mortimer ; and then expatiated on 
the continued state of agitation and 
menial suffering, which Alexena sub- 
jected herself to, in consequence of 
grasping the vain hope of again seeing 
her lover; he proceeded by saying', 
" that it was absolutely necessary to his 
own peace, and that of his household^ 



CASTLE OF SAKTA MARCO. 281 

ihai these alarms should be finally 
suppreysed, and that this desirable 
point conid only be effected by our 
heroine's consenting to unite her fata 
to his.'' He concluded this speech 
with an avowal of his passion, and 
many promises of lasting- attachment. 

When he had ceased, Alexena re- 
plied with a firmness which astonished 
all present, by saying, '' that empires 
could not purchase her consent, nor 
tortures extort it ; she could not even 
say, that she felt grateful for Don 
Philip's attachment, as she was con- 
vinced, his every word had been 
studied, and spnuig from views that 
were as mean as they were base ; she 
valued not his resentment, nor did she 
fear death ; her peace of mind had 
been continually preyed on, by the 
conviction, that the life of her friend 
was exposed to every whim or burst of 
•resentment, which influenced a being, 
whose form alone entitled him to the 
fiame of human ; murder and reven^:e 



;582 alexena; or the 

had been his favourite play things ; by 
him reliiiioii was treated with derision ; 
and more than oiice, lie dared to brave 
bis God, at his very altar. He had the 
power, and seldom wanted the incbna- 
tion, to insult her, and never had been 
denied such permission, by the man 
wlio now solicited her hand, and for 
whom slie could not help feeling- con- 
tempt and abhorrence. Her spirits were 
almost wearied out in the detestable 
controversy, and were it not impious, 
she could not only hate her tyrant, but 
beg of heaven to hide her from him in the 
tomb; she cautioned him not to put too 
much confidence in his strens^th, not to 
provoke an offended Deity, to pour on 
liim the via!.; of his wrath ; nor by a 
repetition of monstrous abuses, and a 
cruel, hopeless persecution of herself, 
expose his life to the laws of his offended 
country, and his soul to everlasting- tor- 
ments. " Learn," said she, as she rose 
to withdraw, 'Mearn to fear Him who 
wields the living thunder ; your know- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2S3 

}e^\^re of his Almighty power, should 
awaken you to a sense of those enor- 
mous criuies^ which cry for vengeance. 
Yes; I see your hrow tells }"ou can kill 
my body ; but were 1 ueaci, your domi- 
iiiou ends ; it cannot extend farther. — 
Nay, threaten not ! — Vv lien you send 
your assassin, 1 shall point to my heart, 
and you may then triumph, if you 
wili." 

Acasto's looks were extremely ex- 
pressive during the time he listened 
to Alexena's spirited reply ; but the 
latter part of it having deprived him oC 
every shadow of hope, from gentle 
means, he resolved to resort to harsh 
ones, and to try whether she was proof 
ai>:ainst them to that extent which her 
last words implied. Thus resolved, he 
frowned, and, in a voice that shook the 
apartment, ordered Alexena to stay, and 
hear his final sentiments. Slie, how- 
ever, refused, conceiving he was about 
to insult her with a repetition of his 
late detestable avowal ; but on her 
moving towards the door, lie sprung 



2ti ALEXENA; OR THE 

forwarJ (o prevent her, wlien Louisa^ 
who had not ventured a siii<>le obser- 
vation, now glided between him and it, 
and in a tone tliat bid defiance to every 
threat, ordered him to desist. *' Be- 
hold," !?he said, " this mnrderous dag-- 
s:ei\ which is encrnsted with the blood 
of the martyred Chirissa — advance one 
pace fartlier, and I'll bnry it in your 
bosom ; while, for your confessor, I 
have the pis'ol by which Cerasco 
fell. — Ah! ah! you cowards! can a 
w Oman scare you both ?" 

Louisa seemed inspired ; she scarce 
lonc'hed tlie solid floor ; her soul flut- 
tered on her tonane, lending; it words 
to fri<iht those ruffians, whose strenoth 
•was blighted by her bravery, and she 
was sufi'ered to lead our heroine oi?, 
without farther molestation. 

In less than an hotu', Don Pliilip 
wrote a note to Alexena, and sent it by 
IMargaret, in which he promised par- 
don for her late oflence, and ever^a^^- 
jng love and constancy, should sl.d^ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAHCO. 285 

liless him with her hand ; but if not, 
he vowed his determination of availinii: 
himself of her helplessness, and after 
renderin<;- her miserable, would then 
deliver her into the hands of Montane, 
to be treated by him with all the rigour, 
and all the eruelty, that she was aware 
he knew how to inflict. " lie shall," 
said Acasto, " have full powers to sub- 
due your proud, rebellious, stubborn 
spirit ; yet I will allow this night for 
reflection ; to-morrow decides your fate. 
You are to consider whether it is bet- 
ter to enjoy all the goods of fortune, 
or yield your last sigh in the noxious 
vapours of a filthy dungeon, where 
your beauty shall fade, neglected and 
unpitied; and, at length, sink into an 
obscure grave, unknown, without a 
single friend to shed a tear, or pile over 
your wasted form, the smallest portion 
OtVen of unhallowed earth." Alexena 
read this scroll in no enviable state 
of mind, and, in a short time, became 
so faint, that Louisa endeavoured to 
persuade her to retire to bed ; but she 



286 alexena; or the 

resolved not to let her feelin<is ovef- 
power her fortididc, as by giving them 
unbridled sway, she would deprive 
herself of the po-aibiiity of resisting 
Acasio ; and, therefore, entreated her 
cousin to walk with her on the ram- 
parts, where, she trusted, the air would 
revive her. 

While they continued walking-, one 
of the soldiers approached, from whom 
Louisa required an explanation of the 
cause of the late attack, to which he 
replied, that " the troops of Beizo 
Carracci had fired a few vollies at the 
centinels, as they passed the castle, 
which was returned by them, and short- 
ly after, Acasto ordered Fernandez to 
fire the cannon towards the spot, w hich 
caused the ensuing confusion. It was 
Jnan, ladies, who is always doing mis- 
chief, that led my lord to believe Don 
Cerasco was Lord Mortimer, because 
he had been a servant of his about two 
years ago, and was turned from his 
place, in disgrace, for malpractices. 
Revenge prompted him to take advair- 



XASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 287 

tage of the alarm, and cause his old 
master to be murdered, which, unfor- 
tunately has happened." 

" Had the robbers any artillery ?" 
demanded Alcxena. 

"Oh! no. Donna; it is impossible 
4o drag cannon over those mountains.'' 

•' Then how did Don Philip contrive 
to brinsT those here V 

" By sea, lady, and then hoisted (hem 
on the walls, by the assistance of a 
windlass." 

Fernandez now appeared, and the 
ladies pursued their ramble. They 
strolled on until they reached a small 
grass-grown court, long since disused, 
Avhore they stood remarking the regular 
beauty of the adjacent towers. While 
they yet conversed, a soldier ap- 
proached, and when within a few paces, 
looked cautiously round, then made 
signs that he wished to speak, or com- 
municate something. Louisa advanced, 
and asked what he required. '' I come. 
Donna, to inform you, Lord IModimer 



£88 alesena; or tuE 

has frieiids in (be castle, who have 
adnntted him ; atid if Donna Alexena 
attends tliis night in the armoury, she 
will meet liim there." 

*' How can you convince us of the 
truth?" 

*' I swear by the name of Belzo," 
replied the soldier. 

" I now understand you," observed 
Louisa. 

'' Then you will both be in the ar- 
moury at midnight." 

" Certainly," said Alexena; " but as 
the monk approaches, you had better 
retire." 

The centinel drew his cap over his 
face, retreated with all possible speed, 
and reached a small arched door-way 
that led into an outer court, through 
which he vanished before Montano 
came up, who appeared almost breath- 
less. 

" So, ladies, you have been tam- 
pering with the soldiers, to assist you 
in the old project of escape; have you 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 2S9 

been so monstrous clever as to prevail/ 
and entertain well-founded ho^'ies of 
success?" 

" How much we should feel oblioed/* 
replied Louisa, ironically, '* for the 
interest you always so kindly take in 
our affairs ! Do now, dear father, 
oblige us by taking- yourself off, that 
we may get rid of your most detestable 
company." 

Montano gnashed his teeth, but was 
loo much enraged to reply ; while she 
continued — '' Nay, I beseech your 
reverend impertinence to withdraw, 
and when within that cell, to which, 
no doubt, you are about to retire, re- 
member us in your prayers, and 1 shall 
think of you in mine.''' 

" Perdition seize you, impudent bag- 
gage!'* vociferated Montano, ''I will, 
this instant, toss you from the ram- 
parts !" He then rushed forward ; but 
Louisa coolly drew forth a pistol, which 
she presented at him, and then said— 
" I doubt whether you now recollect 

TOL. II. N 



'230 .alexena; or the 

your threat ; but a ball in the hf a\l 
may refresh your memory, if you have 
already forgotten the purport of it. — 
Say, shall I fire ? ' 

The monk was petrified with amaze- 
ment, and stood Jnesolute, 'vvhile Alex- 
ena remained a speechless observer of 
this scene. Again the spirit of Louisa 
was roused; and, in a voice of com- 
manding dignity, she ordered Muntano 
Ci'om her presence. — She was armed, 
and he obeyed : twice he turned, and 
gazed on her figure; but we must {cr- 
bcar the wish we have to describe his 
countenance : the reader, however, 
already acquainted with his character, 
iXiay form a much juster idea of it, llian 
any feeble attempt of ours could give. 
When he was no longer discernible, 
Louisa's assumed courage fled ; and sli« 
■was so much exhausted by the late effort, 
that she sunk insensible at Alexena^s 
teet, who now forgot her own feiu'P, 
and was about to hasten for as'iistance, 
vvben Don Philip appeared. He raised 
her in hi« arms, and Tfhen respiration 



CAStLBOP SANTA MARCO. 29t 

returned, assisted her to tlic caslle, 
where he ordered Margaret to trei\t her 
with every possible attention, saying, 
he woukl dispense with our heroine's 
presence at dinner, in consequence of 
the indisposition of her friend ; a!id JT 
ever she felt grateful to him, it was at 
that moment ; while he, having- observed 
the expression of her countenance, re- 
solved, if possible, to improve the jjood 
opinion which, it seemed to say, she 
entertained, and shortly after with- 
drew. 

Louisa's illness was neitlier alarming 
nor serious, and after the lapse of a few 
hours, she appeared most anxious for 
the approaching- interview, as there 
was a possibility they mig-ht escape that 
Slight; tlierefore, at the appointed hour, 
they hastened through the mazy wind- 
ings which lay between their apart- 
ments and the armoury. On entering* 
its gh)om, they held tlicir lamps high, 
and waved then-k round, that their lig^ht 
might dispel (he dark [shadows of the 
adjacent pillars, and shew whether 

X 2 



*j;2 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

friends or enemies lurked behind them; 
but though their rays did not peoelrate 
far into the dusky obscurity, yet they 
partially revealed a flitting figure, who, 
on seeing them, instantly crouched, 
and remained motionless. Alexena said, 
"It is Mortimer! — let us advance.'* 
Louisa caught herariTij and whispered, 
''No! we are betrayed; behold that 
gigantic armour to the left ; this mo- 
ment a man has vdided behind it, whonn 
I recos^nize as Huijo ; and as his mas- 
ter cannot be far o{\] therefore, let us 
retire carelessly, that we may lead 
them to believe, we are unsuspicious of 
any intended injury." She then gave 
the lamp to Alexena, and cautiously 
prepared the pistol which had been 
concealed in the girdle f*f her robe; 
but had scarce effected it, before her 
companion screamed, and on turning, 
bhe beheld Juan approach on tip-toe 
with a drawn dagger, whose intent 
being manifest, she instantly fired, and 
he fell. Montano, on seeing this, 
rushed from the opposite side, followed 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 293 

by Hugo, their eyes blazing with crime' 
and cruelty. Louisa now dashed the 
lamp from Alexena's hands, who, being 
overpowered by fear, fainted ; and 
then, availing herself of the darkness, 
fled for her life, she knew not whither, 
while her footsteps were closely pressed 
on by her blood-thirsty pursuers. Her 
only hope was in fieetness ; she fled 
from corridor to corridor; from cham- 
ber to chamber; from gallery to gal- 
lery; up one stair-case and down 
another, until she had traversed a vast 
number of apartments; but, both her 
breath and stren<j:th beini>- exhausted, she 
was obliged to slacken her pace; and 
at length ventured to pause and listen ; 
— all was silence, and she trusted she 
had outran her pursuers. *' Wretched 
Loui?a! they are within a few paces, 
ready to plunge (heir merciless daggers 
into your panting bosom.'' The room 
she was then in appeared to be 
spacious, but the gloom rendered it 
almost impossible to distinguish ob- 
jects. Yet this, she fondly lioped, 

n3 



59-i 



AL2XENA; OR THE 



would prove a favourable circumstance, 
as its darkness slieltered, while its echo^ 
promised to aid her in discovering the 
approaching foe. Her conjectures were 
right, she lieard the cautious tread of 
her hunters, who were ah'eady in the 
chamber ; but, after a low and very in- 
distinct whisper, they separated, and 
apparently retired through different 
doors. In a few moments she ventured 
forward, and having incautiously passed 
the window, her figure was observed, 
and her assassins then turned to execute 
their vi!e purpose ; while she, unmind- 
ful of the necessity of silence, began 
to pray in a lovv voice : — " Oh ! my 
God," she said, '' save me, I beseech 
thee, from their grasp, and receive my 
thanks for this short respite. They have 
retired, and I trust that another night 
is to be added to my life, as to-morrow 

{ may be able to inform •." 

She paused on hearing the suppressed 

breathings of a man, who almost 

tone lied her, and shrunk back, but 

found her rctrogade motion was dis- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. §95 

covered. She now recognized the 
forms of those savages, and conceiving 
herself witliout a chance of escape, 
exckiimed, '' Strike your devoted vic- 
tim!" but was that instant firmly clasped 
in the gigantic arms of Carracci ; who, 
while she screamed, sunk with her 
through the floor. jMontano then 
bounced forward with a tiger's spring 
lo strike his prey, and plunged his 
dagger deep into Hugo, who he mistook 
for the innocent object of his malice, 
and laid this vile agent of crime dead 
at his feet. 

It was some time before the monk 
discovered this fatal mistake, who, with 
a torrent of execrations, reviled the 
folly of his wretched attendant, for 
approaching so unguardedly within his 
reach ; at a time too, when it was im- 
possible to ascertain his figure. The 
scarf which Hugo had procured for the 
purpose of striking Louisa with super- 
natural terrors, caused his destruction, 
as the dusky light being sufficiently 
strong to shew its whiteness, led his 



29G alexexa; oa the 

murderer to believe, he was Louisa.^ 
IMoiitano did not at first imajjine that- 
Hugo was past recovery, but when he 
laid his hand on his rough beard, and 
found he neither made a reply to his 
repeated entreaties, or the slightest 
motion to obey him, he became con- 
vinced of the dreadful certainty, and 
hurried to his apartment to procure a 
lamp, that he might bury him in ihe 
cemetery, relying on his ingenuity for 
some plausible tale, which would 
account for his absence. The lamp 
that he had brought from his cham- 
ber was extinguished by Hugo, on 
the first appearance of the ladies in 
the armoury, and there the monk 
determined it should remain, as worlds 
would not tempt him to seek it. 
" Alexena," he said. " must hove louir 
since alarmed the attendants, who have 
found Juan's body, and for whose death 
she has accounted ; therefore, if I am 
(.aught before Don Philip can interfere, 
the probability is, they will knock me 
on the head, for the attempt on tliis 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAUCO. 297 

Louisa; who, may the devil fly away 
with, if he has not ah'eady done so; but 
she certainly was killed, for what less 
than a death-blow could produce (he 
yell she gave? Oh ! it must be so ; she 
has staggered a few paces, then fell ; 
and I, not having laid my hand on 
her when I stooped, idly conceived she 
escaped." 

Having thus, in this soliloquy, 
arranged the circumstance to his satis- 
faction, his mind became composed, 
and when he had procured a light, 
he proceeded to the tragical spot 
where his ill-fated attendant lay wel" 
tering in his blood, and by whose 
stiffened hand, an instrument of de- 
struction was still firmly grasped, and 
whose poisoned point had deeply per- 
forated the flooring of the chamber. 
Montano stood leaning in horror over 
the pale aiid gristly visage of the breath- 
less corpse, and when he laid the lamp 
on the bloody boards, in order to lift 
it, he could not avoid feeling the stings 
of remorse. He was a murderer — an 



258 ALEXENA; OR THE 

object of universal hatred, contempt, 
and detestation : and althoiioii in tliis 
instance, he did not intend to kill his 
sen ant, was not the dagg-er by vvliich 
ho fell, raised with the intention of 
committing, if possible, a still more 
horrible crime? But such feelings were 
quickly stifled in his bosom ; he was 
overwhebned in iniqiiity, and, in a few 
seconds, relansed into all his orii2:inal 
depravity. 

While endeavouring to raise the 
black and livid form of lluj^o on 
his shoulders, he gnashed his teeth, in 
the agony of disappointed revenge, 
and vras niany moments before he ef- 
fected his purpose ; but having, at 
lengUi, accomplished it, he grasped 
his lamp, then left the gory stage for the 
burial ground, and moved along, with 
all the haste (he weioht of his bm-iheii 

o 

would permit him. Having now and 
then stopped to listen, he more than once 
conceived he heard the mour'iful jiotes 
of the organ, which created sensations 
it is impossible to describe^ and of which 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. !^9 

few can have an idea. He was tlicii in 
the dreary corridor of an. ivn liquated 
castle, stealing towards a grave-yard^ 
bearing the body of a man who had 
fallen by his hand, when both were in 
the act of perpetrating a deadly, cow- 
ardly, vile, and bloody deed, at the 
bare mention of which^ human nature 
shudders. The fall of Hugo vTas evi- 
dently a punishment decreed by an 
All-seeing Eye, and the monk felt it 
was such, yet dared to brave the Al- 
mighty vengeance. 

He had gained the south aisle of (he 
chapel, and was almost ready to sink 
under the weight of the body, when a 
deep groan burst from one of th(= pillars 
as he passed. Nature was exhausted; 
he could proceed no farther; his lamp 
fell from his powerless grasp ; Hugo 
tumbled from his shoulders on the flags, 
and his fall echoed through the distant 
galleries. The senses of the monk then 
fled, and he dropped motioidess beside 
the cold corpse. On recovering, he be- 
held, with horror, a placard written ift 



oOO ALEXENA. 

red characters^ fastened to the bloody 
bosom, comniandiiis: him to take the 
body, and cast it over the ramparts into 
the sea, or bury it in the courts ; also, 
threatening to punish him with death, if 
he persisted in carrying it to the ceme- 
tery; but this threat was needless, as 
Montano turned from the remains al- 
most frantic. To be obliored to touch it 
again would have been a most dreadful 
punishment; for his superstitious fears 
were awakened by the novelty of his 
situation, having imagined that the 
body grew tremendously heavy the last 
moments he had borue it. On reflec- 
tion, he found the frightful placard had 
not forbade him to leave Hugo where 
he then was ; he therefore determined 
to drag him into an adjoining pew, 
and leave the rest to fate. 



END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 
