OWEN CASTLE; 

OR, 

WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 

IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



BY 

MARY ANN SULLIVAN, 

OF THE THEATRES ROYAL, LIVERPOOL, MANCHESTER, 
NEWCASTLE, BIRMINGHAM, AND NORWICH. 



Know then this troth, enough for man to know, 
Virtae alone is happiness below. POPE. 



SECOND EDITION. 
VOL. L 

LONDON; 

PRINTED FOR 

A. K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADEN H ALL-STREET. 

1823. 



Edward Hodson, Printer, 15, Cross Street, Hatton Garden. 



8S5 

OWEN CASTLE; 



OK. 



Which is the Heroine ? 



CHAPTER I. 

vJN a low seat, beside an open casement, 
sat the bewildered Grace; her heavenly 
features had a fixed melancholy, her coun- 
tenance was pale but expressive, her soft 
dark blue ev^es dull and heavy, except 
when her fevered imagination, like tran- 
sient lightning, threw forth a spark of in- 
tellectual animation : on her high arched 
brows were bound a wreath of white 
withering roses, her auburn ringlets fell 
in wild, yet beautiful disorder, over her 
VOL. I. B 



2 OWEN CASTLE; 

shoulders, and half hid the slender sym- 
metry of her waist: the snowy foldings 
of her dress wound round her polished 
form, and with graceful negligence swept 
the carpet ; at her feet lay a small basket, 
filled with various sorts of flowers, from 
which she was selecting myrtle sprigs and 
willow strips, to twist round a j^edal harp, 
that stood on her left hand. 

Mrs. Milbourne, (her aunt,) seated at 
a little distance, was watching her every 
movement ; tears of sorrow and compas- 
sion ghstened in her eyes, as she beheld 
the darHng of her care thus unhappy and 
bewildered. " Look here," cried the beau- 
teous girl, taking from the heap of flowers 
a drooping lily, " alas! 'tis scentless, lost 
is its sweet perfume, so is the breath of 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 3 

my William, gone ! gone for ever!" A 
deep sigh burst from her white bosom, 
she ca«t the hly away in the deepest 
dejection, placed her arms across her 
breast, bent down her head, and fixing 
her eyes in a vacant gaze, remained ab- 
solved in gloomy, yet unconnected medi- 
tation. 

Mrs. Wallace came tripping into the 
room, and with her usual gaiety accosted 
Mrs. Milbourne, who turned round with 
surprise and pleasure to welcome her. 

" I am very well I thank you, madam/' 
cried Mrs. Wallace, (in return to Mrs. 
Milbourne 's kind enquiry after her health, ) 
*• and am come to spend half an hour with 
you, and my pretty insane here; liow 
B 2 



4 OWEN CASTLE; 

is she now ?'* " Alas!" said Mrs. Mil- 
bourne, " the same as a week since. " I 
am sorry for that," said Mrs. Wallace, and 
advancing towards Grace, asked if she knew 
her ? 

The unhappy maid looked on her at- 
tentively for some time, then cried, '^ Oh, 
yes! I know you very well, you are the 
painted mother that gave her child to 
strangers, and bade me laugh when my 
William died ; but J could not, my heart 
was broke in tw^o, and now 'tis quite 
gone, buried in the grave of my Wil- 
liam." 

Mrs. W^allace turned her face aside, to 
hide the vexation she feared it might 
betray. 



OR. WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 5 

" Do not weep," said the hapless girl, 
mistaking the cause of her emotion ; '' I 
forgive yoii^ I forgive every one, but come 
with me, and see how the willow and the 
cypress wave over my William's cold 
pillow, as if even they lamented his loss; 
but be sure you step sofcly, or you may 
fright the timorous dove that hovers o'er 
his grave ; poor thing ! I would not drive 
her hence for all the world, for she has 
lost her mate ; I saw him killed by cruel 
hands; she is left like me to mourn; 
we are companions in misery, and ought 
to love each other' — here she paused, and 
big drops of woe stole slowly down her 
pallid cheeks. 

" Take comfort, dear girl," said Mrs. 
Wallace. 

b3 



6 



OWEN CASTLE; 



"Comfort!" echoed Grace, "where? — 
Oh! I understand, 'tis by the side of my 
WilUam's corse; I will go; come then,** 
she beckoned Mrs. Wallace to follow her 
through a glass door that opened to the 
lawn, and was out of sight in a moment. 
David now announced lawyer Stanley, 
who, on entering, was shocked to find 
Mrs, Milbourne in tears; he guessed the 
cause, and secretly regretted that by ne- 
cessity he must augment her trouble. 

'^ I am sincerely glad to see you, good 
sir," said she, placing a seat for him 
between herself and Mrs. Wallace; " 'tis 
long since we have seen each other ; you 
have been out of Wales some time; you 
have been spending some months in Lon- 
don^ that seat of fashion and pleasure, have 
you not, sir ?" 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE 1 7 

" I was called there, madam, on very 
important business, which, much against 
my inclination, obliged me to stay in its 
thick atmosphere." 

" You are not fond of London then, 
I presume sir?" said Mrs. Wallace, with a 
winning smile. •' You are perfectly right, 
madam," returned Mr. Stanley ; " you 
cannot, who have been so Ion 2^ in the 
purest air, conceive my delight on ap- 
proaching my native country again ; the 
distant mountains seemed hke forsaken 
friends, with whom I was about to be 
reconciled, after a long disagreement and 
absence ; 1 plucked the wild rose from a 
fresh green hedge, with more delight 
than the finest exotic could have given 
B 4 



5 OWEN CASTLE ; 

me, though presented by the hand of a 
queen." 

'^ You are very odd in your ideas, sir/' 
said Mrs. Wallace, with a half sneer. 

" Perhaps so, madam ; I do not deny 
that I often think differently from other 
people; for instance, I prefer plucking 
a simple cabbage rose^ with a strip of 
sweet briar, from my own little garden, 
to all that art could produce; nay, I am 
old fashioned enough to wear them stuck 
m my button hole: this may appear vul- 
gar to the modish world, yet I see no 
shame or reason, why I should scorn the 
works of my all bountiful Creator, be- 
cause fashion, (that perverter of nature,) 
did not help their culture : but my dear 



OR, WHICH IS THE HF.ROINE!' 



widow, cried he, turning from Mrs. Wal- 
lace to Mrs. Milbourne, why so melan- 
choly, is the dear girl, my darling little 
Grace, worse?" 

"Thank heaven, no sir, she remains 
the same as when you left us/' replied the 
widow, 

•'Since no better, madam, be glad she is 
no worse ; we are never so unhappy, but 
we may be more so.'* 

^^Do you mean this for the consolation 
of my friend, Sir ;'* asked Mrs. Wallace ? 
^' if you do, 'tis mistaken kindness ; she 
cannot have a greater trouble, than the 
insanity of a beloved child." 
b5 



10 OWEN CASTLE ; 

^* I allow it a trouble, madam; but as all 
our losses are only felt by comparison 
with their opposites, we ought instead of 
idly regretting what might have been 
ours, be thankful for what we really 
possess; so in a state of madness, when 
fortune smiles we lament the calamity, 
but reverse the prospect to a state of po- 
verty and dependence, we then bless the 
power that keeps them insensible of their 
situation :" — as he finished speaking, he 
cast a penetrating look on the widow, she 
perceived something was on his mind ; 
the compassion, the earnest enquiry with 
mingled pity in his eye^ struck a forbod- 
ing fear to her bosom, and with a faulter- 
ing voice she answered, " Very true/* 

'^ You have never known the incon- 



ORj WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 11 

veniences of life, Mrs. Milbourne/' said 
he. 

*^ Never, Sir ; yet I think I could bear 
misfortune patiently.'* 

" I am glad to hear it, as it proves you 
are not weak enough to imagine, because 
hitherto you have lived in peace and ease;, 
that a change may never arrive." 

''Dear sir," cried the widow, ^'vvhat 
mean these words? If I may judge their 
purport, they are to prepare me for unplea- 
sant intelligence ; if so, dear Mr. Stanley, 
keep me not in suspense, but dinolose the 
business that brought you here; I have 
perhaps a stronger mind than you at pre- 
sent think, and should occasion require, 
ii6 



12 OWEN CASTLE; 

not deficient I hope, in proper fortitude at 
the hour of triaL" 

" I am glad of it, heartily glad to hear 
you say so, and own you have drawn the 
hne of my thoughts to the point oi> 
which I came to talk with you/* 

Mrs. Wallace rose, but the widow, 
gently detained her, saying, " pray stay, 
I have no secrets to hear, that you may 
not 'partake, and if (as Mr. Stanley's 
manner inclines me to believe) I am on 
the eve of some misfortune, the support 
of a friend will be of benefit to my spi- 
rits, and assist me to bear with compo^ 
sure, what otherwise might overcome 
me. 



OR, WHICH 19 THE HEROINE? 15 

'' To be of service to you madam, is an 
inducement to stay that I cannot resist," 
returned Mrs. Wallace, re- seating her- 
self. 

" That is right, that is like a friend, 
cried Mr. Stanley," shaking her by the 
hand, and addressing the widow, began 
to unfold the business he came upon, 

" Yo know, madam, that your worthy 
departed husband employed me, in many 
important concerns during his life, and 
that I had the honour of his approbation 
and friendship,*' 

'' You had so, Sir, said the widow," 
wiping away a tear that affection had 
given to the memory of the best of hus- 
bands. 



14 OWEN CASTLE; 

^' You will credit me then, madam, nor 
take it for the common place profession of 
condolence so often given to the distressed, 
when I say, that to bring disagreeable 
tidings to his amiable widow, much 
grieves and confounds me; and would the 
urgency of the affair in question permit, 
willingly would I defer my errand, till 
your spinis and mind became more tran- 
quil ; but as time presses, and my stay 
must be short, irksome as the task is, I 
must proceed. Did you ever hear ma- 
dam, your husband had an elder bro- 
ther?'' 

'■ Certainly, sir ; he died abroad much 
embarrassed ; myhusband greatly incon- 
venienced himself in the discharf^e of the 
numerous claims that were made upon 



OR, WHICH IS THE HE«OINE ? l5 

him ; His now two and twenty years since 
his death/' 

" At that time your husband came into 
the Whitford estate ?" 

" He did, sir ; but it had at that time so 
many incumbrances on it, that my hus- 
band gave it up for a certain time, until 
some heavy mortgages were paid off." 

*' How long has it been clear r" 

'^ About twelve years," 

^^ How old is your son ?" 

" Did you not know I had lately lost 
him ?** said she, sighing deeply ; 



1 6 OWEN CASTLE ; 

"No, indeed, madam, or I would not have 
given you this unnecessary pain, pardon 
my inadvertency, but as you always wear 
mourning, and he being mostly at school, 
the sudden loss was not observable/' Here 
he took out his handkerchief, put it to 
his eyes, and a long silence ensued. At 
length he cried. How cruel is my task 
yet I must go on ; What do you receive 
from the Whitford estate, madam ? 

" Eight hundred pounds per annum, 
which by frugal management will ena- 
ble me to save a provision for my poor 
Grace/' 

" On what did my worthy friend live, 
while discharging the debts on the Whit- 
ford estate ?" 



^ 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? Ij 

"On his commission. When his bro- 
ther died, he was a Captain in the Guards; 
the dehcacy of his constitution had long 
made the fatigue of duty irksome and 
dangerous; his physician had earnestly ad- 
vised the calm of retirement as necessary 
to the establishment of his health, but 
his swoid was his only prop, and he must 
have continued his military career had not 
the death of his brother put it in his 
power to retire ; but even this did not 
save him. Six years since he sunk to his 
grave, lamented by all ; but none knew 
the domestic virtues and manly quali- 
ties of his heart, as well as 2/ou, Mr, 
Stanley, and my wretched self," Here a 
burst of anguish deprived her of further 
utterance. 



18 OWEN CASTLES- 



CHAPTER II. 

.A.FTER a pause, Mr. Stanley renewed 
the subject. " At the death of your bro- 
ther in-law, the Whitford estate would 
have descended to his son.*' 

" He died unmarried.'* 

*' You are not certain of that, madam r'* 

" Most certain sir/' 

'^ Ah! madam, you are in an error; 
what will be your surprise, when I m- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? l9 

form you, that the account of his death 
was a falsehood ; a villainous fraud, in 
order to get his debts paid by his bro- 
ther, who he knew had a considerable be- 
quest left him at his father*s death.** 

*' Is it possible ?" exclaimed the aston- 
ished widow. 

" A melancholy fact, madam ; I have 
had the whole transaction from a mer- 
chant of the first repute in Liverpool, 
with whom he has held a correspondence 
up to the beginning of the present year.'' 

" Wonderful ! but pray explain," cried 
the widow. 

" His principal speculations failing at 



20 OWEN CASTLE; 

St. George's in Jamaica, (notwithstanding 
his having married a rich planter's widow) 
he determined on leaving it by stratagem, 
which he effected with great success. 

" During his voyage to Pennsylvania, a 
storm arose, several of the passengers 
were washed overboard, with the captain 
of the vessel, to whom only he was 
known ; none of the crew that remained 
on board after the storm knew his name, 
of which he took immediate advantage, 
and adopted that of a drowned passenger ; 
with all the property he had secreted 
when he left St. George's, he safely 
arrived at Newcastle County, bought a 
second plantation, and became in a short 
time one of the richest planters in that 
part of the world. Having acquired im- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE.*' 21 

niense wealth, it was his intention to 
come to England a year since, with his 
only child, a son of twenty years of age ; 
but a sudden illness hurried him to his 
grave ; his wife did not live many weeks 
after him, and the heir to the Whitford 
estate, is now on his way to England, 
eager to see the birth place of his father,and 
lay claim to his right. Mr. Meanwright, 
the Liverpool merchant, expects him every 
day into that harbour ; there are also two 
merchants of considerable opulence in the 
city, with whom his father transacted 
business in a very extensive degree, who 
have incontestible proofs in their hands, 
of his being the true and lawful heir to 
the Whitford estate; his arrival, my dear 
madam, deprives you of all claim what* 
ever on the estate, and unless he is of 



22 OWEN CASTLE; 

a generous mind, I fear you will find 
yourself entirely dependent on his bounty." 

" This is indeed a blow," said the 
widow, as if awakened to a new scene 
of distress, in the reveal ment of her bro- 
ther-in-law's unjust stratagem. " Oh 
teach me, sir, she cried, in what manner 
to act, what path to take in my deplor- 
able state." 

" Rely on my friendship, madam, and 
look forward with good hope, ( said Mn 
Staiiley with the most soothing accent;) 
my best abilities shall not be wanting 
in y ur behalf; on my return to town I 
will acquaint the gentleman of the law 
that I have seen you, and that you ex- 
pect the son to refund the money your 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 23 



husband expended In paying off the mort- 
gages, which in your present condition 
would be a little fortune." 

^^How can I, sir, make such a demand, 
having received the rents for so many 
years ? He might rather call on me, to 
restore those profits to which I have had 
no legal claim." 

"He will not be so hard with his aunt ; 
take my word he will not ; he does not 
want the Whitford estate; to a youth of 
his immense wealth, 'tis not worth con- 
tending for ; by the time he arrives in 
England, the lovely Grace will have re- 
covered from her present malady, and 
who knows, on seeing her charms, what 
may happen ; she may captivate the ad- 



24 OWEN CASTLE; 

miring stranger, he may marry her, and 
throw his princely fortune in her lap." 

" Surely," returned the widow, regard- 
ing him with surprise, " I do not under- 
stand you rightly ; you would not have 
me sacrifice the dear child, the orphan of 
my care, for my own convenience? Ne- 
ver, sir ; I cannot think it is the worthy 
friend of my hushand, that advises me to 
trepan my nephew into a connexion with 
a girl, whose virtues and whose beauty are 
her only dower ; sell the defenceless child 
of my sainted sister, to the arms of a 
stranger; — indeed I could not endure my 
hated life, if prolonged by such means; 
do not, dear sir, augment my troubles, by 
wishing me to become an accomplice in 
such baseness." 



OR, Which is the heroine? 25 

'^I see no baseness in it, dearest ma- 
dam, cried he ; if Grace has lost her first 
love, why may she not (after due time 
being past.) accept the hand of another? 
No friend in their senses could, I think, 
object to a handsome, young, rich and 
honourable lover, to woo so fair a charge- 
I do not wish you, madam, to take any 
part in the business, but let the young- 
folks when they meet, manage in their 
own way, what I am pretty positive, will 
come to pass." 

" Indeed, so sanguine ?" thought Mrs- 
Wallace. 

*' Give me your word, madam, to be 
neuter in the matter, said Mr. Stanley, 
and let chance work out the rest; on 

VOL, I. C 



26 OWEN CASTLE J 

clear view of the affair you will see it, 1 
have no doubt, in the light I do. What 
think you, madam, said he, turning to 
Mrs. Wallace, is it not an excellent idea, 
and too good to be lost.^' 

" It will not be lost, depend upon it." 
feturned she, 

*^ I hope not, I hope not," said he. 

*^ How can I, Mr. Stanley, invite 
my nephew here. You know that this 
is the Castle of Sir Matthew Fitz- 
owen, with whom I am on a short visit, 
and I dare not take so great a liberty as 
io invite any one without asking his per- 
aiission,'' 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 2? 

'' Where is Sir Matthew ?" asked Mr, 
StanleJ^ 

"In the garden, replied the widow. 
This is the hour he always wanders there^ 
if the gout and other complaints permit." 

*^ I will go seek him, and by explain- 
ing your situation, entreat his favour in 
your behalf, so far at least, as to obtain 
leave for you to entertain your nephew 
in his house. Does the old gentleman 
continue as odd as formerly ?" said Mr. 
Stanley. 

" O yes, sir, returned Mrs. Wallace ; 

his temper is more teazing, more erasci- 

ble than ever. How Mrs. Milbourne 

bears it so well, I know not ; for if 

c 2 



S2 OWEN castle; 



she were not a perfect Griselda in pa- 
tience, 
iiini." 



tience, there would be no living with 



*^ I am sorry, very sorry to hear it ; 
iDut be of comfort, good madam," said 
Mr. Stanley, turning to the widow, who 
stood weeping by his side, 

" Take, dear sir, a view of my forlortj 
condition, and you will not then talk of 
comfort. Alas! what am I now, but a poor 
<Iefenceless widow, doomed to eat her 
jniserable morsel at the table of a proud 
relative, v^'hose polite sufferance may 
give her a bed to re^t her woe-worn 
frame on. Oh cruel reverse of fortune! 
that makes my former life appear a 
dream! Just heaven! have I brought it on 



©R, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 2g 

myself? No^ no ; for in the hour of plenty 
I was not unmindful of the wretched, 
they ever shared in my prosperity. Was 
I ungrateful for the blessings I enjoyt-d ? 
No, for the divine precepts of my religian 
were early stamped on my mind ; their 
heavenly influence calmed the baser pas- 
sions of my soul lo the meekest piety 
and adoration of my beneficent creator; 
respected, beloved by my husband, (who 
next to my Almighty Father I reverenced 
and obeyed,) with a fond and blest return 
of his invaluable love, confidence, in- 
struction, and esteem; with child, fiiends-, 

and the regard of all who knew me, 

such I teas ; and though now stript of all 
these blessings, and the benefit of earthly 
support, yet I will not despair, for I feel 
my heart, my conscience, and my protect- 
c3 



30 OWEN castle; 

ing God are still the same: this reflection 
gives me consolation in this hour of try- 
ing adversity, and pours into my soul 
fortitude, industry, and hope ;" — she sunk 
into a chair, overcome with emotion. 

Mr. Stanley endeavoured to soothe her, 
by placing her circumstances in the best 
light. " Imust now leave you, dear madam, 
in order to set off, from my home, early 
in the morning, for the Forest of Chini 
nies, from whence you will speedily hear 
from me ; I shall see Sir Matthew before 
I quit the castle." 

" You will not leave us without sup- 
ping ; it will be brought up immediately, 
for Sir Matthew always sups at nine 
o'clock, let me also entreat you to take a 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE r 31 

bed, you will not surely ride across the 
mountain at so late an hour." 



" Indeed I must, madam; my business 
will admit of no delay ; make yourself 
perfectly easy with respect to my safety, 
the mountain has no terrors for me; I 
may by chance see a few straggling la- 
bourers retiring to their peaceful hovels, 
they will not harm an old man like me." 
He shook her cordially by the hand, bid- 
ding her keep up her spirits ; and bow- 
ing to Mrs. Wallace, took his leave. 

Mrs. Wallace, after pouring on her 
friend every affectionate epithet her bril- 
liant fancy could suggest, departed for 
home, (a neat cottage about a quarter 

c 4 



32 OWEN CASTLE ; 

of a mile from Owen Castle) attended by 
David, Mrs. Milbourne's .own footman. 

Her prolific brain had now ample room 
for cogitation, the midnight hour fled 
swiftly on long ere she thought on gain- 
ing sleepj and all attempts to court the 
goddess to her pillow, proved ineffica- 
cious. Was the absence or peril of her 
husband so heavy on her mind ? or wei^ 
the misfortunes of her friend so acutely 
felt? Neither — time only can reveal the 
effect of this night's watchfulness. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 33 



CHAPTER III. 



j^ Month had elapsed, and no letter 
arrived from ]Mr. Stanley. The fair Grace 
was gradually approaching to the entire 
possession of her senses, which was a 
great relief to the uneasy mind of her 
aunt, and promised the fulfilment of Mr, 
Stanley's project. One evening about twi- 
light, as she was sitting between Sir 
Matthew Fitzowen and Mrs. Wallace^ 
the conversation turning on marriagey 
Sir Matthew said, throwing off his usual 
ill humour, and speaking in a gerUle 
c5 



34 OWEN CASTLE; 

tone, " Would you, sweet Grace, wed 
for wealth alone ?" 



" Ah no! Wealth may be an induce- 
ment to many, but never any to me!" 
answered the despondent maid. 

^' Yet methlnks," cried Mrs. Wallace, 
"you have suffered so much for pure love, 
that you would choose your second lover 
for more substantial charms. Gold car- 
ries the day now/' 

" How can you name to me, madam, 
(knowing, as you do, my determination 
never to marry) a second choice/' cried 
Grace much affected. 

** Because^ — but no matter, you are 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 35 

offended, and to say the truth, you have 
never honoured me with your con- 
fidence/* returned Mrs. Wallace with great 
pique. 

Mrs. Milbourne now entered the room 
with an open letter in her hand, and 
prevented Sir Matthew from addressing 
something to Grace, that he was on the 
point of uttering, he turned round short 
on his cousin, and in a most petulant 
tone, demanded who the letter came 
from ? She answered. From our worthy 
friend, Mr. Stanley; I will, if you please 
read it to you ; 'tis full of news, and not^ 
of an unpleasant nature. 

Without waiting Sir Matthew's reply, 
she read as follows: 
c6 



36 OWEN CASTLE ; 

" Dear and respected madam^ 

*^ After arranging the affairs which 
^* brought me to town, I made it my 
" business to introduce myself to young 
" Milbourne, and am happy to say, 
*^ fonnd him to be a sensible, generous, 
'* and noble minded youth ; his passions 
" appear ardent, but his manners are 
•' so tempered with gentleness and ani- 
'' mation, that I may venture to say 
'^ their ardency will never force him into 
^' an act of baseness. His education has 
*' been liberal ; his principles, as far as I 
*^' can judge, are firm and good ; his per- 
^' son is handsome, of a graceful and 
" commanding height ; his features regu- 
*' lar and expressive, his brow clear and 
«* open, his eyes a darlc hazle, and from 
'' their extreme brilliancy and penetra- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROIN? 37 

" tiorij strike at first view upon the be- 

" holder, and draw forth his admiration 

^' ere he has been a moment beneath 

c' their radiance; 'tis an excellent eye, and 

" I trust the expressor of the soul to which 

" it belongs, his teeth are very fine, and 

*^ very white, but his complexion is 

" tinged rather deeply from the tropical 

'^ sun under which he has lived, which 

" may dissplease our modern belles; but 

" for my part I think it gives a manli- 

'^ ness to his appearance, which with- 

*^ out that defect, might to many appear 

*^ eflfeminate from its extreme beautv; 

*' he speaks of you with the utmost re- 

*^ spect, and will certainly visit Owen 

" Castle before the close of summer. 

" He has introduced me to a companion 

** of his, a very beautiful and elegant 



38 OWEN CASTLE ; 

*^ creature, named Omphale, brought up 
'^ by his mother, and to whom, from 
^' aJl I can learn, he is contracted in 
" marriage. She is a woman of colour, 
*' commonly called a Mulatto; is talMn 
" her figure, and by the bye has the most 
^' lovely formed hand and arm I ever saw; 
'^ her eye^ are deep black, of the most 
^' sparkhng lustre and sweet expression; 
" her face is perfectly of the Grecian 
" mould, pensive to a degree, when ab- 
" sent, but when cheerful, the smiles of 
" Hebe cannot equal those that play 
" round her mouth; her teeth are small 
*^ but of a transparent whiteness, and 
*^ contrast in a striking degree with the 
^' orange hue of her polished skin; her 
*' voice is soft and touchingly felt on the 
" heart and ear ; she is the most fascina- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 39 

" ting female altogether, notwithstanding 
" the darkness of her complexion, I ever 
*' beheld ; her age I should imagine to 
'^ be about seventeen I will, now I have 
" done with the description of their per" 
*' sons, endeavour to recollect a late conver- 
*^ sation I had with them, that will 
*' enable you to judge of the hearts of 
'* each. Augustus Milbourne acquainted 
^•' me that he was sorry it was out of his 
*• power to present you with the sole 
^•' possession of the Whitford estate, ha- 
'' ving previously promised it to Om- 
" phale/' 

" Then give," she cried, starting from 
her seat, " give thii estate to Omphale. 
" Ah do! that she may please herself, 
'* when she have it." 



40 OWEN castle; 

'' That I cannot do, until I am of age, 
^^ which will be in about four months, 
'^ from this/' said Augustus. 

'' And when those months are fled 
*^ away you will give the estate to Om- 
« phale?" 

" I will, said he; on my honour I 
<^ ivilir 

" My heart sunk within me at these 
'' words, and I, for an instant did hate 
f^ Omphale most cruelly.'' 

^' But coming up to me with the 
most winning softness^ and taking me by 
the hand, I began to waver in the opi- 
nion I had encouraged of her avarice ; par- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 4.1 

•* ticularly when she thus addressed me r 
*• You are friend to poor white lady. Om- 
" phale sends joy to her, by you. Tell her 
" to make easy her widowed heart; for 
" the instant the estate be mine to give, 
'' it shall be her's ; and very much happy 
" she will yet be ; If she permits the 
" stranger, poor Omphale, to love her^ is 
^ all she wish in return. Though this 
" was delivered in indifferent English, it 
" struck to my very soul ; I pressed her 
^' hand to my lips, and spake my grati- 
*' tude as well as my feelings would let 
" me, and at the same time ventured to 
*^ add, you would be proud and happy to 
*^ receive her, Augustus applauded her 
" generosity, and after renewing his pro- 
" mise of paying you an early visit, left 
'' the room to prepare for a party at the 



42 

" west end of the town, accon)panied by 
*' his guardian/' 

" Ah me! sad here!" cried Omphale, 
" in the most mourntul accent. " Me no 
" hke this place, this London." 

*^ Why not madam, said 1.*' 

'* Because me be left alone so often. 
" Augustus never mind me now ; the 
" English ladies with white skin, and 
" roses on their cheek, please him better 
« than Omphale/' 

" Why do you not go with him, 
" madam, returned I ? 

" He will not take me, he say j the 
'' English ladies laugh when he go with 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 43 

'* me, and the gentlemen stare at my so 
" strange appearance. Ah wretched Mu- 
" latto ! no happy out of her own coun- 
" try," she exclaimed with a deep drawn 
'*■ sigh. 

'' Have you a female patroness with 
" whom you could enter into the plea- 
" sures of this gay town," said I. 

" Oh noT she cried, bursting into tears, 
" my patroness, my friend, is gone for ever 
*' from the forlorn Omphale. No more 
" she see her sweet face on earth, but 
" here is the likeness of her," taking a 
" bracelet from her arm, in which was 
^' set the miniature of the late Mrs. 
" Milbourne, surrounded by diamonds 
" of the first water, and presenting it to 
" me said, " Is she not an angel ?*' 



44 OWEN CASTLE ; 

" She was indeed a very fine womaBp. 
" and something remarkably mild in her 
*' countenance/' said J, returning the pic-- 

^' ture, 

" She love me like her daughter, thouglr 
" only a poor orphan child ; but now me 
'^ talk of that, she say to me, when she 
^' die, something of my father, who was 
" a great man; but my grief made me 
" deaf to the feeble voice and broken 
" Sentence of my patroness, who breathed 
^' short time after her last sigh on the 
^' bosom of Omphale; 'tis not much I 
*' know of friends here, but this I be 
^^ certain, I feel no friend can ever be 
'' hke her. The lady Augustus guardian 
" brought to me for companion, be so 
" different to all me ever knew, that I, 



^n, WHICH IS THE heroine:' 45 

'^' never wish to see her more ; she treat 
" me more Hke slave, than the contracted 
" wife of Auonistns."* 

o 

" You must have mistook her mean- 
^' ing, and however repugnant to your 
" inchnation^ I w^ould advise you to let her 
" attend on you, while you remain in 
** this great town; for you will not meet 
'* with the respect that is your due, if 
** you go into company with Augustus 
" alone." I was placed in a delicate situa- 
" tion ; I saw the young creature was 
^' ignorant of the light she would appear 
" in to the eyes of half the world ; yet 
*^ knew how to caution her under such 
^ circumstances, against acting in a man 
""' ner that would expose her to their 
**' unjust scrutiny. 



46 OWEN CASTLE; 

" Me see your very kind meaning very 
^' well," returned the poor girl in some 
'^ confusion, and must be sorry for my 
" own distressing predicament ; me have 
" only one satisfaction at my poor heart, 
** and that is to know the pure inten- 
" tions that dwell in it,'* (the glow of 
*^ conscious integrity burnt on her cheek 
*' and sparkled in her eye as she said 
*' this) and from that moment I deter- 
" mined to befriend her. While I was 
" ruminating on the best method to prove 
" my good will, she unlocked a writing 
*^ desk, took from it a paper, and with 
** a trembling hand gave it into mine, 
** beseeching me in the most earnest 
" manner to read it. I found it to be 
^^ a contract of marriage legally drawn 
** up between Augustus Milbourne and 



oft, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 47 

** Oinphale Carlton, with the approba- 
" tion of his parents, who had signed 
^' their names in due form, the engage- 
*' mejit or contract to be fulfilled six 
** months after his arrival in England, 

*' My beloved patroness^, sir/' said she 
" gave me this paper, at her dying mo- 
^' ment called me her child, and consigned 
^^ me to the care of Augustus for life, who 
"gj^then so fit for my companion as he ?'* 

*' 'Tis true, madam, returned I; but cus- 
*' tom obliges all to submit to her rules. 
'' I see Mr. Milbourne on refusing to 
'• fulfil this contract, forfeits his immense 
"' wealth to your possession" — 

** He does sir, but should he cease to 



4S owfiN castle; 

^^ love Omphale, she never would enforce 
" the payment of the great forfeiture, but 
^ die at once with grief." 

" So saying, she began weeping, noi^ 
^' could my efforts, nor assurances of his 
'* tenderness, for a long time compose her. 
" When she listened to me, I begged 
^ leave to retain the contract in my hands, 
^^ as it would be safer and forthcoming 
" upon demand, but all my ai-guments 
^' in favour of her committing it to my 
" care proved ineffectual. It was again 
'' enclosed in the desk: she did me wrong 
" to mistrust me ; it was zeal for her 
" happiness and dependant state that 
" prompted my request, but let that pass, 
** she will know me better in time. Tell 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 4Q 

" Grace she has a rival and the prize 
"is lost/' 



" What does he mean? madam" asked 
Grace". 

'' A wild scheme the foolish old man 
had formed of your catching this young 
West Indian" cried Mrs. Wallace, laugh- 
ingly- 

Grace sighed ; it was a sigh of thank- 
fulness for her escape. — Mrs. Milbourne 
remained silent. Sir Matthew pulled his 
bushy brows, a sure tokeB of discontent. 

The widow continued the letter. 

'^ This young creature has a strong 

VOL. I. D 



50 OWEN castle; 

*^ desire to see you, madam ; and bid me 
^^ tell you, in her artless style, that she 
*^ would choose you for her guardian, or 
^' female protectress^ for the few months 
^^ before her nuptials are to take place^ 
^^ Whatever be your decision on reading 
" this short sketch of this interesting 
^^ female, follow it freely, nor let my 
*' recommendation of her to your notice 
-i* and protection, bias your actions on 
^' her account ; but this much I must add, 
'' before 1 close this long letter, that I am 
*' certain she will prove worthy of your 
*^ esteem and friendship. Mr. Milbourne 
" told me he would write by this post, 
*' perhaps our letters may arrive together : 
*^ I hope the purport of his may be to 
^^ to your wish ; give my love to my pretty 
^'^ Grace, and tell her, Omphale is half in 



OR, Which is thu heroine? 51 

** love with her from my description, and 
*^ anxious to become her companion in a 
" ramble over the Welch mountains ; 
" likewise present my respectful compli- 
" ments to Sir Matthew, and that I hope 
" the gout has left him ; for politeness 
" sake, remember me to Mrs. Wallace, 
" tho' to speak the truth, I don^t much Kke 
'' that—" 

Mrs. Milbourne paused : 

" Oh pray go on. Madam,'' cried Mrs. 
Wallace, '' I have more sense than to mind 
such an oddity ; his liking or disliking me 
can be of no consequence to either of us ; 
I always knew 1 was not of his school : I 
intreat my dear friend that you finish the 
letter". 

D 2 



52 OWEN CASTLE; 

The widow went on. 

"^^ Lady ; she is too much of the French 
^^ school for my home- spun taste ; her 
-'^ dress is entirely french ; her manners the 
^' same, her cheeks the same, her head 
*^ inside and out the same : French wit 
^' with the Satanic pleasure of satirizing 
^' the innocent foihles of her acquaintance. 
^^ Your steward and household have had 
*^ notice to quit the Whitford mansion, 
" as it is to be put in readiness for the real 
^' heir, who means 1 hear to keep his 
■^^ wedding there. Now farewell, dear ma- 
" dam ; . I have scarce room to add, that 
^^ I am ever your sincere, 

*^ J^nd respectful friend 

George Stanley." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HFROINE? 55 

^^ Upon my word if I bad not heard 
the description of myself rend; I C( aid 
never have supposed itvvas oieaiit for ue,'* 
said, Mrs. Wallace ; *' but the old la'irat 
shall find my satank safirizirfg \plrit slall 
at least vent itself on him ; let him beware 
of meeting me in pubiic or private ; be 
shall find no mercy/' 

" He did not think it would reach your 
ear, madam'* said the widow, " therefore 
forgive him I 

" That is the very reason I ought not 
to forgive him" returned Mrs. Wallace; 
<' to attempt to prejudice my friend against 
me is cruel 1" 

" I am sorry for this," cried the widow, 
d3 



54 OWEN CASTLE; 

I was to blame in not looking over the 
letter before I read it aloud." 

" Your own nature being free from all 
unkindness^ and suspicion my dear friend, 
made you unwary ; but remember I tell 
you, all are not like yourself ; think so^, and 
you may guard against the evil designs of 
the wicked ; but for the opinion the old 
bachelor entertains of me, my dear friend, 
think not, it gives me the least displeasure. 
I doubt not but I shall be even with him 
ere long, so make yourself no longer un- 
easy about what is not to me of the least 
consequence." 

" Here is another letter said the widow, 
which I am impatient to open, as no 
doubt it is from Mr. Miibourne. Do you 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE^ 55 

read it Mrs. Wallace, my eyes are weak 
from perusing the former." 

'' You mean to say, dear madam" return- 
ed Mrs. Wallace, taking the letter, " that 
your feelings would not permit you to go 
calmly through it." 

" Perhaps you are right. Dependence 
is new to me, and I have not yet learnt 
the lesson it teaches, which is the subjuga- 
tion of feeling," said the widow. 

" Do cousin," cried Sir Matthew, " swal^ 
low your Welch pride a little. I can see no- 
thing in a simple letter from the hand of a 
nephew you never saw, to trouble your fine 
feelings that you talk about — Pish! itlooks 
like affectation.-* 

D 4 



5G OWEN CASTLE; 

" Must not my husband's brother claim 
my regard ; and is it not natural, now iVe 
lost my own, that I should feel anxious to 
see that brother's son, to know if he be 
worthy of the uncle whose name he bears ?" 
returned the widow. 

" Pshaw !'' was the only reply Sir 
Matthew made, with a pettish kick at the 
lap dog that lay at corner of the sofa, en- 
joying until that moment a very sound sleep. 

'• Have you not room enough, Sir 
Matthew ?*' asked the widow, and calling 
Grace away, bade her take a chair that Sir 
Matthew might not be incommoded. 

*' She was very well where she was, 
but you are for ever teazing one with your 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 5/ 

ceremony, cousin Milbourne ; was it not 
for the prattle of Mrs. Wallace you would 
give me the blue devils/' 

*•' It was m)7 desire to see you at ease. 
Sir Matthew, that made me remove Grace ; 
but if that arrangement displeases you, I — " 

" Now comes a string of apologies. You 
are the strangest woman — do be quiet and 
don't make a fool of yourself, for I can see 
the tears, ready to start from your eyes at 
this moment ; well, thank heaven, I airi 
not such a martyr to a watery head as 
you are, cousin, cried Sir Matthew with a 
sneer, and turning to Mrs. Wal^ace, begged 
her to open the letter, 

Mrs. Wallace broke the envelope, and 



&S OWEN CASTLE ; 

read the following : 

" Dear aunt and madam, 

" From my infancy I have 
^* been accustomed to revere your virtues, 
" which have so often been described by 
'' my much honored and departed father, 
*' that I long to meet your welcome and 
" blessing at your abode in Wales; where^ 
" we may talk over future arrangements, 
*' respecting the Whitford estate, which 
^^ will be presented again to you from the 
'^ hand of my destined bride, Omphale 
^' Carlton, who was the protegee and con- 
^^ sidered daughter of my dear and res- 
" peeled mother. If not encroaching too 
^' much on your hospitality, I should 
*"* request your permission to present her 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 59 

'' to your friendship and regard. Do not 
^' make any preparation I implore yoUj 
" dear aunt, for me; I shall have very few 
" attendants to accomodate; only two 
** black servants^ a French valet, a couple 
" of grooms, a coachman of my own, with 
'* a female slave, a parrot, and a monkey 
" of Omphale's. By the 30th of August 
" you may expect us at Owen Ca«tle. I 
" hear from Mr. Stanley that there is 
" excellent shooting in your neighbour- 
" hood; delightful mountains for romantic 
" rambles, and with the society of the 
^' fair, what can man want more ? 

'* Forgive me, madam if the style, of this 
** hasty letter should displease, or appear 
'' less ceremonious than you expected ; my 
" nature is not of the frigid cast ; whe«i 



€0 OWEN CASTLE ; 

" I respect, I soon love ; my manners are 
*^ as open as my heart, and on a further 
*' acquaintance with both, I hope they 
^^ may meet your approbation and esteem. 
^' This London is a new world to me ; each 
" hour gives fresh pleasure and amusement, 
^' Adieu, dear aunt ; accept the best wishes 
" for your happiness from Omphale, and 
^* the sincererespect and duty, 

" Of your aifectionate nephew^, 
'^. Augustus Milbourne." 

" A very short letter.'* cried Sir Matthew : 

<^ Very friendly and concise," said Mrs, 
Wallace : 

*' And the making light of so great 
an obligationisthefinal charm of all," added 



fi:^' 



OR; WHICH IS THE HEUOINE ? 6 1 

the widow. '' He is, I am well persuaded, 
an amiable youth !" 

"Aye," cried the baronet, ^^ youth, beau- 
tij, and generosity^ are the sure demands 
of favour from the fair ; but with these 
fine requisites there may lurk faults of a 
very heinous kind/' 

"Don't, dear baronet, prognosticate evil,'' 
said Mrs. Wallace. " He has three cap- 
ital recommendations^ youth, a very won- 
derful advantage ; beauty, the most be- 
witching qualification ; an open heart, 
delightful, generous ; and to crown all, a 
plentitude of gold. Why if he had the 
baneful passions of the wicked one himself, \ 
under such a mask they would never be 
seen or heard of. The mighty glory of his 



62 OWEN castle; 

other gifts would dazzle the world, till 
being half blind with their brightness, 
they would wink and blink, and so close 
their eyes, that nothing beyond the sur- 
face would appear to their deluded optics." 

*^ Is the world,'' said Grace, *' so soon 
caught by appearances only?" 

*' Most veritable/' answered Mrs. Wal- 
lace. 

*' Then the unprepossessing, however 
estimable in their moral dealings, under- 
standing, and manner of life, obtain no 
consideration ?" continued Grace. 

^' None^ from the great world ; a few 
creeping circumscribed humdrum beings^ 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 63 

may waste time in searching after moral 
company and adherents, but the polished 
circles seek notorietif' cried Mrs. Wal- 
lace. 

" Then their adherents must be notor- 
iously good, I should hope," answered 
Grace. g 

" If it happens so, it is all well ; if not 
the spirit of the action carries equal weight 
in the fashionable estimation," said Mrs, 
Wallace, 

'' Then the enormity of the crime, if I 
comprehend you right, does not impede 
their progress to exaltation amongst a 
certain select number of ton ?" cried Grace, 

^ Oh nO; but it depends on the nature of 



64 OWEN CASTLE; 

the emormity, for instance : if a peeress 
of the reahii desert her husband and chil^ 
dren, to elope with a nobody, that is with 
a person unknown to the higher ranks, she 
is of course abandoned, despised, and 
justly thought unworthy the notice of her 
former companions ; but should her gal- 
lant be oi equal 'CdiX^k with her husband, the 
elopement becomes an universal topic for 
discussion ; her refined taste, her sensihi- 
liti/, her indiseretion, diveihe soft terms for 
instahiUty, desertion, adult erv, and an un- 
natural parent. The divorce, damages, and 
second bridal equipage, are swallowed up 
one after the other so greedily, by the 
loungers of Pall Mall and Bond Street, that 
the crime is forgot, and they only regret 
their own want of rank, wealth, or beauty, 
to have entitled them to the same notorie- 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 65 

ty. The retrograde wife and mother again 
move a comet in the eccentric parabola 
of fashion ; what she wears, what shesavs, 
what she does, is all. charming, fall of 
spirit, and above the vulgar prejudice of 
contracted plebeian minds/* returned Mrs. 
Wallace. 

'^ And is her former crime no more 
remembered ? " asked Grace. 

" No more, child, it sinks into the gold 
dust beneath her feet, and like that^ scat- 
ters into air in a season," answered Mrs. 
Wallace. 

^' Then/* said Grace " I don't like your 
picture ofthe to7i ; I fear I should be one 
of the creeping circumscribed humdrum 



66 OWEN castle; 

beings who search for morahty among^ 
their fellow creatures, ere I enrolled my- 
self in their list a votaress of their laws 
and customs. 

'^ Depend on it, your search would be 
a veary one ; you should get a clue 
or kind fairy to guide you through the 
dangerous crowds of dissipated triflers 
that flirt before, and quite obscure them 
from your view. This Omphale now, 
when she becomes Mrs. Milbourne, will 
create much attention ; but she must shine 
in a splendid equipage, must dress in the 
Peruvian manner, half naked ; hut that has 
been so long the taste, that unless she were 
to step forth without any drapery at all, 
there would be no novelty to create atten- 
tion. She will have one grand victory ovei: 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 6j 

the belles in point of complexion, for I can 
venture to swear they will not copy that; 
yet from its singularity, it may strike a 
few, and for a day, the Mdhourne dye, or 
orange tint, may sully the fair faces of 
tonish ladies. She must appear in nothing 
but ?i palanquin, surrounded by her biack 
slaves in the most brilliant dresses ; such 
a procession up Bond Street, would col- 
lect more gazers than the city barge 
sailing up the Thames for Richmond 
on a Sunday, or even the gaudy equipa- 
ges on Lord- MayorVday. Oh ! how I 
long to see this beauty of Mr. Stanley's : 
this happy /«/>, no, hrown, I mean; she 
will be the envy of the whites for daring 
to enfetter so enchanting a youth. Won't 
you contend with her for the heart of 
such a man?" 



6s OWEN CASTLE; 

*• No, madam," said Grace, ^^ my study 
shall be to promote her happiness, not 
destroy it." 

^^ Aye, you who have felt what it rs 
to lose your first love, can pity her, 
should she suffer as you have done/' 

" Heaven forbid !" cried Grace, clasp- 
ing her hands together and flying out of 
the room. 

" I am shocked, dear Madam, at the 
effect of my thoughtless conduct. I have 
driven Grace from the room," said Mrs. 
Wallace rising, '^pray pardon me, I touched 
a tender string ; it was wrong, it was 
cruel." 

" I will seek her,'* said the widow, 



OHj WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 69 

^^ she must not wander in the damp of 
the evening; the dews are heavy on the 
lawn, and a cold may bring on a relapse." 

" Keep your seat, cousin/' said Sir 
Matthew in a harsh tone, "1 will seek her 
myself:" then with a severe look and 
stately air, he bade Mrs. Wallace good 
night, and hobbling across the hall, en- 
quired of David the road his young 
mistress had taken. To the pleasure gar- 
den, was the reply, 

" Give me my hat and cloak, and I will 
follow her," said Sir Matthew. 

" You, sir ; bless my soul, you will be 
laid up if you do, let me find my young 
ladv,^ 



70 OWEN CASTLE; 

*' Silence, jackanapes/' t thundered Sir 
Matthew, who hurried to the garden. 

" Is it you, Sir Matthew/' said the asto- 
nished Grace, '' I am concerned that you 
should venture out, the dew may give 
yoU' cold." 

" And may not you, sweet Grace," said 
he, " be liable to the same? Prithee return 
to the oak parlour, that talking woman is 
gone by this, for I gave her a broad hint, 
that I did not wish for any more of her 
company to-night, as I left the room." 

He drew her arm within his own, and 
they walked on in silence for some time. 
Grace was the first to speak, saying, '-I 
am sure you can pity and pardon me 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE.-' 7I 

all the trouble I have been to you. You 
may in the days of your youth have met with 
a similar affliction, Sir Mathew ; if so, you 
can feel for me ; but I have l.eard that we 
forget in our age, the miseries as well as 
the pleasures of our youth." 

*' Not always, child," said he. 

" The past must appear a romantic 
ilream; seventy cannot feel for the dis- 
tress of seventeen," returned Grace. 

" Who told you, child;, I was seventy ?" 
asked he in a petulant accent* 

*'Mv aunt, dear sir.*^ 

"Your aunt is a foolish, stupid old 
woman ; what had she to do with my 
ager 



Jr^ OWEN CASTLE; 

^' She did not mean to offend you. Sir ; 
she was only pitying your helpless state 
when the rheumatism settled in your 
limbs and you could not take the air, 
either in a carriage or horseback; and iu- 
deed Sir Matthew, you walk a little lame 
now ; do lean a little on my arm, I fear 
my bearing on yours, has fatigued you.'* 

This artless speech of hers, put the 
little share of patience he possessed to 
flight, and giving way to the anger that 
burnt within him, cried, *^ Zounds, child, 
you would make me believe I was nearly 
bedrid ; why I could walk as well as any 
stripling « in the county, were it not for 
the gout, rheumatism^ and a slight touch 
of the palsy. You suppose a man of se- 
venty h^s not a single faculty left Why 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE - 73 

child^ if you had not been bred on a Welch 
mountain, you would have known that a 
man of seventy, in the polite world, is as 
hkely to commit an act of folly as any 
boy of Eton School ; and where the ten- 
der passion attracts, can run into more ex- 
travagant excess than half the young ones 
of the day. He will have a flaxen wig, 
hung round with ringlets ; dress, sing, 
dance, ogle, sigh and languish with any 
of them; and what is more, can ^our gold 
upon the chosen fair, which is worth all 
the poetic raptures of a pennyless spend- 
thrift. Yes, girl, go into the world, and 
you will find old men the greatest rakes of 
the time." 

''1 am very sorry for it. Sir Matthew; 
and would rather continue on my native 

VOL. J. E 



74 OWEN CASTLE ; 

hrlls, where I see human nature in its pro- 
per degrees, than live in the pohte world, 
and see an old man expose himself in so 
ridiculous a manner. Surely he must be a 
frightful picture to the thinking part of 
the world. I am sure Sir Matthew you 
must join me^ in supposing a man of 
seventy would be a more admirable figu-re 
in the eyes of the youthful, and of more 
value to society at large, were he seen 
surrounded by his grand-children, bestow- 
ing his counsel and moral advice, with a 
^hare of his gold, upon their helpless inno- 
cence, instead of squandering it upon a 
wanton. How can age demand respect 
and reverence from th€ juvenile^, when 
they imitate their vices, and encourage by 
their own example the progress of infamy ? 
The aged should be the supporters of vir- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 75 

tue, the patrons of wisdom and forbear- 
ance, the benefactors of the poor, the 
guardians of their offspring. I may be 
very simple, but in my opinion there is 
not on earth a more contemptible charac- 
ter, than that of a rakish old man." 

^^Then you would not dislike a young 
rake ?" cried he with pique. 

'^ Yes, I should disapprove of vice in 
either :" — when ascending the steps of the 
hall as she uttered this, the conversation 
^vas broken up fo^ that time. 



E a 



76 OWEN CASTLE,' 



CHAPTER IV, 



j^JlRS. Milbourne was taken up in pre- 
paring for the arrival of her guests ; for 
she had in answer to her nephew's letter, 
requested their early compliance to her 
wish of tlieir speedy appearance at Owen 
Castle. The covers were taken from the 
gilt and massy wrought furniture of the 
state chambers; the painted gothic win- 
dows were fresh cleaned, the oak floor- 
ing newly polished, but the ancient ta- 
pestry that hung from the lofty ceilings 
could not partake in the general ira- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 77 

provements, the colours of the worsted 
being faded, yet the figures were stri- 
king still, — knights receiving their swords 
and scarfs from ladies enamoured of their 
bravery — Penelope weaving her web sur- 
rounded by suitors — Calypso and her 
nymphs running with blazing torches 
to destroy the ship that was to take 
Telemachus from the enchanted island^ — 
Cupid endeavouring to seduce men to the 
triumph of St. George over the dragon ; 
these w^ere the subjects Sir Matthew's 
ancestors had selected to decorate the 
walls of Owen Castle witli, and were 
held by him as the criterions of all tsUte. 

" What room, Sir Matthew, will you 
think fit to appropriate to Omphale as 
£ 3 



78 OWEN CASTLE; 

lier dressing room ?" asked Mrs. Mil- 
bourne. 

<^« Why the round room in the httle 
tower/' cried he. 

" But, dear sir, that is so far removed 
from the rest of the family, had she not 
better have mine; 'tis nearer the grand 
staircase, has a fine commanding pros- 
pect of the sea, and moreover a flight 
of marble steps that leads out upon the 
lawn and shrubbery ; the furniture is 
better, it is blue damask, trimmed with 
silver fringe, and there are many elegant 
paintings by the best artists/' 

" I have said it, cousin ; the round 
room in the little tower ; it was my 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 79^^ 

grandmother's dressing room, and there- 
fore more comphment in offering it to 
Oniphale/' 

" But the prospect is so dull ; it looks 
into a dreary court now closed up and 
walled in, on each side ; has bars at the 
windows, and looks for all the world 
like a prison," cried Grace, " Dear sir, don't 
let her be there." 

" Why not," replied he in a surley 
tone. 

" Because it will appear as if we wished 
to desert her, by giving her that me- 
lancholy abode." 

" It is the safest place in the castle. 

E 4 



80 OWEN castle; 

My grandmother — no^ my great grandmo- 
ther was put there for security when the 
castle was besieged.'* 

" But, Sir Matthew there is no dan- 
ger of besieging now, and the furniture 
is so gloomy; purple velvet couches, 
trimmed with black ; and then the pic- 
tures are so frightful ; the murder of the 
innocents, Cleopatra poisoning herself with 
an asp — a hnight in black armour — a 
7iun — a madona — and a priest T cried 
Mrs. Wallace, who was assisting Mrs. 
Milbourne to give the drapery that 
adorned an alcove or recess in the li- 
brary, a more modern appearance. 

" Maybe so/' returned Sir Matthew," but 
they are very fine paintings for all that." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 8 1 

" The room in the httle tower would 
do vastly well for her principal slave, 
but not for Omp hale ; permit me, cousin, 
to prepare my dressing room for her re- 
ception/' said Mrs. Milbourne, entreat- 
ingly. 

*^ Cousin" cried he in a decisive and 
commanding voice, *' the round room in 
the little tower is Omphale's. You may 
put her black devils where you please; 
cram them any where; I have deter- 
mined on selecting dressing rooms and 
apartments for my guests as / please, 
when you are to entertain them in your 
own house, you may do the same." 

*' I am silenced," sighed the widow. 



£ 5 



82 OWEN CASTLE; 

^' And pray who is to have the crim- 
son room with the gold furniture that 
joins the Hbrary'* asked Mrs. Wallace, 
gailey humming a tune. 

" Augustus Milbourne" said Sir Mat- 
thew. 

^* Who will have the yellow apartment?" 

'' / will give that to Grace ; it is next 
my own, and I can hear her play on 
the harp or sing, should I be confined 
by the gout, or not disposed to join 
the company." 

" I don't want a dressing room, dear 
sir, my aunt*s wiH do for me," said Grace. 

*' Your aunt must give up hers, to her 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 83 

friend !Mrs. Wallace^ whom I have invited 
to meet the stranger." 

*• Dear sir! how can you think of plac- 
ing me in so aukward a situation, as to 
obhge my friend to quit her favourite 
room. Indeed you must excuse me. Sir 
Matthew, if I refuse to accept it,'* said 
Mrs. Wallace, (at the same time whisper- 
ing in the ear of the widow), *^ what a 
strange humour the old bear has taken 
into his head." 

'^ You must and shall accept it^ so no 
more words on that head, or you will 
put me in a passion/' returned Sir Mat- 
thew, hobbling across to Grace, who had 
during that last arrangement taken up 
an old romance to hide her grief, at what 
she thought was a slight to her dear aun 



84 OWEN castle; 

*^ The terrace drawing room will be 
charming to place Mrs. Wallace's piano- 
forte in, with sometimes your harp ; and 
the walk on the terrace is charming, it 
looks over the valley to the left, with 
the park, pleasure grounds, plantation and 
shrubbery; then on the right you have 
the mountain, the water-fall and distant 
view of the sea, all delightful objects!" 

Grace was silent to this address from 
Sir Matthew, she could not force her 
nature to answer in her accustomed 
sweetness, when she felt displeased at 
bis manner of retorting her aunt's simple 
and unoffending request of the dressing 
room. When you are in your own house, 
you may do the same, still rung in her 
ear with all the harshness it was said : 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 85 

then to offer the very room, to one who 
was of no consequence to particularly 
oblige, by displacing her aunt, was re* 
ducing her cruelly, and all under tiie 
appearance of rendering her friend com- 
fortable; resentment was evident in her 
eye, her glowing cheek, and averted 
head. 

But Sir Matthew went on, disregard- 
ing her reserve, saying ^' and then the 
cedar room, to breakfast in, that opens 
into the pleasure grounds will be exceed- 
ingly refreshing to the senses ; the odour 
from the rose bushes will scent the air 
enchantingly ; then the back pailour to 
dine in is spacious, lofty, and light, open- 
ing upon the lawn; then the temple at 
the bottom of the pleasure ground will 



86 OWEN CASTLE; 

do for a refreshment room. He paused, 
and fixing his eyes on those of the asto- 
nished girl, watclied with pride and ex- 
ultation the gradual dawn of pleasure, 
sparkle in them, hut the smile of incre- 
dulity lingered round her lip. 

Sir Matthew wishing to hear her speak, 
grew disappointed and impatient, and 
determined on obtaining her opinion of a 
ball he intended to give, pursued thesubject. 
*' Don't you Hke it? Don't you think a ball 
will be acceptable to our young guests?" 

" The very thing 1 should have wished 
to have entertained them with, answered 
she ; but I cannot repress my wonder at 
the design being yours, Sir Matthew; j/o?/, 
that always appeared to me so very re- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 8^ 

cluse in your habits^ to rush into a crowd 
of company at once, is almost incredible; 
does my aunt know of your intentions, 
Sir ?" 

" Mrs. Wallace was the first to point 
out to me the matter in its jast light; 
' and very truly says^ how can w^e expect 
young persons of fortune and beauty to 
be moped up in an old castle without com- 
pany and amusement ; and truly I begin 
to find she is right ; and I will have all 
the first families in the neighbourhood to 
meet them. And as I have got the better 
of my complaints (at least the major part 
of them) I may as well join in the 
mirth. I'faith we will have a gay ball; the 
castle is large enough to contain half the 
gentry round, much more to receive so 



88 OWEN castle; 

compact a circle ; your aunt does not yet 
know of it, and before I acquaint her, 
I expect you to say if it meets your ap- 
probation." 

" Perfectly, dear sir ; any thing that 
can contribute to the satisfaction of my 
aunt's relations, must be agreeable to me," 
said she. 

^^ But will you partake of the amuse- 
ments r will you take on yourself the ar- 
rangement of the pleasures ? will you com- 
mand what you wish, and leave the rest 
to obedient servants ?" cried he, seizing her 
hand. 

" No, Sir Matthew, returned she, with- 
drawing it ; let my aunt or Mrs. Wallace, 



0R, WHICH IS THE HEROINE.-* 89 

who understand such things better than 
I, conduct the whole; I have neither 
spirits nor incHnation for the task." 

'^ But you will join in the pleasures? 
you will dance ?" cried he, looking beseech- 
ingly on her. " Never can I dance again. 
Sir Matthew — pray pardon me/* said she, 
sighing deeply. 

" If you don't promise to dance, and 
with me too, I will give no ball, as 
welcome to your aunt's friends, so there's 
an end," — cried he in a resolute and disap- 
pointed key. 

" Then painful as the effort will be, 
I promise to dance, for the sake of the 
enjoyment it may afford to others; for 



90 OWEN CASTLE ; 

I should much belie my heart, were I ta 
say I took great delight now in such pas- 
time; — but why. Sir Matthew make me 
the arbitress in the affair ? Surely I am 
not of so mucii importance!'" 

*^ To me o^ the greatest y' whispered he, 
hurrying away, and approaching Mrs. 
Wallace. 

'^ Well, Sir Knight," cried she, ^' is vic- 
tory obtained ? does the maid of the 
enchanted castle yield to your pressing 
solicitation ? Does she like the thoughts 
of this intended ball, or public breakfast? 
Will she honor the tournament with 
her divine presence ? — to speak in more 
correct terms, does the maid of Owent 
Castle conduct the ceremonies ?'' 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 91 

« No — she refuses to pleaae me in that 
particular, but has consented to share in 
the sports, nay, even to dance ^ answered 
he in high good humour." 

" Mrs Wallace," said the widow to 
Sir Matthew^ " has informed me of your 
intentions ; let me offer my most grateful 
thanks, dear cousin for your politeness 
to my relations/' 

" 2\it, tut, woman" cried he in a jocu- 
lar style, " I will claim relationship with 
the young West Indian too, though I 
dare say he has little of the blood that 
flows in these veinSk." Here his native pride 
arose, he drew his head erect, took three 
pinches of snufF extraordinary, and cast- 
ing a signficant glance at a full length 



92 OWEN CASTLE.; 

portrait of his grandfather, that hung in 
stately grandeur before him, then com- 
paring his own diminutive figure in the 
glass^to that of the gigantic resemblance 
of his forefather, exclaimed '^ 'tis evident 
the line from whence I sprung could 
never have had an intercourse with sugar 
barrels, or slave drivers; therefore I'll 
■wave all claims of relationship, for ma- 
th inks my grandfather frowns at the in- 
tended degradation, of affinity between 
hh heir and that of a planter." 

* No'* (said Mrs. Wallace, perceiving 
Mrs. Milbourne was hurt, and ^fearing 
Sir Matthew would resume his former- 
self in spite of all her endeavours to in- 
spire him with temporary good humour), 
" no, Heaven forbid that Mr, Milbourne 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 93 

should look SO frightfully grand with his 
tips, peaked chin, and long hair, with 
armour and shield ; oh, lud a mercy ! he 
looks for all the world, as if he would 
fright us all out of the house. Your 
grandfatlier might have been a good sol- 
dier in former days. Sir Matthew, but 
give me the gay ones of the present day; 
what lady would fall in love with such a 
son of Mars ; his heart appears as impene- 
trable as his coat of mail." 

The conversation now took a different 
turn, as she had hoped ,• the pride of blood 
was forgot when the lovely Grace advanced 
to Sir Matthew, leaning her white arm 
on his shoulder, asked if the portrait of 
the young lady which hung by the side of 
the knight in armour, was his grand- 
mother. 



94 OWEN CASTLE; 

*^ She was indeed," answered he, " my 
grandmother, and the knighfs armour 
was more admired by her, than the scarlet 
of the present warriors can be by the 
belles of the present age. That scarf 
that falls from his right shoulder to his 
left hip, was of her working, embroidered 
with the emblems of mercy, that was 
given him as a token of her love ; and she 
was the most constant of her sex^ during 
a courtship of 7i7ne years, my grandfather 
has been heard to say she never gave him 
reason to suppose her affection diminished 
or inclined to another. 



^' Nine years," cried Mrs. Wallace, 
^J nine weeks you mean. Sir Matthew?'' 



N05 nine years" replied he. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE .•' 95 

*' Oh! defend me !" returned she^ '' how 
could so sweet a creature as that picture 
represents, though in a clock case of a 
<^ress, endure that grim visage of his, year 
after year making faces at her ; for he, 
might strive in vain to be agreeable, till 
she had counted nine — why I should have 
been sick to death at the sight of his 
stately person, and certainly run away 
before the wedding was over/' 

*^ The ladies of former times,'' said Sir 
Matthew with some acrimony '^ did not 
■approve of the present prevailing fashion 
of nnimng away," 

*• True, Sir Matthew," returned she 
with a laugh, " their shoes were tight 
and crippled them : but now our slippers 



^ OWEN CASTILE ; 

are so flat and easy, we are off before 
they could buckle theirs on." 

" You mean, madam*' replied he, " that 
to run away cost the maidens of ancie7it 
times some deliberation, while our mo- 
<Jern ones go off without any, and the 
slackness of their slippers often cause a 
Jalse step'' 

'' You are severe. Sir Matthew," said she, 
pushing him gently away; "but talking of 
steps, where are we to find beaus to dance 
with. I shall positively waltz with Mil- 
bourne in my very best manner; I doat 
on waltzing with an elegant youth, what 
can be more delightful ; don't you, Grace r" 
asked she, beginning to float round her. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 97 

" No, I cannot say I admire them," 
answered she. 



"And why not/' demanded Mrs. Wal- 
ace, '^ can any thing display the figure 
better r" 

" In my thinking," returned the artless 
girl, " it displays it too much." 

" Nonsense, child," said Mrs. Wallace, 
half angry, " what notions you have — 
got hie, got hie , beyond supposition." 

" Perhaps they are," answered she laugh- 
ingly, "but when my dancing master had 
half taught it to me, I blushed and refused 
to finish it. 

▼OL. I. F 



98 OWEN CASTLE; 

"Oh! Miss Grace, take care what you 
say/' cried Mrs. Wallace, *' you delicate 
ladies are very odd in your conceptions, 
give me leave to ask, why you wold not 
:finish learning an innocent waltzf " 

" Because I thought there was a fami- 
liarity in the figure, and embracing; turn- 
ing round, makes a weak head giddy^ and 
tlien one is apt to hold tight of one's part- 
ner for fear of falling/' 

" Well, and what of that:" asked Mrs. 
Wallace. 

** Why, nothing particular, only I think 
single ladies should wait until they are 
wives before they waltz.'* 

*' Oh \ you would, with all your over- 



OR, WHICH n THE HEROINE? 99 

straining modesty, let married women 
waltz ?" 

"Yes," answered Grace, "with their 
husbands." 

" Weil, I have often observed that ladies 
of pretended refined sentiments, are the 
least so in reality, and make the innocent 
pleasures they take no delight in, appear 
odious or improper. From enjoying what 
they see transports others to the height of 
joyous gaiety, they descend to malice, and 
pervert playful ease into famiharity of 
the grossest kind," muttered Mrs. Wallace, 
and with evident marks of inward vexation, 
sullenly seated herself^ 

" Believe me, madam," said Grace, ap- 
F 2 



100 OWEN CASTLE; 

proaching her, " it was neither malice nor 
envy that gave me a dislike to waltzing, 
but an innate reluctance to join that fa- 
shionable mode of dancing. I own I can- 
not accept freedoms from strangers, or 
those presuming persons that accident may- 
mingle in a ball room, who take liberties 
that are without a name, and which would 
appear, if complained of, fastidious ; or 
placing a meaning to what was to the 
understanding of many, meant as nothing 
beyond the lightness of the moment, and 
fiatter the offender with the liberty being 
obsei'ved. To avoid this, a young female 
mustsilently endure what is repugnant to 
herdelicacy^ orentirely withdrawfrom what 
places her in so disagreeable a situation. 
I did not mean to offend you, madam, 
by delivering my opinion, which I do not 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? lOl 

wish you to abide by, but to forget, should 
it displease you." 

"You know my temper," returned Mrs» 
Wallace; "not conceiving harm myself, 
I never suspect my conduct can be scruti- 
nized unjustly by others; my spirits are 
naturally high, and will transport me, 
when on a subject I like/' 

"Well, well!" said Sir Matthew, "no 
more of this, but let us enumerate our 
neighbours, and arrange to whom we shall 
send invitations for the ball." 

Mrs. Wallace's countenance brightened, 
and her displeasure vanished as she countisd 
each individual that came within her know- 
ledge. " There are for beaux," said she, 
F 3 



102/ GWEN CASTLE; 

^* first of all (for I shall name them according 
to their rank) your name-sake. Sir Matthew 
S^taivelingjabachelor oftvvo thousand ayear; 
I daie be sworn he will be foundin a corner 
of Im mouldering castle. — A card for him. 

^' He has let thecastle fall'to decayjand em- 
ployed the money that would have repaired 
it^ in building a modern cottage to reside 
in. He told me, when last I met him, in 
his easy way, that the old castle would 
make a most beautiful ruin, a fine object 
at a distance!" cried Sir Matthew, out of 
patience at the disrespect he had shew his 
ancestors. 

'* Then comes the Lady Temperance 
Matthias, his maiden kinswoman, who 
lives in single blessedness, about three 



ORj WHICH IS THE HEROINE? l03 

miles off, at that dismal abode called the 
rookery ; Sir INIatthew can call and take 
her up in his carriage on his way here, so 
we shall be sure of her compan}^ Then 
there is handsome Tobit Swithin, the 
pupil of Mr. Maskall the parson, a youth 
of considerable expectations, a good dancer 
and extremely good-natured ; some call 
him foolish Tobit, but we shall judge for 
ourselves anon. — Two cards for him." 

" Then there is the elegant Rufus Mar- 
Hiaduke, the young parson, who looks like 
an angel, and preaches divinely, and 
to whose little church I would go much 
oftener, were it not so far off. By the 
bye, old Maskall and he are sworn ene- 
mies ; envy on one side, and contempt on 
the other.— Well, a card for Rufus.** 
F4 



104 OWEN CASTLE ; 

*^Then there are three brothers, Griffith, 
Guy, and Nathan Singleton, all bachelors, 
living they say in a state of uninterrupted 
happiness; (of which I have my doubts) 
in that romantic spot, Pheasant Farm, but 
here they shall come, and perhaps the 
pretty, insipid. Miss Eve Mildred, may 
melt one of their stony hearts. — Four 
cards.** 

" Then comes the five Miss Merediths^ 
Prudence, Maud, Rebecca, Sabina, and 
Jemima; they have about a thousand 
pounds each, when they marry, but hea- 
ven knows when that day will arrive ; they 
live with an old uncle, who is so crabbed 
and recluse, that they are as it were shut 
in a prison ; but I'll force the doors, and 
bring them away in spite of Argus. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 105 

Prudence, I am sorry to say, is a most de- 
termined old maid of thirty- seven, very 
ugly, very cross, but fond of cards, scandal, 
and a young beau, (when she can get one.) 
Maud is about thirty, mild in her temper, 
pleasing in her manners, and not unper- 
sonable ; but ill health constantly keeps 
her at home. Then Rebecca is as con- 
stantly abroad ; very masculine in her 
manners, and coarse in her person ; is an 
excellent jockey, a famous huntress, her 
voice harsh and loud, her conversation 
consists of littlfe else but horse-racing, 
dogs, and fox-hunting. She boasts she 
never took a needle in her hand since ten 
years old ; she makes charming flies for 
fishing, and very liberally presents them 
to the gentlemen of her acquaintance, v?ho 
approving her art, return a little battery 
f5 



lo6 OWEN castle; 

and attention by way of payment. Sabina 
is the reverse of her sisters in every thing; 
her temper is quick, and her feelings sen- 
sitive, her person small, but exceeding 
pretty ; her manners soft, and adorned by 
every effeminate grace. Jemima is tall, 
aukward and rompish, turbulent in her 
temper, and pettish in her manners; her 
face is handsome, but her hungry bones 
rising almost through her skin, give a 
wretched appearance to her height, which 
she endeavours to conceal by wearing short 
frocks, thereby exposing her matchy arms 
and miserable legs ; but enough of these, 
they will shortly speak for themselves. — ^ 
Five Cards." 

'' Then there is Theobald Raymond and 
his brother Titus, they must come, they 



ORj WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 1 0/ 

are charmiao^ creatures, but very different 
in their persons. Theobald is a good fi- 
gure but extremely plain in his features, 
is proud, sentimental and reserved, seldom 
happy himself, and rails at those that are * 
he has finished his studies, and is on a 
visit to his mother, the talkative lady of 
Bloom-grove ; his fortune will be hand- 
some. Titus is a delightful creature, has 
a smart, dapper little person, a round 
rosy countenance, and a twinkling black 
eye, in which you may read mirth and 
mischitf. He plays on the flute, sings 
a merry song, dances, coquets, and finally 
charms all the girls ; but is a rover, never 
true to any above a month ; he has an es- 
tate of six hundred a year, and is far hap- 
pier than his brother with his thousands. — ' 
Three cards there, for the old ladv must 
F 6 



108 OWEN CASTLE; 

come^ if it be only to stick her at the card 
table. 



'• Then there is young Solomon the 
quaker, a very comely youth with a good 
fortune, and much inclined to wicked pas- 
times, such as music, dancing, and chat- 
ting with the pretty girls. Yea, verily," 
cried Mrs. Wallace, rising on her toes, 
and clasping her hands upon her bosom, 
"Solomon must be invited to dinner, but 
not a word on the card of such vanities as 
aforesaid, lest Tabithaand Zachary should 
be moved by the spirit of wrath, and for- 
bid the youth Solomon to join in such 
lewd sports.'* 

She was irresistible in her imitative 
powers, and her hearers could not restrain 



ORWHICH IS THE HEROINE ? IO9 

a laugh. There were several more of the 
neighbourhood invited to the ball, which 
was to take place in the beginning of Sep- 
tember. But before the arrival of Mr. 
Milbourne and his intended bride, we will 
give a short account of Mrs. Wallace, 
lest more important events occupy our 
future pages. 



110 OWEN castle; 



CHAPTER V, 



The Origin of Mrs. Wallace. 

W HEN persons have felt the loss of 
education in their youth, and have been 
put back in life on that account^ they are 
doubly desirous that their offspring should 
not s^^uffer privations of a similar nature, 
and by over anxiety for their mental ac- 
quirements, often hurl ruin on heads, that 
otherwise might have been content and 
happy in a moderate share of cultivation, 
such as became the sphere that they were 
by birth likely to move in. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE." Ill 

Mothers, I charge you, consider well 
what claims your daughters have to for- 
tune, ere you, by misplaced generosity of 
education, create ambition in a weak 
mind ; give not your daughters a taste for 
accomplishments unnecessary to their con- 
fined finances; if you do, beware of the 
sorrow you expose them to, tremble at 
the price they too often pay for former 
indulgence. 

Farmer Rae was an honest man, plain 
in his manners, warm in his heart, hasty- 
of temper, but soon appeased; his morals 
were sound, and the constant sentence he 
uttered, when r^igion was the topic, was, 
^' Let every man do as he would be done 
by." — ^To this he acted up in every in- 
stance of his life; his neighbours were 



11 i OWEN CAJSTLE; 

ever ready to assist his harvest, to help 
him pay his rent, if the produce of his in- 
dustrious toil failed; sure of punctual pay- 
ment with the like friendship, should the 
same ill-luck befall theaiselves — but with 
all this, his understanding was not com- 
prehensive, nor able to digest any intri- 
cate point of debate; in such dilemmas, 
he had recourse to a friend, on whose 
learnmg he would say he could depend. 
His coun =ellor was the clerk of the parish, 
who never refused his information on any 
knotty subject, which the farmer required 
to be discussed; these debates generally 
took place over a tankard of his heady 
ale. Amongst the many virtues of this 
honest farmer, was an auful reverence for 
the church ; parsons v^M^. lamed men he 
would cry, and knowed evl^y thing ; but it 



ORj WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 113 

never occurred to his unsovvn brain, that 
all parsons were not Solomons of wisdom, 
and that Latin and Greek might be put 
mto a skull, as thick perhaps as his own. 
The parson was not to be approached by 
such a rustic as he, but the clerk, Na- 
thaniel Grubb, loved good cheer, knew 
nearly as much as the minister himself, 
(for his second-hand uisdom could not be 
detected by Farmer Rae) and answered 
in every particular as well as the superior; 
for he took in the wetkly paper, could 
talk politics, had a brother an attorney's 
writer, a):d could give a hint on law 
matters in private to a cavilling neigh 
bour, for which, in lieu of fee, a nam or 
side of bacon, a cheese, a young pig, or 
a few bottles of elder-wine were sure 
©f welcome. Besides this limb of the 



1 i 4 OWEN CASTLE ; 

church, honest Rae was blest with an 
helpmate, as great an original as himself 
in her petty ways. 

Dolly Maybush had been dairy-maid at 
the great house, and amongst Lord Or- 
minstead's household had gained a distant 
smattering of London fashions and tonish 
noiions, from John the footman, and my 
ladj^'s maid, on whom she waited with 
cream (;f a morning; the cast-ofF finery 
of Mvh. Kitty, made a due impression on 
her tasteful fancy, the milk pail suddenly 
became too heavy for her hand, and hy^ 
being more handy about china, she was 
admitted by the housekeeper into the still 
room, from thence to wait on the ivalting 
gentlewoman, Mrs. Kitty, and as her as- 
sistant taken to town, when my lady Or- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 115^ 

ni instead returned to shine in the great 
world. At the table when in the servant's- 
hall, Dolly was courted by suitors, as 
numerous as her lady, my ladifs maid, 
which did not exactly please the town- 
bred Kitty, for the butler certainly did 
not behold the plump and rosy Dolly 
with indiiFerence. 

Mrs. Kitty resolved on getting rid of 
so dangerous a rival, and on the family's 
return to their seat, D^jlly was dismissed, 
but not until she had at church attracted 
honest Rae, who, enamoured of her beau- 
ty, shortly after married her. The 
tongues of villagers are as much inclined 
to scandal as those belonging to the more 
enlightened Londoners, and to say the 
truth, dame Gossip was very busy with 



11 6 OWEN CASTLE; 

the fame of fair Mrs. Rae, who soon pre- 
sented her husband with a daughter. — 
The christening did not escape contro- 
versy, particularly when the kind butler 
stood godfather to Dolly's pretty babe; 
but honest Rea was happy in spite of all. 
their chattering. 

Mr. Fopinjay^ the butler, was, in the 
farmer's mind, a very worthy man, and 
treated him handsomely, whenever he 
made a call at the great house, which was 
frequently on a Sunday afternoon, when 
in a snug corner of the butler's room^ 
seated in an easy chair, he would dose 
over a bottle of good old Port, his brain 
deeply intent on wheat and barley, and 
the important traffic of the recent Satur- 
day, little dreaming that Mr. Popinjay 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? Hf 

Iiad taken the opportunity his drowsiness 
gave him, to visit his god daughter, some 
have said, Mrs. Rae ; but of this we are 
positive, that he could not see one without 
the other, till the little Arpaaia had at- 
tained her tenth year. 

Arpasia ! I think I hear my reader ex- 
claim, what a name for the daughter of 
DoUt/ Rae ! — but I trust you will suspend 
your reproof upon Dolly, as Mr. Popin- 
jay had given the child the n^me in oppo- 
sition to the plain farmer, who wanted her 
to be christened Sally, Madge, or Jane, 
but these were in the polite butlers 
opinion, vulgar names, and fit only for 
ordinary children of low extraction; he 
had been to the pit of Covent Garden 
Theatre, had seen plays performed in all 



lis OWEN CASTLE; 

the pomp and show, for which the public 
are so eager, amongst the rest, Tamerlane. 
Arpasia was the name of the heroine which 
most interested his feeUngs ; besides, it 
^vas high sounding, romantic^ and out of 
the common road, and Arpasia was de- 
termined on by Mrs. Rae, for that very 
reason, — in vain did the farmer protest he 
could not pronounce it, he was unheeded ; 
Mr. Popinjay had said, Arpasia was gen- 
teel and elegant y and th^t was enough — 
but we digress. 

At ten years old, Miss Arpasia Rae was 
the admiration of the village; the fond 
parents joined in the praise of her beauty 
with pride and exultation, and foresaw she 
would be the making of them and herself. 
Even at this dawn of reason she showed 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINfE ? II9 

'great capability of understanding, she 
could read the spelling-book which Na- 
thaniel Grubb had given her through, and 
was pronounced by him a prodigy of 
learning ; — she could likewise coax her 
mother with all the winning playfulness 
of infantine endearment, when a favourite 
toy or sugar-cake was to be obtained; or 
if that did not succeed, could pout and 
-cry with unwearied perseverance until the 
prize was given for which she sighed; — 
instead of correcting this budding art, the 
vain mother encouraged it, by never re- 
sisting her importunity, — she looked so 
pretty when coaxing, Mrs. Rae would say, 
when receiving a reprimand from her 
husband for spoilii^g . the child — what 
mother could refuse the child any thing ; 
-and when she was in her pouts, her ruby 



120 OWEN CASTLE; 

lips, swelled so beautiful in sullenness, 
that it would melt the heart of a stone. 



" Now, Dolly, mind I tells ye, you will 
have reason to curse the hour you were 
born, if you go on so ; only see to the airs 
she is taking now,'* cried he pointing to 
Arpasia, who with a swimming air was 
dancing before a glass, admiring her y el- 
low shoes and pink sash. — " Dear heart! 
the baby's head is turned wi* finery already. 
— Arpy^ I say, come away from there." 

*^ Let her bide, Thomas, sure she is 
doing no harm" returned his wife; ^^ Do 
but look what a notion she has o'dancing, 
her pretty feet go pit a pat to a tune of 
her own making; only hearken to her; 
how natural she do turn a tune already,** 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 121 

Thus saying, the vain silly mother flew to 
clasp the idol of her soul. 

'^ Dolly, Dolly," the father would cry, 
" I can love my child as dear as my life, 
but to make the fool on it, as you do, I 
can't, so hear what I say. To save her 
from ruin, Til send her to boarding school, 
where she may larn some'ut more than 
you can teach her ; I'll take her up to 
th' house and have a consultation wi' Mr. 
Popinjay on the matter : I am got up a 
little in repute, tho* I say it, and can 
afford to give my only child an edication, 
fit for the squire's daughter; I never 
knowed the blessing of laming myself, 
which always kept m,e back like — and my 
chick shan't be served as I was. Why 
only see, Dolly, the good as '11 come on it; 

VOL. I. G 



122 OWEN CASTLE; 

she will be able to read the newspaper^ 
and the hardest chapter out o' the Bible 
to me o* Sunday without stopping to spell 
al every word as I do; then she will 
virile for me upon business, and see that 
I make up my accounts right; for be- 
tween you and me, Dolly, I often had a 
notion^ that Nathaniel Grubb have done 
me out of many pounds, o' that fashion, 
when I have given him my slate to cast 
properly up. I should mayhap have done 
better in my auk ward fancy, but I don't 
mean to rake up old times; but as I were 
saymg, myArpy shall have larmng^and if 
I can't trust my own natural bom babe 
\vi* my money, who in the varsel world 
can I ? so no more screeting and scolding 
Dollv, for I be determined on't : she shall 
study behaviour, and manner fulness, and 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? l25 

artificial fine needle work, like Miss 
SpriggSj to hang in parlour; so give me 
my hat off peg, and I'll take her directly 
to my worthy friend, Mr. Popinjay, her 
godfather, and he shall find out a school 
to his mind for her, as he understands 
these here grand doings and schoolderings 
better than I ; but don't put on the girl 
them outlandish breeches dangling wi' fur- 
belows about her toes ; let my Lady Or- 
minstead, dress her children in unnatural 
ways, if she do like, but don't let me see 
Arpy, skipping about in a pair of breeches; 
'tis not becoming for farmers to dress 
their chickens like the lords o' the land 
do theirs. I be ashamed to meet my lady 
when she be dressed out so unfitting; 
she axed me one day, if that smart beauty 
were mine, and hang me, Dolly, if Ivvasent 

G2 



124 OWEN CASTLE; 

dofFt so, I felt as tho' I were ashamed to 
say yes; then my ]ord came riding by 
wi' his son, as fine a lad as any in the 
country round, not like most lord's sons 
sickly looking, but wi* a face like the sun 
on a summer's evening, all of a glow ; and 
then my lord played wi' Arpy, and said 
that the badger was happy in such a 
sultaney; and then my lady said i;he was 
dressed in character, pointing to her 
breeches and laughing all the time. I 
don't know what my lord and lady were 
meaning by talking of the badger^ but I 
am sure they had a joke between them 
about Arpy's name, and that moment I 
would have given a bushel of wheat to 
a had it Peggy, or any honest simple 
name lit for a christian farmer.'' 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 125 

*' You are a fool, Thomas, to mind 
my lady : she were only afraid Arpy would 
be handsomer than her daughter Lady 
Jane. What if the child was fine; if I 
make her so wi' my own hands, aii't I to 
do as I like ? Win gold and wear it to be 
sure. Your money is your own, you don't 
ax them for theirs, so I shall put on her 
best trowsers in spite of lier jeering lady- 
ship. Breeches! la! Thomas, how you call 
them things out of their names, I tell you 
they are Turkish trowsers." 

" Turkey trowsers," returned simple 
Thomas; " well, well I suppose she won't al- 
ways wear them, so mind I tell you,I*ll give 
no more money for such nonsense. Why 
I never heard the like, there is no know- 
ing girls from boys now a days ; you may 
G 3 



126 OWEN CASTLE; 

cut up your aprons if you like to fur- 
below all her clothes a' this fashion/* 

'' Well, and so I will, Tom Rea, go 
without any apron at all, and see how that 
wou'd look." 

'• No/' answered he, " I should not like 
that— a farmer's wife should never be with- 
out a cap and apron; but I hope you don't 
go for to call the bit of white gauze as 
clips over your silk gown on a Sunday 
an apron ?" Here the farmer enjoyed a, 
hearty laugh at his wife's expense. 

But when the flaming scarlet coat and 
bonnet were put on, with three feathers 
of the same colour, with a satin bow, the 
farmer grew angry, and cried, " Hey day. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 12/ 

Dolly ! art mad, woman? Where did you 
get this staring colour, and flaunting fea- 
thers? Take them off, Dolly, I won't go 
through the village wi' such ^finery ; I 
woudent be the mock of the folks for any 
woman's proud heartedness in the nation." 

" Her godfather gave them to her, Tom 
Rae ; it wasent your money as went for 
them/' cried his whimpering wife, 

" Don't tell me a lie, Dolly, you know 
r don't like it ; I see by your turning 
so red, you be telling one ; you never 
gives me a lawful account of the money 
you gets at market by the butter, cheese 
and eggs, you know you don't, Dolly ; and 
to cheat your lawful husband is bad on 
ye, it is, when you have all your lieart 
G4 



128 OWEN CASTLE; 

can desire in a proper manner ; you go as 
fine to church as any dame in the parish^ 
aye, and finer too." 

*^ Well, and so I ought, Tom Rae," re- 
turned she, bridling up, advancing her 
voice to its highest key, " I ave genteel folks 
to keep company wi', Tom Rae, as knows 
manners, and puts a value on costly geer. 
I have been to Lunnon, I knows beha- 
viour, which is more than you do; you 
ought for to be proud of so smart and 
handsome a person as I be, for I might 
have had the best of the village if I 
hadent been a fool, instead of a clod- 
hopping lump of a farmer, as knows no- 
thing of life and quality goings on." 

" I knows," cried Thomas with a wink. 



OR, WHICH 19 THE HEROINE? 129 

^^ Mr. Gruhh, has a mind to you ; I wasn't 
so blind as you may think ; and if ever I 
catch him in my dairy again, I'll make 
his skin as black as his coat, and my 
fist shall knock out a dozen more of his 
teeth, and then he may whistle the psalms 
out how he can." 

Honest Rae had pitched upon the last 
person, that was likely to attract his wife's 
taste, but the neighbours had given him 
mysterious hints, and his clear compre- 
hension could not conceive the object 
at whom they pointed, so his suspicions 
fell on the poor clerk, because he was 
often at his farm, used to praise Mrs. 
Rae's tea and elder wine, and congratu- 
late his friend on having such a clever, 
comely wife. 

G5 



130 OWEN CASTLE^ 

Mr. Grubb was no longer consulted, 
but neglected by his former friend and 
companion. The penetrating eye of Na- 
thaniel soon discovered the new friend, 
and his mean soul longed for revenge, 
but Mr. Popinjay had power, and was 
not to be insulted by so common a person 
with impunity ; therefore the ire of the 
innocent Grubb, was only smothered, 
until a fair opportunity occurred to give 
it vent. 

To suspect Mrs. Rae with such an ugly 
quiz as the clerk, was to her a never to 
be forgiven affront, and by the virulent 
manner she resented this attack upon her 
reputation, completely hid the real cause 
of complaint ; none dare openly avow 
their doubts^ for she was a very virago 
in defence of her virtue. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 131 

I have heard a very learned counsellor 
declare, that it was wonderful how much 
depended on the power of oratory to sus- 
tain a bad cause ; whether Mrs. Rae was 
of the same opinion, we know not, but of 
this we are certain, she by her eloquent ap- 
peal to her misled husband's wit, gained 
the day, and Miss Arpasia went to the 
great house in the scarlet coat, bonnet, and 
feathers. 

Tlie event of the long debate with 
Mr. Popinjay was, that Miss Arpasia 
should be taken to town under his care^ 
and afterwards be sent to a stylish board* 
ing-school at Brompton, where he could 
have the pleasure of seeing her frequently^ 
and she could sometimes have the enter- 
g6 



132 OWEN CASTLE; 

tainment of the town, when of a fit age 
to enjoy it. 

Every thing was arranged, and Miss 
Rae was taken the following spring to 
London. We will pass over seven years, 
and the holidays, which she spent in 
all the gaieties of London which Mr. 
Popinjay could introduce her to, her re- 
sidence being at the town house of my 
Lord Orminstead. 

We will now bring our reader to the 
time of her return home, in the second 
carriage of my Lord Orminstead's equi- 
page, accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Pop- 
injay, late Mrs. Kitty, their discourse 
turning on the dulness of tiie country. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 133 

" I shall be dead," cried Arpasia, in that 
wilderness of a farm with that rustic papa 
of mine, after sharing in the pleasures 
of London, and your dear society and 
that of the young ladies at Brompton 
school. Well, my music and tambour may 
fill up the tedious time tolerably for 
awhile; but I'm sure I shall be soon tired 
of a rural life*/' 

" You may have something else to do," 
(cried Mrs. Popinjay with malignant sa- 
tisfaction) *' for I have heard that poor 
farmer Rae has sunk in the world greatly 
within these last seven years, and should 
not wonder, Miss Arpasia, if you were 
obliged to milk the cows, churn the but- 
ter, and go with it upon Old Dobbin the 
blind horse to market every Saturday.* 



134 OWFN castle; 

" Heaven forbid!'* cried she with a 
look of suprise and cofitempt, " milk the 
filthy cows, why it would spoil my hands 
for ever ; and as for trotting upon Old 
Dobbin to market, I could never endure 
after learning at Astley*s to ride with 
grace and ease ; t'would drive me mad.'* 

'* I'm sorry for it, ''said Mrs. Popinjay, 
'^ but think you ought to assist all that 
lies in your your power for your poor 
father, who has laid out so much upon 
your education and bringing up." 

*^ It was his duty to give me education," 
returiied she sharply; " there is little obli^ 
gation in that ; if he had not pleased him- 
self by it he would not have done it ; I 
think he ought to be thankful that I have 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 135 

profited by my tuition, in the suprising 
way I have, and not expect me to conde- 
scend to drudge in so low a department, 
to which I will never submit, Mrs. Popin- 
jay, I promise you ; I know what is due to 
myself." 

'' I hope you do, Arpasia," said Mr. 
Popinjay ; " you must never descend to 
vulgar employments ; a girl of your beauty 
and accomplishments may hold her head 
above the low creatures nature may have 
given her for parents; was it not for an 
intercourse with us, who Jcnow a little, I 
should pity your miserable lot at Oak- 
Farm." 

The conceit with which this was ut- 
tered would have astonished those who 



136 OWEN CASTLE; 

were unaccustomed to the gentry belong- 
ing to the second table of an English 
peer; but to those who have observed with 
accuracy their servile imitations of their 
betters, the character of Mr. Popinjay will 
appear a correct copy of their ignorant 
insolence and absurdity. 

Thus prepared to despise her honest fa- 
ther and his poverty, we cannot wondeF 
at the disgust she took to her neat but 
rustic home, when she saw its thatched 
roof pet-ping through the foliage of the 
surrounding coppice, and heard the low- 
ing of the herd, with the gingling bells 
that adorned the returning team, as they 
entered the lane that led to the barn and 
stable ; it seemed Hke discord to her re- 
fined ear. The quacking of the ducks in 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 13f 

the pond before the cottage, were to her 
distorted imagination^, like the croaking of 
ravens on her entrance to the abode of 
misery ; — her father and mother stood at 
the pretty gate, (which was dressed round 
with honeysuckles and sweetbriar) ready 
to receive her as she alighted from the 
travelling chariot ; each at the same in- 
stant sprang forward to embrace the ob- 
ject of their fond regard, holding her by 
turns in their affectionate arms, and press- 
ing her warmly to their parental hearts. 

" Don't suffocate me so,*' cried Miss 
Arpasia, pushing them from her, '^ nor 
overpower me with so many questions at 
once, it is the rudest thing in nature." 

For her parents had been enquiring 
how she hked her line journey in the gay 



138 OWEN castle; 

coach; and about her health; how Mr. 
and Mrs. Popinjay were, who she had left 
at the great house ? &c. 

^^ ril answer all by and by ; don't teaze 
me now, but mind how you take this 
band-box, as it contains a Parisian dress- 
cap, that I would not have crushed for the 
world ; and mind how you carry my port- 
folio, if you scatter my drawings I shall 
die with vexation; and mother, here j& 
my devili mind how you take it." 

*' Your ivJiat P" asked her father. 

^^ My Devi), that I play with/' answered"" 
she, 

^^ Well/' cried the farmer, ^Mt is the 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 139 

oddest play thing I ever heard of; take 
care, girl, of such wicked things in time, 
or you may rue the day you took the 
devil, as you call it, for a companion." 

" Pshaw /" cried the young lady, look- 
ing on her parent, " how ignorant you are;, 
don't you know it is an instrument of that 
name, invented to amuse ladies; but I for- 
got, you are so homely, so wretchedly 
recluse, you can know nothing ; you are 
quite an Antediluvian, or Cornish hermit, 
in your ideas.'* 

" I'm no such thing, Arpy " cried her 
father, in a heat, " Vm no deluvian, I am 
a sound churchman, and hate all metho- 
disticalness as much as any Londoner in 
the nation." 



140 OWEN CASTLE; 

" The blessings of stupidity !** ex- 
claimed she, bursting into a loud laugh, 
and pointing at her father with contempt 
and derision — '^ but you shall see me play 
with this terrible invention, which so 
greatly alarms you ; take them in Mrs. Rae 
and nevermind my father's fright.'* The 
happy mother obeyed, and conducted her 
darling to the parlour, where seating her- 
self with a listless air, she cried, " What, 
no sofa, madam? how do you exist with- 
out one!" 

" Very badly," returned the mother, 
(determined to shew her daughter that she 
was better bred than her husband,) "but 
Thomas would never let me ave one, 
tho' I have told him over and over again, 
I could not do without one." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 14 1 

'' Sop/u/,'' said the farmer, lighting his 
pipe, and puffing the smoke across tlie 
tea-table, at which his daughter sat care- 
lessly sipping the tea her mother handed 
to her, ^' what can a girl like you want of 
^sophij? 'tis a bad fashion, rolling and 
lolloping about as thof they wanted to go 
to bed. Dolly wasent so minded, till her 
growed so fat and lumpish. No, no — no 
sophy for me, you will have some'ut else 
to do, child ; you must help mother in 
the dairy, fetch cows home o' evening, 
bring me my meals to the field, mend my 
stockings, and the carter's frock, feed the 
chickens, pick e'm, and get e'm ready to 
take to market. Times are changed, Arpy; 
I can't afford to keep servants now; and 
as mother and me have given you an edi- 
cation, why you must lend us a helping 



142 OWEN castle; 

hand in farm, and a tight maid you be as 
any round ; but that fine long-tailed coat 
of yours must be put by, and your ring- 
lets on your pole must be cut off: when 
you help to turn the hay over^yj must 
forget all your gay London fancies." 

The tea-cup fell from her white hand 
upon the earthen floor and broke into a 
thousand pieces; half choaked by pride 
and smoke, she strove in vain to express 
her sense of degradation and disdain. 

" Why, what's the matter with the 
child?" demanded he, then in the kindest 
voice masked if she was not well. 

*^ Well !" screamed she in an agony of 
passion and disappointment, '- how can I 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 143 

be ivell with such a horrid prospect before 
me! Gracious power! did I hear right? 
Fetch the cows home ; wait on you in the 
field with bread and cheese; make hay- 
amidst a set of low wretches. I can't 
beac the thought. Oh ! I shall die with 
grief!" 

Here a short hysteric and burst of tears 
came to her relief, but so frightened her 
poor father, that she was promised she 
should do nothing disagreeable or out of 
the way, but wait upon herself, if that 
was not too much trouble. 

This point gained, there was another 
to be had, which was a piano-forte ; after 
a great blustering about the expense from 
honest Rae, scolding from Dolly, and 



144 OWEN castle; 

tears from Arpy, it was got, and placed in 
the parlour; the walls hung round with 
her drawings and work, and the earthen 
floor covered by a carpet from the up- 
holsterers, and a sofa, wore, as she would 
say, a more civilized appearance. Letting 
her follow the bent of her inclinations 
without control for above a year, at 
length the simple farmer began to get 
uneasy, and to entertain fears, that in 
giving his only child education, he had 
created a taste for expense and indolence 
which his decreasino: circumstances could 
not support. — He would look on her with 
an heart aching delight as she sat at her 
piano ; listen to her well-directed voice, 
as she warbled forth some new air, and 
mentally exclaim, " She were certain sure 
born for a lady, and if ill luck had not 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE^ 145 

come upon him in such haste, she 
should have had her belly full of music, 
and such like pretty nonsense ; but as 
times was, she must leave it off, and 
go out to service, which would break 
his heart/' 

One afternoon he found her in a very 
tractable humour, and seating himself be 
side her, the big tear bursting from 
his eye, and his voice scarce under com- 
mand, from the swelling of his heart, 
that rose as it were to his throat, and 
impeded his utterance, he gave a hem or 
two, and began his task. 

" This is'nt the firt time as IVe bid thee, 
Arpy, to banish all thoughts of continuing 
in the lady line; because, I a' been misfor- 

VOL. I. H 



146 OWEN castle; 

tunate of late years, and can't give thee a 
forten, fitting to thy bro*tage np, but 
quite otherwise; more's the pity for us all, 
but we can't order things to our hking; 
but must be thankful to a good Providence, 
that they be even as they be. But I need 
not go for to lecture you about pious 
things, for you can read the Bible better 
a thousand times than I do, and I dare be 
sworn knows a good deal by heart. Well, 
I be glad I did give thee larning, o' that 
account; because child, be your befall- 
ments never so cruel to bear, you can look 
into your Bible, and find consolation and 
advice. 'Tis a hard job for me to tell thee, 
Arpy, for I know it cuts ye to th' heart, 
that your edication has cost me as much 
as would have kept thy mother and me, 
(wi' industry) from want in our old age; 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE : 147 

and therefore, and likewise, I be going to 
say, that you should consider on't; and 
now you be quite grown up, a matter of 
eighteen years old, you should lend a will- 
ing heart and helping hand to your mo- 
ther, for I can t afford to keep Peg the 
dairy wench any longer; so I mun pay 
the saucy-tongue her wages, and send her 
off. Now, child, this be the case, you 
must take your choice; if so be you will 
assist 3^our mother at home, or go out to 
sarvice. But I knows which you'll chuse; 
3^ou cannot leave your loving parents, as 
'dve bringed you up so kindly, so thou'It 
stay wi' us, and help me to pay up rent 
by thy industry and dutiful endeavours. — • 
Don'4: cry, Arpy," said he, kissing her affec- 
tionately, '' don't cry ; if I get over this bit 
of trouble, you shall have all your fancies 
H 2 



1-18 OWEN CASTLE; 

again; be a good child, and GocJ love and 
keep thee." — so saying, he hurried out of 
the room to hide the sorrow of his heai^t, 
that he might not afflict his only child 
with the sight of his distress. 

" So/' cried Arpasia, as her weeping 
mother joined her, " here is a fine propo- 
sal from my amiaole father, either to 
drudge in his wretched hovel, or go to 
service." — she trod the room with stately 
indio:nation, an^ier iiashinon from her 
eye, and the bitterest reproaches lighting 
from her tongue upon her mother, who 
stood not daring to interrupt her ; at last 
she demanded to know how her father 
came to be in such straitened circumstances 
go suddenly. 

^•^ Why all along o' that Natt Grubb; 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 14^ 

for Thomas it seems afTronted him ; 
because he were suspicious of his hking 
o* me," cried Dolly, bridhng with disdain^ 
" when heaven knows for vartue there ii5 
none to come up to me in the parish 
or twenty miles round.** 

" I don't want to hear of Mr. Grubb's 

> 

gallantry or^ your discrttion, mother,' 
returned Arpasia, " all I want to know is, 
how my father came to be in all this 
trouble." 

" Why, about twelve years ago, my 
Thomas had borrowed o' Natt Grubb 
two hundred pounds, and signed a note of 
hand to pay it in one year, which he did it 
seems ; but like a ninny hammer as he was 
for certain, paid Natt Grubb in his turnip 
h3 



150 OWEN castle; 

field, as he met hiai a coming from selling 
his wheat and barley to the great factor, 
without no witness ; but the rogue swore 
he would tear up the note of hand, as soon 
as he got home, and so Thomas foolishly 
believed him, being as they were such 
great friends ; but the starved looking 
rogue sent a lawyer to him a week ago, and 
said that if he did'ent send the money soon, 
he would put him in jail. So the lawyer 
has the note of hand safe enough, and if 
so be Thomas can't raise the money 
forthwith, he must go sure and certain to 
prison, for he has no witness to prove he 
paid it ; and then he owes two years rent, 
which is four hundred pounds, besides 
great losses of cattle and horses, so we 
are wholly crazed wi* trouble and dant 
know what will become of us." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROlNEr 151 

** Won't your friend, and my godfather, 
Mr. Popinjay, lend my father this two 
hundred pounds ?" asked Arpasia. 

" No more nor he will fly, Arpy, for 
between ourselves I asked him ; he is, mi- 
serable over his money, and tho' he be 
worth as pretty a penny, as any round, 
he won't part wi' a farthing on't ; so Arpy, 
you must go to sarvice, when we get warn- 
ing to quit the farm, which will kill my 
poor heart at once ; for so handsome and 
genteel a lass as you be, to come down in 
the world is so cruel. The music man is to 
come next week to fetch away your beau- 
tiful thingumbob, as you plays on ; and 
your fine French books, with the picture 
of the lady that made a nunnery of her- 
self for love ; and there's your Italy books, 
H4 



1-53 bWEN CASTLE; 

and loads of musical books as lies under- 
neath ; and the flowers on the satin, in 
the picture frame, and your black lace 
vale is to be sold, and your parasol and 
your silk gowns, and all such like flnery ; 
and then there is four feather beds, that 1 
made wi' my own hands, and two best 
horses out o' the team ; and the silver tan- 
kard, as poor Thomas was so fond on, 
and all the rest of the silver^ with all the 
best things in the house, as I have been so 
long scraping together/' 

Here Mrs. Kae burst into tears, and sat 
bewailing her hard fate, while Arpasia 
continued silent, and regardless of her 
mothers sorrow. At length starting up, 
with a brightened countenance, she cried, 
„I have it; don't fret, mother, I won'l 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 153 

lose my piano or silk dresses, nor shall 
you lose your beds, nor plate, if you will 
be ruled by me." 

Dolly started with surprize and wonder 
on her daughter, and eagerly requested to 
know her meaning ; when after a solemn 
promise of secrecy, she was admitted into 
her daughter's confidence. 

*^ You must know then, mother,'* cried 
Arpasia, "that my young Lord Orminstead 
has frequently met me, and was so struck 
by my personal and mental charms, that 
he has declared he loves me to distraction. 
Now you know the Lord, his father, is 
dangerouslv ill and that when he dies, 
the young one will come in for the title 
and estate; and when that happens, he 
H b 



154 OWEN CASTLE ; 

has sworn to make me Lady Ormlnstead.'^ 
Here she walked gracefully up to the 
glass to adjust her ringlets and settle her 
necklace ; enjoying the vacant gaze of her 
mother, who sat as it were petrified with 
astonishment and delight, and in the 
most easy cavalier way went on in her 
discovery. *'Yes, when I am my Lady 
Orminstead, I shall remove you and my 
father from this, to a snug box of my 
lord's, near Windsor, and leave the low 
wretches of tenants to dwell in it ; but as 
the old lord may not die just yet, T will ask 
the idol of my sympathetic soul, my 
generous Theodosius, to advance this trifle, 
this two hundred pounds, for whicb my 
father would sacrifice his accomplished 
daughter to slavery and contempt. How 
astonished his weak mind will be, when 
he sees me the bride of Lord Orminstead. 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 155 

" I always said as my daughter Arpy 
wou'd turn out to be a great and grand 
lady," cried Mrs. Rae, embracing her in 
a transport of joy ; *' but Thomas and 
neighbours wou'd rate me, and chatter 
about your going so fine, and said I should 
be the ruin on you, but I knowed better. 
I had been in Lunnun, and there I see'd 
fine clothes were every thing. How Miss 
Spriggs will stare, when she hears as how 
you are my lady. I see'd her cock her 
nose up at your silk gown, as was di- 
zen'd wi' ribbon and bows, that you went 
to church in on Sunday: I could see 
her heart were ready to burst a two for 
envy, for Reuben Blackthorn did so gaze 
and sigh as you went by, as if his heart 
were totally gone, and that was enough 
to give her a mortification, for Reuben 
h6 



156 OWEN CASTLE; 

was once a bit of a sweetheart of her's 
until you talked and laughed wi' him." 

" Low wretch," cried Arpasia, with a 
sneer, '' he dares not have the audacity 
to aspire to my love, to the love o? Arpa-^ 
sia, whose blood curdles in her veins 
at the horrid touch of an husbandman, No, 
Thecdosius is the Strephon of the silvan 
plain; I am the Deha of his soul, and 
my father is the rustic shepherd of the 
vale. My Iambs should be adorned with 
roses, and I should be dressed with flowers, 
and shine a second Perditta^ and my 
Theodosius, Florizel, and his enraged 
father, the old Lord ; the Winter's Tale 
quite complete, and the end will prove the 
same. Though I may not turn out the daugh- 
ter pf a king, I am tempted to believe that 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 157 

I Sprung from nobler blood than that of 
a farmer." 

'* Why, as for your father being as you 
say, Arpy, a rusty shepherd, he does look 
monstrous shabby in his fustain jacket 
when about the fields, that's a moral cer- 
tainty; but as for his ever being a king, 
you are quite out there, for I knowed his 
father Ralph Rae, as vulgar and honest a 
farmer as any anywhere, tho' he was 
somewhat of kin to late squire Hacka- 
way, as I have heard tell on ; so thy father 
has noble blood sure enough, and for 
the matter of that ave 1; my grandfather 
was a fishmonger in Whitechapel and 
had a great fortune. She was going on^ 
with a whole string of relations, if her 
daughter, (sick at the low race she derived 



158 OWEN castle; 

her being from) had not interrupted her in 
a most impatient accent, and a command 
to be silent." 

The means to obtain the money to 
stop the selHng off the goods, were now 
considered with due weighty and after 
many disputes, finally settled according 
to Arpasia's plan. — " You must, mother/' 
(cried she in a decided tone, and with 
appropriate action) *^ wait on the young 
lord at the castle; you must make your 
figure as interesting as possible, you 
must not neglect to weep at proper periods 
of your narration, explain the cruel op- 
pression of Nathaniel Grubb, attest the 
probity of my father in all the glowing 
colours of affection and the pure lan- 
guage of innocence, and above all, be 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 159 

sure to represent me, drowned in sorrow 
and dutiful affliction; — say that I could 
not assunne courage to approach his di- 
vine presence, but that I had sent an 
humble request, in conjunction with your 
petition, and then present him a note 
which I shall give you, as soon as you 
are ready to set off. Let me see, 'tis half 
past three o'clock, he dines at home I 
know to-day at five o'clock ; with his sick 
father, because he told me so when he 
promised to meet me by eight in the cop- 
pice to night." 

" Ah Arpy !" cried the mother in alarm, 
'* take heed o*that, 'tis a dangerous thing 
to meet a sweetheart m a coppice at dark ; 
I knows by experience, 'tis cruel dan- 
gerous." 



160 OWEN CASTLE", 

*^ To you, madam," returned her daugh* 
ter with a supercilious glance,*' it might 
threaten evil, but not to one of my supe- 
rior mind, and a youth of his uncommon 
soul ; there have I oft stolen to meet my 
Theodosius, heard him breathe his vows 
in soft murmurs on my listening ear, 
while pale Cynthia, peeping through the 
trees, was the only witness of our ardent 
love/' 

'^ Don't trust her, Arpy ; 'tis not good 
to trust secrets to girls," cried Mrs. Rae, 
with a sagacious shake of the head. 

'< What girl do you mean, madam ! I 
have no kind confident in whose heart I 
could repose my griefs, no gentle adviser 
whose melting nature wou'd soothe the 
anguish of a heart in love." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? l6l 

Here Arpasia sighed and bewailed in 
romantic pathos that fate had not given 
her a sister soul ; this was all she thought 
she wanted to finish the resemblance of 
her situation, to that of the heroine of 
the last novel which she had read. 



" But who be Cynthia?" asked her 
mother. 

" Oh, torture of ignorance !" cried Ar- 
pasia, suppressing a smile of contempt, 
and assuming all the authority the little 
knowledge she had given her, prepared 
to answer her mother's simple question, 

" You are to know, madam, that 
Diana is the goddess of chastity, and 
daughter to Jupiter and Latona. Cynthia 



l6^ OWEN castle; 

is one of her titles. Diana wears a cre- 
scent on her brow, which is emblemati- 
cal of the modest and shining lustre of 
virtue, and this is the reason the moon i* 
called Cynthia and Diana." 

" Oh, aye,** answered her mother, " I 
understands it be all innocence, I was only 
afraid this Cynthia was some busybody 
as might make mischief by telling o'Tho- 
mas ; who if he knowed, wou'd'nt mind 
knocking down a lord, no more nor ano- 
ther man, if he catched him offering to 
mislest his daughter ; but as this friend 
be a goddess, she may keep a silent 
tongue in her head, and never say nought 
to nobody.*!. , 

Arpasia finding her explanation lost 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 1 63 

upon her mother, gave up all further at- 
tempt on that head, and enjoying her 
mistake, assured her that her friend the 
goddess would never betray her confi- 
dence to mortals, whatever she might do 
to the gods, 

Mrs. Rae went to dress herself accord- 
ing to her daughter's desire, but when 
^e returned after near an hour and a 
halfs time, she did not appear so inte- 
resting as her daughter could have 
wished. 

** Why, mother,** she exclaimed on 
viewing her, '• you have not attended to 
my directions ; do take that pink ribbon 
out of your cap, and purple streamer 
out of yonr bonnet ; the green stuff is 



l64 OWEN CASTLE 5 

pastoral and pretty enough, with the 
neat lemon coloured sha\^l and str^.w cot- 
tage bonnet, but the other colours only 
give a vulgar look to the whole, so pray 
take them out." 

"Indeed I sha'nt, Arpy ; I know what 
dress is very well, and I am sure I an't 
been so poverty looking this many a year, 
so I won't d' ye see change my mind any 
more." 

As time was flying swiftly on, Arpasia 
was anxious to get her off, on her er- 
rand, lest she should not be able to ob- 
tain an audience witli Theodosius 
before he went to dinner; so would 
not contend the point with her, only asked 
if $he had been rubbing some powder oa 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? l65 

her face, to give her rubid countenance 
a more delicate and distressed appearance, 
for there was no visible alteration. 

'^ Yes, to be sure I have, but it*s all of 
no use ; I shall be as red as fire when I 
get there ; as for my eyes they are red wi' 
crying, so I shall look sorrowful enough, 
and play my talking part well, I warrant, 
Arpy ; so make no more to do, but give 
me the note to carry to the young lord. 

She read the contents aloud with self 
applause and approbation ; for she had 
taken care to assign to herself all the 
amiable feelings of an affectionate child, 
which she knew would heighten her cha- 
racter with her lover, and add a second 
charm to that of beauty. 



166 OWEN CASTLE ; 

The note ran thus : 

'' I know the valediction of Arpasia, 
will wring the heart of her Theodosius; 
but it must, it must be so ; filial duty- 
demands the sacrifice of love, and she 
obeys ; she quits the sylvan scene of all 
her woes and joys^ where first she learnt 
to love ; nought but despair attends her 
flight, but 'tis for a beloved parent she 
labours^ and the task will appear light. 
Yes, my Theodosius, in vile and abject 
servitude must the adored of thy soul be 
buried for ever from thy view ; the cruel 
hand of power of thy relentless father 
will seize our little all, and turn me and 
my hapless parents forth to want and 
misery, unless some guardian angel ward 
off the threatening blow, and merit my 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? l6j 

eternal gratitude. My trembling hand 
cannot pen a supplication to the only 
one I dare invoke ; tears obtrude, I can 
no more — accept the everlasting love and 
faith of your own lost Arpasiar 

Is it not charming, madam," cried she 
sealing it, " the very style of the undone 
Treandaphelia to her Rodolphin." 

As soon as she had dispatched her 
mother, her father entered with a face 
of importance, and gave a letter into her 
hand which she read aloud. 

*' Dear Farmer Rae, 

*' I have for a long time known 
and respected you, and am sorry to hear 
of your misfortunes, and will, if you won't 



l68 OWEN castle; 

take it amiss, lend you a bit of help in 
your trouble by the loan of a hundred 
pounds, that may stop the proceedings of 
that rascal Grubb for a time, till you can 
turn yourself round : all I ask in return 
is, for you to speak a kind word for me 
to miss Arpasia, for whom I feel the 
sincere respect and value of a true lover, 
and for whom 1 would risk my life to 
prove myself deserving her kind notice. 
I have a good farm of three hundred 
pounds per year, well stocked, to offer 
her, besides a faithful heart that will 
know no happiness, if she don't share 
the gifts of fortune with me; I cannot 
make verses to please her, or make my 
courtship in fashionable manners, but 
this I can assure both her and you, that 
it will be the study of my life to promote. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? I69 

her comfort and felicity. In the hope of 
soon beuig called to wait on her, 

" I am your sincere friend, 
and, Arpasia*s faithful admirer, 
Reuben Blackthorn.'* 

''Here's forten ! Arpy,'* cried her 
father, " the lad of all the land I could 
have wished for thee with regard to money 
and behaviour, sobriety and mannerful- 
ness ; with as good an edication almost 
as your own; he plays on the flute to 
admiration, and dances to the very life, and 
is the pride o' the wenches ; why they be 
pulling caps for him all over the country ; 
and then for his heart, 'tis the best out and 
out, I ever met wi' in my born days ; 
only think of his kindness to lend me a 
hundred pounds, and take you without 

VOL. I. I 



l^O OWEN castle; 

ever a penny of money. Oh ! Arpy, thou 
he's a lucky maid ; kiss thy father ; my 
heart be fail to think of thy prosperity/* 
He kissed her cheek, shook her by the 
hand, and called loudly for his dame, 
to partake of the good news. 

" Is it your desire, father, that I siiould 
encourage the addresses of this clown," 
said she with a disdainful look. 

" Why, yes, Arpy, if so be you can like 
of him ; I would not wish my child to 
take a husband against her will, for no 
consideration whatsomever; but Reuben 
is mortal handsome and genteel like, and 
IVe often caught you together, coming 
from walking, so I be sure you think so, 
as well as J, thof you make so shy.— I 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? Ifl 

shall step across the fields, return him 
my hearty thanks for his kind offer, and 
tell him to make the best use of his time 
to win thee, Arpy. — And mind as you 
speak kindly to the poor lad that loves 
you, and don*t take airs on yourself, as 
your mother did with me ; I can feel for 
he, if you be so minded ; for when Dolly 
were in her tantrums, nothing could come 
up to my spondations of mind." — 

" ^yell, father," cried she, ^' he may 
come, there can be no harm in his 
taking a cup of tea with us." 

The farmer kissed her with a joyful 
heart and flew for Reuben. 



I 2 



173 OWEN castle; 



CHAPTER VI. 



X HE reason why Arpasia consented so 
readily to receive Reuben as a suitor for 
her favour, was to blind her father to 
the design she had on the young lord ; 
for well she knew he would object to 
the clandestine intercourse she main- 
tained with Theodosius, as being one so 
infinitely above her sphere^ and perhaps 
spoil all, by disclosing to lord Ormin- 
stead his son's intention ; besides Reuben 
was a most excellent rival to alarm her 
lover with; and might hasten her marriage 



OKj WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 1^3 

with him, from the fear of losing her. 
Lastly, a spirit of coquetry and triumph 
of seducing a virtuous heart to misery 
and rejection, whose simphcity had 
chosen a beautiful person and fascinat- 
i ng manners, not entertaining a doubt 
but there was a more precious ornament 
within the lovely form, called an uncor 
Tupted heart. 

When Reuben entered the cottage, 
she was struck by his appearance, and 
thought he looked more handsome and 
genteel than ever she had beheld him ; 
his chesnut shaded hair was parted in 
a wave upon his smooth forehead, whose 
whiteness gained additional advantage 
from the sun-burnt and glowing complex- 
ion of his manly cheek ; his eyes were of 



174 OWEN CASTL; 

the brightest blue, and spoke eloquently 
the language of his honest soul, while 
gazing on her he loved; truth and justice 
hovered round his smiling lip, and fi- 
nished a set of expressive features in a 
most prepossessing style; his figure was 
neatly proportioned and of the middle 
stature, with a deportment not clownish 
or affected. His grandfather, (a well read 
man) had undertaken his education him- 
self ; it was of the essential sort, refined 
by a knowledge of polite literature, 
whence his conversation was rational and 
pleasing ; his talent for music, and taste 
for innocent gaiety, recommended him to 
the acquaintance of the youthful, while 
his mental acquirements, benevolence, 
rectitude and persevering industry, gained 
him the respect and friendship of the 
aged. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE.- 1/5 

Arpasia accepted his advances with 
playful ease, and when in timid accents 
he pleaded for her love, she listened with 
a dimpled smile, which gave to his honest 
soul, the vision of hope and happiness. 
When he took his leave at the rustic gate, 
he threw a cornelian heart suspended by 
a small gold chain round her neck, and 
cried *' take, dearest Arpasia, this heart 
in token of the empire you hold over 
mine ; receive it, oh ! receive it for ever," — 
and snatching a kiss darted out of sight 
in an instant 

*' Ah," cried Arpasia, leaning on the 
gate, " I might be happy, very happy 
with worthy Keuben ; I wish he was a lord; 
but whence that wish, I don't love him ; 
no, yet I cannot but admire his ..erson 
l4 



Ij6 OWEN (ASTLE; 

mind, and manners ; his address is so 
respectful, yet so aident; his language, 
simple, yet so warmly tempered by a 
sincere passion, that it penetrates even 
my pre-occupied bosom ; I waver ; I com* 
pare Reuben with Theodosius constantly, 
and Reuben ever gains the victory, I 
feat I have mistook my feelings; I fear 
twas an emulous desire of rising supe* 
rior to my station, to gratify vanity, sor- 
did avarice and ambition, that made me 
think I adored Theodosius ; he was my 
guide to title, equipage and splendour, 
and as such, I gave him gratitude, mis- 
called love ; how contrary are my wishes ! 
I wou'd marry this Reuben, marry him 
for pure love (for now I know the dif- 
ference of my sensations) yet cannot drive 
from my bosom this ambition ; this long- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 17/ 

Migto soar on higlV; this aspiring wish to 
mount the proudest pinnacle of celebrity ; 
to be admired ; to be considered the cen- 
tre of fashion ; and by the effulgence of 
my charms and brilliant establishment, 
eclipse the satellites that would revolve 
round me. Yes, this is my elysium, the 
mere thought of what / may he, agi- 
tates my heart with delight ; I was not 
born to sleep away my life in indolent 
content ; waste it in oblivious seclusion 
and inactive serenity'; — no ; but to step 
beyond the prescribed limits of plebeian 
souls. Then farewell Reuben, farewell 
love ; for which I will not give up the glit- 
tering prospect that lies before my gaze ; 
could 1 do that, I were thine ; as it is, I 
am the bride of Theodosius.** 



16 



i/S OWEN CASTLE; 

How snrciv do we find golden chains 
will never biiui love; he will not inhabit 
with ambition, but takes instant Hight 
from tlie bold intruder, wanders oer the 
cottage, lurks in the grove, and nestles 
closely in the unsophisticated virgin s bo- 
som. The village church clock struck 
eight, she started from her reclining pos- 
ture, and hurried towards the coppice, 
the appointed rendezvous; where she found 
Theodosius, who had read her letter with 
a mixture of satisfaction and risibility. 
He knew her turn for romance, arid ever 
humoured it ; the difficulty under which 
she laboured, gave birth to the most 
sanguine hopes of success that a liber- 
tine could form, yet as he knew the mind 
of Arpasia was discerning under all 
the guise of visionary fiction, so he dis- 



OR, WHK-H 1% THE HEROINE." 17^^ 

tetnbled his real views, and pur^^ued her 
with honourable professions ; he promi^^ed 
her mother to intercede with his father in 
favour of Thomas Rae, and settle every 
thing in an indulgent manner with re- 
gard to the rent ; hkewise to see if Natha- 
niel Grubb's unlawful demand might not 
be disputed hv c/j^:-.': of law; and ended 
by assuring Mr^. liae that all should be 
arranged in perfect satisfaction by quarter 
day. Her heart was eased from a load of 
care,"and feeling no inclination to return 
home, accepted an invitation from Mr. 
Popinjay to stay tea and supper, and play 
a game at cards, so that it was late be- 
fore she returned home ; her husband 
informed her of Reuben's proposal, and 
that Arpasia had been walking with him ; 
this astonished her beyond every things 
\6 



180 OWEN CASTLE; 

nor could she fathom her daughter's de- 
sign, and did not retire to rest, until she 
had satisfied her curiosity by enquiring 
of Arpasia her reason for such proceed- 
ings ; which being explained at full, she 
very contentedly retired to bed.* About 
a week before quarter day, Reuben call- 
ed rather earlier than usual, on Farmer 
Rae, and acquainted him that he h^d 
something of importance to relate, which 
was, that Jack the carter, and Ralph 
Broadcast the ploughman, had made a 
discovery of some worth. It seems that 
Nathaniel Grubb had designedly met 
Thomas Rae on his return from the great 
factor's ; he sent Joe and Ralph to drink 
"a jug of ale to his health, who were 
working in the field ; — the public house 
was but a short distance, and they re- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? ISl 

turned just at the time their maste/count- 
ed out the two hundred pounds into the 
clerk's hands; could swear before any court 
of justice, that they heard the farmer say, 
*' Well, now Nathaniel, I am outof thy debt 
and thank you kmdly for past favours.'* 
Nathaniel made answer and said, " Yes, 
friend, you have paid me justly and duly, 
and I thank you." 

'* They are honest fellows," cried the 
farmer ; *^ them were the very words, but 
how didst find it out.'* 

Reuben explained, that since the com- 
mencement of his friend's troubles, Joe 
had been very unsettled and did not like 
to quit his master Farmer Rae, (who 
had been so very kind to him when he 



83 OWEN CASTLE I 

was sick and could not work,) and go to 
another, but having got his warning, 
he was obliged to look out for another 
service, so came to his farm, where he had 
been some days before he heard of the 
villainy of Grubb against Farmer Rae, 
and determmed to seek Ralph, and by 
their evidence defeat the malice of his 
enemy; Ralph was ready to swear to what 
he had heard and seen. Reuben advised 
his friend to go instantly to law, saying ; 
''Now my good farmer, take this, giving 
him Si hundred pounds, and pay one out 
of the four you owe your landlord, and 
sit down in peace ; he will give you time 
to make up the other ; in the course of 
the year all will be well ; pay me when 
you can, and as you can ; all I want, is 
to see an honest man triumph over his 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 183 

enemy, and enjoy the blessings of an 
easy mind." 

Arpasia's eye spoke her admiration and 
gratitude, but her lips were closed, she 
dared not trust herself to speak, lest 
her heart should give the hand she had 
reserved for another. Ah ! w^hy, she men- 
tally exclaimed, was not Reuben a lord ; 
he has generosity enough to entitle him 
to thedistinction. Her father pressed the 
youth's hand, but could not clearly thank 
him, till some minutes had elapsed, then 
the overflowing language of honest grati- 
tude fully expressed itself. " 1 love thee 
Reuben as my son," said he, " which I do 
pray you will shortly be, and am loth to 
press, as I may say, a free horse to death ; 
my lord ha» promised my wife to be in-- 



184 OWEN CASTLE ; 

dulgently given ; he is rich, and can 
afford to wait better than you, so take 
back this here handsome lend^; I wont 
distress a good youth, I will depend on 
my lord's promises." 

*' Don't lean on a rotten reed, farmer,, 
but be your own friend, when you can,"^ 
returned Reuben ; ^^ great men's promises 
are sometimes fallacious; don't rely on 
them^ for you may too late repent it." 

His mellow voice was expressively firm 
as he said this, and Arpasia felt he was 
right ; a boding fear struck at her hearty 
find a deep sigh escaped her bosom. 

^^ Are you ill', my dear Arpasia r** 
asked Reuben, gently seating himself by 
her side. 



OR, WHICH IvS THE HEROINE? 185 

•* A\ Reuben," returned she, keeping 
her eyes on the work before her. 

" Unhappy then r" said he, taking her 
hand. 



^' Neither, neither^ let me alone/* cried 
she pettishly. 

*' If you refuse me your confidence, 
you hurt, not offend me, Arpasia. I love 
you so entirely, that not to share in your 
distresses, wounds me more than to be 
debarred the sight of you when happiness 
adorns your face with lovely smiles.** 

" Don't mind her, lad,** said the farmer, 
'tis nothing but love of you that troubles 
her mind, so Til leave you to make iier 



18^ OWEN castle; 

unsay it, if she can !" so saying he left 
the room. 



'^ Is it so Arpasia ?" asked he, fixing 
his eyes on her burning cheek ; *' say 
but yes, ah! say it, truly, sincerely, if 'tis 
so, — if not, keep me not in wretchedness 
and doubt, but by a final blow destroy 
my peace, and hopes at once." 

" How strangely you talk, Reuben,'* 
cried she ; " what makes you suppose any 
answer of mine would destroy your ]?eace ; 
have I not given you my word, to wed 
you, Reuben." 

" You have^ Arpasia ; I consider it a 
solemn tie, a tie not to be lightly held ; 
how do you consider it," said he in a 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 187 

deep tone, and fixing his eyes on her 
face. 

*' How should I/' answered she, twist- 
ing her ringlets that hung about her neck, 
and becoming every moment more con- 
fused. 

*' How should you. Oh Arpasia ! is this 
the way to answer me ; whence arises this 
confusion and reserve ? there should be a 
mutual faith and confidence between per- 
sons about to enter into an holy engage- 
ment ; a reciprocal reliance on each other ; 
not an action, not a thought should es- 
cape the scrutiny of the elected partner ; 
then ^\ve your thoughts, your \^ishes, 
and your troubles to me ; let my fortitude 
sustain your weakness ; allow the few 



188 OWEN castle; 

years I have lived beyond you, may have 
given me experience to conduct your 
mind, and ward off encroaching error. 
Is there any favorite desire you would re- 
quest to be granted, any youthful vanity 
or pleasing offering to your worthy pa- 
rents to be presented ere you quit their 
roof? Say, love, and if my means can 
compass it, 'tis thine/'' he hstened for a re- 
ply, but she was silent, is there any secret 
uneasiness, any trouble that weighs on 
your mind, that o'er shades the prospect 
of our union ? Tell me, I implore you, 
Arpasia, that I may instantly relieve you 
from the burden." 

" I am not in trouble, Reuben, why 
do you fancy such things," said she, while- 
tears chased down her cheeks, which she 
endeavoured to hide. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? I89 

'^ Not in affliction, Arpasia, then 
wherefore these woeful sis^ns of sorrow? 
Arpasia do not deny" (he said with a faul- 
tering voice and, taking both her hands 
within his own, looked most earnestly 
in her face) " do not deny, but that 
there is a mutability hovering round your 
heart ; that the ratification of our engage- 
ment being so nigh, fills you with fear 
and doubt, you don't feel assured of being 
happy with me. — I charge you, Arpasia, 
to examine your heart ; if the least reluc- 
tance lurks within it, disclose it now ; do 
not carry a variable unconfirmed mind 
to the altar, and thereby render me and 
yourself miserable. Oh ! Arpasia, where 
is the affectionate candour of real love ; 
you have it not ; something lies like a 
concealed serpent to my peace within 



igo OWEN castle; 

your bosom, — it tortures you, it distracts 
me. — Speak, Oh ! speak at once the fatal 
truth ; there is another, for whom your 
heart is strugghng to be free; for whom, 
you would sacrifice ray future happiness. 
Beware, Arpasia, act not cruelly by one 
who loves you dear as his honour, his 
life; confess now, and save me endless 
misery." 

" No, no, Reuben, my heart is solely 
yours,'' she cried, bursting into tears. 

^^ Thank heaven," he exclaimed, a tear 
starting from his eye, " you are my own 
Arpasia," he embraced her tenderly, and 
rose to depart, '' but still/' said he " Arpa- 
sia, my mind is not satisfied on the cause 
of your apparent distress ; tell me, dearest 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? I9I 

girl, when will you bestow upon me 
your coniidence? Before we are married 
I entreat it/' he said -^ for my sake, — 
for your own." 

'- You shall know it soon," returned she, 
bending down her head. 

'* But when? if not 7iow'* 

'^ Now I cannot tell you, but soon, 
verj/ soon you will know it/* she mourn- 
fully cried, 

" It must be to-morrow, then, x\rpa- 
sia/' cried he, " for the next day gives you 
to me for ever ; and as I would have all 
your future days glide on in tranquillity, 
80 shall you not become my wife with an 



192 OWEN CASTLE; 

unquiet mind. — When may I expect this 
disclosure r" 

^' By ten to-morrow night.'* 

^' Your decision will make the morning 
bright or wretched to me; 'tis long to 
bare suspense, where i/ou are concerned; 
it can be nothing of importance, or you 
would not surely delay the communica- 
tion so tediously/' 

" Of this, be certain, Reuben/* return- 
ed she, " 'tis what will inspire you with 
pity only ; I know your nature too well to 
think it will afflict you long, therefore rest 
content." 

*^ Pity is a gentle passion, Arpasia, and 



OR, waiCH IS THE HEROINE ? 193 

sister to all the estimable virtues of the 
soul ; it often obtrudes on a soft and gene- 
rous breast, -and too frequently dissolves 
it to contemptible weakness ; farewell, my 
love, my hrlde farewell ;" he pressed her 
closely in his arms, and hastened home. 

Arpasia retired to her room, with an 
aching heart, the tumult of her mind and 
spirits could not subside^ and she could 
not sleep ; she did not close her eyelids"^ 
that night; next morning she looked upon 
her wedding clothes^ arranged them in 
her drawer, admired the white satin boAV 
that was tied in a true lover's knot^ for 
her bosom, the white chip hat and ribbon 
were pinned on in many ways, but none 
could please her ; her dress was not fine 
enough, the edging on the bosom not rich 

VOL. I. K 



194 0W£N castle; 

enough, and the little cloak was too long ; 
it hid the slender turn of her waist; thus 
did she find fault with the village mantua- 
maker and milliner^ who brought them 
• home. 

Re^uben had brought his mother, from 
his sister's home a few miles ofl', to witness 
bis marriage, and to delight his only sur- 
viving parent by the sight of his felicity ; 
the old lady had been busy in making 
and preparing ever}^ thing for the bride/s 
reception, there were also many friends 
invited to grace the feast, and pay homage 
to his choice. 

The sun seemed long in setting to the 
impatient Reuben, and as the clock struck 
nine he left his Lo.ne for that of farmer 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? l95 

Rue's, determined to reach it before the 
hour Arpasia had fixed as the close of his 
suspense ; bat a friend prevented his in- 
tent, by intreating him to go to the cot- 
tage of Joe the carter, who had that day 
fallen from the cart, beneath the horse's 
feet, and had not a person unknown stop- 
ped the fore horse, he must have been 
trampled to death ; as it was, he had 
escaped with a broken limb; he was in 
great pain, and desired to see his master im- 
mediately, for he had something to relate 
that would surprise him, and might prove 
of conf^eqaence, if not looked to; and as 
he was like to die, he said his last mo- 
ments might be heavy because of the trou- 
ble of his mind. 

Anxious as Reuben was to see Arpasia^ 

K 2 



196 OWEN CASTLE; 

this was a call he could not withstand. 
He sent a servant to acquaint her of tlie 
cause of his non-appearance, and say that 
he would be with her by 6 o'clock the 
next morning. 

He found Joe in a very dreadful state, 
but quite unable to disclose what he had 
declared to be of so much consequence. 
After he had seen every possible aid ad- 
ministered by his suffering wife, and at- 
tentive surgeon, he was about to leave him, 
but the poor man perceiving his intention, 
grasped his hand so earnestly, and groaned 
forth so piteous a request to stay, that the 
kind heart of Reuben could not refuse 
him^ but watched by his bedside the 
whole night. As the grey dawn of morn- 
ing appeared he fell asleep, and the 



OR, \VIIICH IS THE HEROINE? I97 

youth thinking each moment an age, 
left the cottage, and by six of the morn- 
ing sallied forth. — ^The rising sun gilt each 
leaf and flower of the garden through 
which he had passed with a crimson 
edge; the distant windows of Arpasia's 
dwelling reflected its cheering beams ; 
Aurora seemed to smile auspicious on his 
wedding day ; and on his entering his 
home to dress for the ceremony, the 
words of his mother (who had been long 
up, and met him at the door) touched 
his very soul with reverence and love. 

" This is a glorious morning, my son ; 
a joyful omen on thy marriage day, and 
may each coming morrow be as sweet 
as this to thee and thy fair bride. I 
give thee my blessing, boy ; the blessing 
K 3 



lyS OWEN CASTLE; 

of a fond mother, thy only parent, and 
be it a comfort to your breast to know, 
that 1 avow thou hast been to me the best 
of sons; that thou hast by thy affectionate 
duty and tender care, supplied the place of 
thy father to his poor Widow ; and 
having so well performed thy duty to thy 
mother, I have no doubt tliou wilt fulMl 
it to thy v\i£e. May the great God of all 
mercies prosper thee through life, and fi- 
nally reward thy virtues!** She clasped 
her aged arms round his neck, as he invo- 
luntarily dropped upon his knee, and sealed 
her blessing by a maternal kiss upon his 
forehead. 

With a bounding heart, he bent his 
coi'rse to the cottage of his intended 
bride; he found the honest farmer up. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE.' ]Cj() 

and ready dressed in his best clothes, 
to attend his daughter to church, for he, 
hy his own express desire was to give 
her away» 

" I wish to speak to your daughter, 
friend/' said Reuben, '^ is slie dressed ?" 

" Aye, to be sure she is," returned he. 
*' I saw her in the garden at five, or 
a little before, looking as handsome and 
gay as a May blossom.*' 

"Where is she now?'* said Reuben. 

" In the garden still, I dare say, and 
thinks it long till you fetch her to church." 

Reuben flew to the garden ; he search- 
k3 



2Q0 OW£N CASTLE ; 

ed each walk; he called on her name? 
but saw her not; heard her not; he re- 
turned to the cottage, she was not in 
the parlour ; her chamber was searched 
in vain ; not a trace of her remained. 
While Reuben stood lost in wonder and 
alarm., a little lad that belonged to a 
neighbouring farm, came running, cry- 
ing, '^ Oh! Farmer Rae, she be gone, 
Miss Arpasia's gone. I seed her step into 
a chaise and four ; it stood a good while 
waiting for her, behind the hay stacks 
at the back of the barn, on the London 
road! she be gone as sure as life, for 
the horses went as fast as they could gal- 
lop/' 

The mystery of her conduct was now 
explained; the ambiguity of her words. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 20 I 

were now clear as dav. She well knew the 
contempt that Reuben held for wealth or 
titles, if not honourably obtained ; and 
that they were dishonourably acquired 
by her, needed not a moment to con- 
vince him. — The breach of promise was 
evident ; the long concealed duplicity of 
her heart was laid before him ; she had 
stifled a virtuous passion in its bud ; ex- 
tinguished all remorse or compassion for 
his sufferings, and consigned herself to 
endless compunction for the'glittering in- 
famy of a moment. — He did indeed pity 
her. — A groan burst from the flattened 
heart of the worthy farmer, as he sunk 
on a chair, that roused the youth from 
the stupor the sudden information had 
caused; he turned to his friend, and shook 
his hand with trembling cordiality, and 



20!^ OWEN CASTLE; 

exclaimed in a broken voice, — " Sink not 
thus, my friend, nor lament a degenerate 
daughter. — 'Tis her abandonment of sa 
kind a father, that crowns her conduct 
with redoubled guilt ; for that I despise 
her ; for that I abhor her ; give not me 
a thought, — heaven has freed me from 
an undeserving woman. I feel my wrongs 
as a man should, with disdain ; for my 
judgment convinces me of the happiness 
of the event, though hiiman weakness 
will mourn the loss of what I once fondly 
conceivedperfection.— Her image (such as 
she did appear to my deluded eyes) will 
present itself, and anguish may then wring 
my heart; but reason will at last subdue 
my folly, and teach me how little I should- 
value the perfect form of a female, unless 
lis enriched by virtue and aa upright 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE.- 203 

mind. — She has fled you in adversity ; 
I never will. She has broken her faith 
with me^ I never will with you. I will 
yet prove myself deserving to be your 
son, though she has shewn herself unwor- 
thy to be your daughter." 

'* Oh r cried the Farmer, in the bitterest 
tone; did I think the babe I nourished 
by my toil, whose every comfort sprung 
from the hard wrung sweat of my brow, 
would turn serpent, viper, and sting my 
old heart in this inhuman manner ? Lit- 
tle did I think my child would be a 
madam, I thought God had sent a bless- 
ing when she was born ; a comfort to 
my latter days ; — but now I find her a 
curse, a disgrace to my honest name. 
God will punish her for leaving her pa- 
rents in the hour of trouble/' 



J?04 OWEN CASTLE; 

" He will do no such like thing ; she is a 
good girl j she is only gone to be married to 
my young lord, and will soon come back 
a topping lady ; and she was right not to 
slip her fortune, to take up with a paltry 
farmer, tho' I did," cried Mrs Rae in anger, 
and bridling up, cast a look of contempt on 
l^euben, who leaned his head supported 
by his arms upon a table. His hands were 
linked before his eyes, and a tear, a single 
tear, escaping through his fingers betrayed 
that the forsaken lover was not insensible 
to his injuries^ 

Condemn him not, you who have never 
knov/n the misery of being deceived ; it 
was not a tear of feminine weakness ; — 
No, it was distilled from an honourable 
heart, labouring with the pangs of slight- 



OR, WHICH rS THE HEKOINE ? 203 

cd love, of an unmerited insult ; resent- 
ment softened by pity ; for it is the vir^ 
tuous who lament the progress of the 
guilty ; it is the virtuous who raise them 
from famine and despair, not the partners 
of their iniquitous life. Ah no! they fly ofi^ 
and leave them to bewail their solitary 
misery, in all the horrors of an upbraid- 
ing conscience. 

" Why, I hope Dolly as you know 
nothing of her goings on, how should 
you know my young lord will marry a 
poor maa*s child like mine?*' cried the 
farmer. 

" Because she told me the history on't* 
I an't no fool, Thomas/' said his wife; 
" whatever you may think on't ; I gave 



^06 OWEN CASTLE; 

her my advice, so she'll make her forten, 
as you'll see ; only you keep abusing her 
80^ and have no patience." 

" If you knowed on her wicked doings^ 
Dolly," said he, " I have done wi' you 
for ever, and 1*11 go up to my lord, and 
ax him if he knows how basely his son has- 
used me/' 

" Hold, farmer !'* cried Reuben, starting 
up, " don't mar her designs by any rash 
act; if it be, as Mrs. Rae says, all may 
be well. I only fear her daughter has 
only in part instructed her on the sub- 
ject ; and as we all believe what we wish, 
she may think her daughter's conduct 
right ; for no mother would in my opin- 
ion be accessary to a child's ruin. Ex» 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 207" 

plain the particulars of your daughter's 
flighty madam." 

" And so I can Sir/' said Mrs. Rae ; 
*' my lord has sworn a hundred and a 
hundred times, as he would make her 
his lady, but said as how his cross old 
father would never give his consent, so 
begged her to go wi' him to Lonnun, and 
he wou'd marry her there ; so she, natural 
enough, consented, and is gone; and 
w here's the great harm done*" 

" And is the promise of that libertine 
young man, the only reliance your 
daughter has for becoming his wifeT 
said Reuben. 

" Yes, and quite enough too, Reuben 



205 OWEN CASTLE? 

JBiacJ(thor77y whom do t/ou call young 
man ; learn to be more homageful to your^ 
betters/' cried she. 

" I can never treat a villain with re- 
spect, madam, if you mean that; nor can 
I consider a seducer in the light of an 
lionest man, tho' the one be a lord, and 
the other an humble^husbandman. But 
why was all this so long kept secret? Why 
was I led on to the last instant, to be ex- 
posed to the derison of the village ?" 

** Because Arpy was fearful, you or 
her father might blab it all, and set the 
old lord on the scent, and so prevent the 
match." 

^^ You are a deceived woman/' said 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 209 

Reuben ; your daughter knew her father 
and I should have doubted the sincerity 
of his lordship's son ; especially when 
he promised to marry his tenant's daugh- 
ter. She knew lue were not to be blinded 
to his real views, and might have strove 
to recall her from a fatal snare. As it is, 
she is lost.*' 

" Lost ! lost ! I say, lost indeed ! here's 
spite and malice !" cried Mrs. Rae in a 
rage. 

" Madam, spare your anger," said 
Reuben ; '' this is not a moment for pas- 
sion, but for repentance ; you have un- 
knowingly connived at your daughter's 
destruction, and destroyed your husband's 
peace/* 



210 OWEN CASTLE; 

As he finished this sentence, a bailifiT 
-and his follower entered the house; he 
laid his hand upon the farmer's shouldefj 
saying ** I arrest you farmer Rae, for 
four hundred pounds due for rent, at the 
suit of Lord Orminstead, and seize on 
all your goods to defray sundry other 
demands. You must go with me to prison J* 

"With all my soul /" cried the wretched' 
man, " I can die any where/* 

" What is the reason of this unusual 
severity?" asked Reuben. 

" Why answered the bailiff, Mr. stew- 
ard told me, that ray lord has done it from 
reveege, because Mr. Rae encouraged my 
lord's son to come after his fine daughter^, 
and let them go off to be married/' 



©R, WHICH 15 THE flEROINtf 21 1 

" 'Tis false sir/' cried Reuben. " Mr. 
Rae's heart is now bleeding at the newly 
discovered desertion of that daughter ; he 
is the victim of lier artfel disobedience^ 
and the young lord'^ villainy." 

** You had better not say as rnuch,** 
said the bailiff. 

'* Not say it. I will say it to the world; 
nay^ to his stern lordship's self. Wait but 
an half hour, and I will engage to bring 
my friend his freedom, by disclosing the 
real state of the affair to this enraged 
parent." 

" I can't stop I tell you, sir ; he must 
go along with us to prison, so there's no 
talking on the matter ; bring him along. 
Snatch/-' cried the bailiff to his follower. 



212 OWEN CASTLE J 

^^ Won't you take my bail^" said Reu- 
ben. 

^^ No, I have orders not," answered the 
baihff. 

^ You dare not refuse it/' cried Reuben, 
growing warm, and fretted by the haste of 
his friend*s oppressor. 

*' Why, as to that/' returned the baili^V 
*^ if you'll take on yourself to be answer- 
able ?'' 

" A^o, no r said the farmer, " he shall 
not suffer any more by me, or mi?ie ; I'll 
go to prison, rot and die there, sooner 
than touch a guinea of his : he is injured 
enough by me already, and as for you. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 215 

wife, I never desire to see thy face, never 
no more ;" so saying he darted from the 
house, followed by Reuben, tlie baihfF 
^nd his follower. 



An execution was laid on the goods, 
and Mrs. Rae driven from the once 
happy cottage to partake her husband's 
confinement. 

On the morning of Arpasia's intended 
wedding day, she arose as early as four, 
and bent her steps towards the garden. 
She had on her bridal \vhite, to elude all 
suspicion of her design ; ^e paused as she 
reached the rustic gate ; she trembled in 
every joint, the enormity of her treachery 
to Reuben came in strong colours before 
her mind, and in a voice of agony, she 



214 OWEN castle; 

faintly cried, '^ at this gate I swore to 
give my hand to Reuben, I am his af- 
fianced wife, yet I fly him, I abandon 
him, and my parents to misery; amhitioni 
thou monster of the soul! by thee I fall, 
for thee have I given up my only love, 
my honour. — What remains tome? Shall 
I wed the man I love, deceive him with 
the imaginary passion of happiness, while 
he but holds a poison to his lip that will 
embitter all his life to come. Oh ! Reuben ! 
no, let this struggle prove my love for thee, 
I will not bestow infamy on thy head, 
honour I cannot give thee, v/ith my love, 
therefore I quit you. — Oh! had I early 
1 no'.VQ thy virtues, I should not now 
have been the guilty wretch I am. 
The confession of my trespass from the 
fence of virtue is by chance spared me^ 



■on, WHICH IS THE HEROINE : 215 

-and better is it to fly, while I have power, 
than plunge my soul in lasting torture 
by deceiving an affectionate confiding 
husband, of whom I know myself un- 
worthy. Reuben, you will pity me, but 
you know not how I have deserved it : 
you will despise me too, and will not 
know how justl3^ Reuben I leave my 
heart with thee ; my breast is henceforth 
petrified ; callous to the sufTerings I may 
inflict on man ; and since I have givtrn 
up all the softer ties of kindred and of love, 
nought but interest shall influence my 
actions ; icealth, title, parade and show, 
are now my only aim. I have bongl.t 
them dear ; oh how dear! and if art re- 
fined by more worldly knowledge can re- 
tain them, they are mine for ever. Farewell 
farewell!" she cried, *^ and tearing herself 



2l6 OWEN CASTLE; 

from the gate flew to the carriage that 
waited to bear her to Theodosius^ who was 
to meet her a stage off, and from thence to 
proceed to London. As it rolled rapidly 
from the village, she cast a last look 
upon her birth place ; then fell back and 
shut it from her sight, while her busy mind 
painted the consternation her flight would 
Qccasion to her father and Reuben : for 
them she wept and wished to lose the fa- 
culty of thought. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? ^Ij 



CHAPTER VIL 



X HE secret intercourse of a youthful fe- 
male of low origin, with the superiorly 
gifted young nobleman, must be attended 
with danger; the vanity of Arpasia and 
spirit of romance with which her disposi- 
tion glowed, made her an easy victim to 
his arts ; the seeds of religion were not 
early sown or stamped in all their heavenly 
import in her young bosom ; 'tis true at 
school she had gone through the Bible, 
had regularly^attended church; but the 
flippant mirth of her whispering compa- 

VOL. I. L 



218 OWEIS CASTLE; 

nions had withdrawn her attention from 
the sermon ; she knew not the intent or 
jjoint of the well preached discourse she 
had heard; it was forgot in the diversion 
of a leisure hour, without a friend to 
examine the depth of her sentiment on so 
serious a suhject. — Left without a firm 
bias to guide her from the neglect of her 
preceptress^ whose duty it was to cultivate 
the virtues, as well as the accomplisli- 
nients of her pupils, can we wonder when 
she v\ as assailed by the modern ethic so- 
phistry oFa libertine, and taught to doubt 
the potency of heavenly power,, by a well 
informed youth possessing a perverted 
mind ; that, dazzled by his splendour and 
personal beauty, her senses should be 
bewildered, lier heart inflamed, and that 
bliQ should sink in the whirlpool of con- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 219 

tending passions, a victim to disgrace, 
treachery, and infamy? — Ah ! No ! — pain- 
fully is the truth drawn forth — She 
Jell. — Nor did she feel a degradation, 
till Reuben approached her with his ho- 
nourable suit. — His respectful attentions, 
sincerity of affection, and rectitude of mo- 
rals, soon convinced her of his worth. Truth 
ungarnished by vivid rhetoric, flowed 
spontaneously from his lips ; the holy 
mysteries of scripture were by him dis- 
solved and made clear to her understand- 
ing ; she saw the black treachery that 
had deluded her; she was awakened to all 
the misery her ambitious folly had in- 
volved her in ; she vowed not to act the 
wiley part with Reuben, or hide her crime 
beneath the niabk of wedded faith, but 
to confess her error, and seek forgive- 
L 2 



220 OWEN CASTLE; 

n€ss by repentance. Happy had her re- 
solacionnot been broken by the non-ap- 
pearance of Reuben. Having escaped the 
dread confession, false ioy took posses- 
sion of her breast ; sh^ listened to the voice 
of her seducer that urged flight, by which 
her situation would not be known ; and 
since by a disclosure of it, she would lose 
her Reuben's love for ever and live de- 
S])ised him by in poverty and contumely, 
too severe a trial for her pride of soul, she 
therefore preferred the gaudy triumph for a 
day, to the lasting blessings of contrition, 
fortitudcj and iilialduiy, 

Theodosius lodged her in a fashionable 
b >x, near Richmond in Sarry, whose 
grounds were bordered by the Thames, 
and gave a pleasing variety to the sur- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 221 

rounding scenery it commanded ; she had 
a carriage for her use, and an establish- 
ment suitable to her expensive taste. She 
presided as hostess of the feast, whenever 
her paramour invited his gay companions 
to the villa. Ladies we:re not wantino- to 
finish these frequent parties, whose tainted 
minds and vicious hearts, might well cor- 
rupt a girl of Arpasia's disposition ; yet 
she was their superior in intellect, and had 
withal 1 a winning softness, an infantine 
simplicity of look, that baffled the most 
experienced of her female visitants. — She 
endured the company of her own sex, not 
delighted in it; and by wit and education 
so captivated the other^ that she was held 
at once infinitely above the rank of usual 
mistresses. Theodosius was so ena- 
moured by the innocence of her counte- 
L 3 



OWEN CASTi.E ; 

nance, and gentle manners, that he with 
difficulty resisted his strong inclination.to 
make her his wife, and give an honourable 
reparation for the loss of character she 
so mildly sustained ; but he dared not 
oppose his father's will; who knowing 
the infatuation of his son, had pronounc- 
ed his eternal curse on him, if he were 
mad enough to unite himself so meanly, 
and had also insisted that he should give 
her up, as nothing less would convince his 
father of his duty, or intent to fulfil his 
repeated promise of marrying an heiress of 
high birth, his care had })rovided for him ; 
and that the honour of his illustrious house 
might escape certain contamination, he 
pledged himself to bestow upon Arpasia, 
a fortune of three thousand pounds ; like- 
wise to free his son from all pecuniary 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 223 

embarrassments. This offer to Theodosius, 
harrassed by debt ; and^ threatened with a 
father's malediction, was a temptation not 
to be resisted. Hereditary pride was strong 
within his bosom, though for a short time 
smothered by his passion ; he saw the con- 
sequence of the connexion his father 
wished him to form, the honour it would 
confer upon his house, and vast addition 
it would make to his impaired posses- 
sions; the beauty of his intended bride was 
another stimulus for obedience to his fa- 
ther's will; he determined on complying 
with his commands: — this, after a preface 
of neglect, he disclosed to Arpasia, and 
with a cool advice of one peremptorily 
resolved not to be won by tears, up- 
braidings, or endearments, he advised her 
to select one from amongst the lovers that 

L 4 



224 OWEN CASTLE ; 

surrounded her, deserving her beauty and 
bis father's dower. 

Stung to the soul by his desertion of 
herself and infant (for she had recovered 
her confinement only a few weeks.) when 
he made known to her his intentions ; 
she gave vent to the bitterest reproaches, 
accusing him as the author of her destruc- 
tion. He pointed out Reuben, and ad- 
vised her to write to him, judging, his love 
when solicited, would eagerly renew its force, 
and the money salve his delicate scruples. 

She finding her dazzHng dream of great- 
ness vanish, beheld the purity and peace 
of his rustic home and habits with en- 
creasing admiration, and as her infant re- 
clined on her lovely bosom, it seemed to 
melt her heart and touch it with com- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 225 

punction for her parent's sufferings. She 
wrote to them for the first time since her 
departure, imploring them to explain their 
distresses, that she might relieve them. 
Her letter was returned in a blank cover. 
She learned from the valet of Theo- 
dosius, who had lately come from the es- 
tate, that the honest farmer had died of a 
violent fever, caught from the dampness 
of his prison, accusing her with his dying 
breath as the cause ; that Nathaniel 
Grubb had been proved a villain, and had 
lost his cause ; and her mother had gone 
for shelter to the workhouse. Reuben had 
lost his hundred pounds, but was still 
kind lo her unhappy mother, and remained 
a bachelor. 

*' My father die in a prison!" cried 
L 5 



226 OWEN castle; 

Arpasia, " stabbed to his heart by me! 
My mother languishing in poverty, a 
pensioner on the parish, and her only 
friend a loser by his benevolence, still 
kind to her! For whose sake but mine 
does he perform the office of friend ? He 
shall not suffer for his liberality ; I will 
humble my spirt, and by a full confession 
of my miseries, create his former — no ! his 
former confidence can never be mine again, 
I abused it." — Thus did Arpasia ruminate, 
but hope induced her to write to Reuben 
to make an offer of her repentant heart, 
her person, and her doiver to him, ere 
she would choose amongst the groupe that 
hovered round her. — Many attempts were 
made before she sent this last efpjrt of her 
able pen to him, and tho ' trembling with 
doubt and fear, for the result of his de- 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 22/ 

cision, she could not refrain from believ- 
ing that an affection once so ardent and 
firm as his, must retain some lurking 
influence over his actions, and finally 
triumph over all obstacles. In a week after 
she had written to him, she received the 
following answer : 

" Madam, 

^' I am not fallen so far 
beneath the consideration of the estimable 
part of mankind, as to meanly accept 
money as a reparation for the wrongs 
conferred on me. Tho' there was a 
nobleness of soul in your not accepting 
my willing hand, when I believed you all 
truth and loveliness, it will not palliate 
the system of deceit you for a length of 
time practised towards me, nor heal the 
L 6 



228 OWEN castle; 

wound your sudden desertion caused 
within my heart. I shall pmy for your 
happiness with the earnest supphcation 
of a brother lamenting the fall of a once 
virtuous sister ; but no dearer tie can now 
subsist between us. I am not so lost to 
probity of mind, refinement of soul, or 
delicacy of sentiment, as to give my hand 
where my judgment might condemn. 
I am sorry you have forced me to express 
my feelings on so delicate a subject; and 
for the pain I inflict, I implore your 
pardon, as not by choice given to op- 
press one already bending under cruelty 
and desertion. — Farewell, Arpasia, and 
believe me, that to hear you are safe in 
the protection of a husband, whose mild 
nature may pardon your errors, while his 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 229 

justice may guard you from future dan- 
ger, will be to me the best atonement 
you can make for p^st trespass on my 
heart. I own it beats for you even now, 
but I would rather tear it from my 
bosom, than suffer it's weakness to tar- 
nish the name or honour of the humble 
'^ Reuben Blackthorn/* 

'•' Fool that I was, I might have known 
the event without giving him this oppor- 
tunity to insult me," (cried she, tearing 
the letter in a thousand pieces.) *' Con- 
tempt from him is more than I can bear, 
but ril yet be revenged ; the day may 
come when my resentment may be keenly 
felt by all." 

All hope of gaining the heir of Ormin- 



23a OWEN CASTLE; 

stead being gone, she discovered, that to 
obtain a respectable consideration with 
the world, and gain admittance to their 
notice, was to cloak her misdemeanour, 
under the name of wife ; when her arts 
might display their force as occasion 
offered. By becoming a wife to one of her 
suitors, she should secure a responsible 
person for her debts and support^ likewise 
a speedy chance of liberty, if her views 
were crowned with success, for he was 
on the point of leaving the kingdom to 
embark for America with his regiment : 
on him she fixed, but stipulated for one 
third of the three thousand pounds, for 
her portion, which he granted ; the re- 
maining two thousand being sufficient 
to discharge his debts, and answer idle 
expences till his departure, was all he 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 231 

cared for ; it was a mere chance his 
return to England, and so little did he 
value the woman he was about to marry, 
but from the convenience her fortune 
afforded him, that he cared not if he 
never beheld her face again after the cere- 
mony was over. Dissipated by bad com- 
pany, of loose morals, gay disposition, 
and ruined fortune, he plunged for a short 
relief from difficulty into a solemn en- 
gagement with a woman he knew to 
have been the open mistress of his friend. 

Lord Orminstead was so well pleased 
that she would comply with his request to 
marry, that on her wedding day he 
presented her with a neat shooting cottage 
in Wales^ for her residence, as a compli- 
ment for her compliance with his' plans, and 



232 OWEN CASTLE; 

to keep ber during the a'^'sence of her 
husband from the sight of his son, whose 
relapse into folly he feared. She refused 
to bury herself in Wales, and peremptorily 
resolved en London as her abode, but her 
husband exerted his authority, and in 
opposition to all her remonstrances, hur- 
ried her away to her Welch gift, where 
shut out from the busy scenes of fashion, 
she cursed the day^he became a wife. Left 
entirely to the control of her husband, 
she found her expensive style of living 
curtailed to the necessaries of life only ; 
the thousand pounds she had demanded, 
was deposited in the hands of his agent, 
to be paid her by miserable instalments. 
After arranging every thing to his satisfac- 
tion, Captain Wallace took his depar- 
ture; — the parting of persons meeting 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE? t233 

for their own purposes solely, without 
the least regard to the happiness of each 
other, may be imagined not to be veri/ 
affecting ; he left her rejoicing in his 
having frustrated her designs agamst his 
honour during his campaign ; she, with 
a fervent prayer never to behold him more^ 
saw him depart. 

Thus was Arpasia Rae transformed 
into the beautiful Mrs. Wallace, whose 
lonely situation called forth the commis- 
seration of the inhabitants of Owen Castle. 
They met in their walks, and insensibly 
commenced an acquaintance. The bloom* 
ing innocence of the infant Theodosius, 
caught the admiring eyes of Mrs. Mil- 
bourne and her niece Miss Grace Fitz- 
beauchamp, and as they stopped to caress 



234 OWEN castle; 

the child, the insinuating manners and 
pohte conversation of the youthful 
mother, so won upon them, that she 
received a general invitation to the castle. 
Having in a short time learnt the dearest 
concerns of the unadulterated heart of 
Grace, and finding nothing of importance 
would accrue from her intimacy with 
the family, she had (on parting with her 
child at Lord Orminstead's desire,) re- 
solved to quit Wales, and seek the more 
active scenes of life, when an account 
reached her that Captain Wallace was ta- 
ken prisoner; at the same time the anxious 
guests of Owen Castle were shocked at 
the information the paper conveyed to 
them of the death of Lieutenant Murray, 
who had been killed in a late skirmish 
with the enemy. This was a dreadful 



OR; WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 235 

shock to the firmly attached Grace ; she 
had loved not as many do, lightli/, or 
with romantic wildness, the amiable 
William Murray, but with the sanction 
of reason, and confirmed esteem, they 
had imbibed a reciprocal passion from 
the tenderest years of juvenile friendship, 
under the approbation of their friends, 
who were anxious to see two beings of 
such uncommon virtues united in an 
indissoluble bond of amity. The weight 
of her affliction unsettled the reason of 
the fair Grace, and a melancholy mad- 
ness ensued. — The sanguine hopes Mrs. 
Wallace had entertained of her hus- 
band^s death had fled, when she found 
he was secure from further hazard by 
being pent up from action ; this disap- 
pointment gave to her expressive features. 



236 OWEN CASTLE; 

a gloomy shade, which the kind Mrs^o 
Milbourne conceiving to be sorrow for 
her htusband's confinement, endeavoured 
to divert her by every friendly attention in 
her power. 

When the widow's circumstances be- 
came fully known to Mrs. Wallace^ she 
ruminated deeply, and saw in the arrival of 
the young West Indian a shining opportu- 
nity of acquiring the wealth and pleasures 
she so much coveted to obtain. A twelve- 
month's residence in Wales had not im- 
paired the dangerous charms of face and 
figure she so strikingly possessed ; and of 
them she determined to make trial, by sup- 
planting Omphale in the heart of Augus- 
tus Milbourne. She had by her art be- 
come acquainted with Sir Matthew's pas- 



TOR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 23/ 

^ion for his cousiiVs niece, and by giving 
him hopes of success in secret, had 
wound herself so closely in his confidence, 
that he constantly depended on her in- 
structions how to win the unconscious 
inaid. At a brilliant assembly she knew 
her power of pleasing, and therefore 
\irged Sir Matthew to give the fete in 
token of his love to Grace, as a certain 
way to gain her to his suit ; she knew the 
dependant state of both the aunt and 
niece on his caprice, and fearing the 
unpresuming beauty of Grace might not 
escape the West Indian's eye, determined 
to rid herself of so likely a rival to Iier de- 
signs, by pointing out to the doiting Sir 
Matthev/, ihe needless form of delaying 
his wish of proposing to the aunt for the 
fciir Grace, who in destitute circumstar.c.^s 



238 OWEN CASTLE ; 

must look over the disparity of age, and 
with gratitude for so noble an offer, 
become his wife. Enchantecj by her cheer- 
ing prognostics of triumph, the enamour- 
ed knight sought the aunt, and with 
much circumlocution recounted the many 
obligations she laboured under to him ; 
then disclosed the wish of his superan- 
nuated heart, in the following equivocal 
manner. " You will reflect on the very 
great advantage it will be to a portionless 
girl, like Grace, to accept the hand of a 
baronet/' cried he, drawing up his head 
with stately grandeur. 

" I do sir/' cried the widow, concluding 
he was speaking in behalf of Sir Mat- 
thew Starveling ; for the hoary lover, con- 
scious of the ridicule his passion would 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 239 

expose him to, had with caution spo- 
ken only of the honour intended the fair 
Grace, without directly naming the ob- 
ject. He never imagined that his age made 
him the Ifist man the widow could sup- 
pose enamoured of so young a creature 
as her niece. The baronet, named Sir 
Matthew Staveling, was about thirty, and 
frequently passed encomiums on Grace, 
he was the love she understood from 
Sir Matthew Fitzowen's mysterious and 
confused style, who had so generously of- 
fered for her portionless charge, arid the 
conversation continued in mutual misun- 
derstanding. '^ If my poor girl,** added 
the, *' has so far recovered from her first 
impression as to receive his addresses 
with composure, I should be glad to see 
her so respectably protected for life, but 



240 OWEN castle; 

if she objects I cannot urge her on so im- 
portant a subject. 

" Object!" exclaimed Sir Matthew^ 
" what objection can she have ; it cannot 
be a few years over his head more than 
her own.'' 

" No" returned the widow, '^ that is not 
worth mentioning ; 'tis the mind, 'tis 
the disposition, I alhide to, that may 
not strike my niece with favourable 
thought;^ 

♦ " You have known his mind and tem- 
per many years, madam," cried Sir Mat- 
thew ; " so does she ; and if there be any 
peculiarity in it, 'tis the duty of both to 
bear with and overlook it : all 1 wish 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE r 211 

you to understand \^, that unless the ad- 
dresses of Sir Matthew are received with 
pleasure and thankfulness, neither you 
nor your niece are considered welcome 
visitors in this castle." With this un- 
feeling speech he left her, and hastened 
to acqi^.aint his counsellor, Mrs. Wallace, 
who acquiesced in his decisive pro- 
ceedings. 

In this predicament the widow stood 
with her arrogant cousin ; all opposition 
to his will was useless ; she and her niece 
determined to submit with patience (o 
his wish, until the event of Mr. Mil- 
bourne's visit was decided, and to receive 
the addresses of Sir Matthew Starvelin-v 
with politeness, but to give no liglit of 
acceptance that might hereafter throw 

TOL. I. M 



2i2 OWEN castle; 

upon them the least degree of odium the 
task was irksome and disagreeable to 
the gentle Grace, for &he had contracted 
from her infancy, an abhorrence for all 
kinds of disguise or double dealings, and 
had her own comfort only been given 
up, by her instant rejection of his offer, 
she would not have hesitated a moment 
in so doing; but the tender guardian of 
her destitute childhood called forth at- 
tention and the endurance of being a tame 
instrument of deceit. For her voluntary 
parent's future independence, she submit- 
ted to be thought acquiescent on a sub* 
ject so repugnant to her feelings. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 243 



CHAPTER VIII. 



X HE evening before the arrival of Au^ 
gustus Milbourne and Omphale, Mrs. 
Wallace joined her in the garden to assist 
her in selecting flowers for the different 
vases that were to adorn the ch'awing 
room. So, mj sweet friend/' said Mrs. 
Wallace, in tlie accent of entreating con- 
fidence, and with a kind pressure of her 
soft hand, '*^ you have accepted the hand 
of the baronet, and mean to wear the 
title of lady with becoming dignity?" 
M 2 



244 ©WEN CASTLE ; 

'^ I have not taken so decided a «^tep 
as yet/' returned Grace; " for I have never 
had an hour's conversation with the gen- 
tleman, since he honoured me with the 
offer of his name, but on common topics ; 
and indeed, if my auni had not assured 
me he had proposed for my love, I should 
have thought him entirely indifferent 
to me ; his behaviour is polite, but has 
not a tincture of the lover in it." 

*' *Tis you affect not to understand 
him, and that throws a reserve over his 
manners in your company ; you should 
overlook the formality of his notions, and 
reflect how great a disadvantage a man 
encounters, that has not made \o\e for a 
century, the Damon tricks of ancient 
days, being insipid to the young ladies 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE." 245 

of the present time. Consider, Grace, 
lie is an old bachelor, and you ought to 
encourage the spark of fire you've kin- 
dled in a breast of ice congealed these 
forty years. Come, girl, be more complai- 
.«<ant. Sir Matthew is serious, and to be 
Lady Fitzovven with five thousand a 
year, 'tis too great a prize to let slip 
through your rosy fingers." 

" Did I hear you right, madam ?" 
exclaimed Grace, fixed to the spot with 
astonishment. ^' Can Sir Matthew Fitz • 
owen really suppose I sanction his love 
for me, who am only old enough to be 
reasonably supposed his grandchild?" 

" Why this affected surprise, love?" 
enquired Mrs Wallace. " Did not your 

m3 



246 OWEN CASTLE; 

aunt announce to him that you had agreed 
to receive his attentions, and that time 
might win you to declare in his favour? 
Has not Sir Matthew been constantiv at 
your side ever since, and yet you deny 
the knowledge of his being your devoted 
suitor?" 

" Oh, madam! dear friend!'* returned 
the trembling girl/* How has an unhappy 
similitude of name involved me. I under- 
stood from my aunt, 'twas Sir Matthew 
Starveling who had interested our host in 
his favour, and interpreted all the civili- 
ties I have received from Sir Matthew 
Fitzowen, as inducements to encourage 
the former." 

Mrs. Wallace burst into a loud laugh, 
which overwhelmed the innocent Grace 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE.-^ 2-l7 

with vexation and dismay, at Jier want 
of sympathy in her dilemma, and she could 
hardly assume patience at its long conti- 
nuance, when it suddenly subsided into an 
exhausted faintness for want of breath_, 
which scarce gave her strength to say, 
** And did your simple Welch innocence 
suppose, that a man of seventy would 
venture his life in silk stockings, thin 
pumps, and satin waiscoat, to plead the 
suit of another, his younger by forty 
years? Cruel maid! is it for this liis 
bald pate has been anointed by Botance, 
Prince^ Russia, and Macassar oils, 
in hopes to revive the long deserting 
ringlets that once grew there ? — Is it for 
this, that the best paste for whitenmg 
the skin, and preserving the bloom, has 
been resorted to r — Is it for this, oh! blind 
m4 



'2 is OWEN CASTLE; 

inhuman! that the withered supporters of 
his worm-eaten trunk of leather, have 
been rendered and made by the aid of 
cork and padding to resemble sometliing 
hke nature ?" 

" You alarm me, madam. I fear — I 
mean I must undeceive him. I will not 
let him render himself so uselessly ridicu- 
lous/' said Grace, about to leave her. 

" Stay my pretty petulant/' cried Mrs, 
Wallace; " you will ruin your aunt, if you 
discover your insensibility to the attack 
of the knight, whose vanity ere long will 
receive its own punishment, for he will 
certainly be laid by the heels with cold ; 
then let me advise you to reflect on the 
benefits arising from five thousand pounds 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 249 

per annum, with your youth, beauty^ anp 
liberty to boot ; all these privileges you 
throw from you, if you refuse to tie the 
knot that binds them yours for ever. 
When you recover your freedom, you can 
share your wealth with some youthful 
lover, whose ardent atfection will amply 
compensate for the attendance you may 
have given to the sick chamber of 
your late lord. You know not, my little 
rustic, the transports of being envied 
by your own sex, and adored by the 
other." 

*' I am indeed ignorant of the pleasures 
to be derived from an act of baseness," 
said Grace, ^'and should expect little hap- 
piness from wealth or title, if purchased 
by an oath void of all sincerity, I can 
M & 



I8^50f OWEN CASTLE ; 

never unite myself to Sir Matthew Fitz- 
owen; 'tis impossible for me to regard 
him in any other light but that of guar- 
dian, benefactor, and relative. I am 
thoroughly acquainted with his demands 
upon my warmest gratitude, and will 
evince it by every respectful and cheering 
care in time of illness and discomfiture ; 
this is all I can give in return for sup- 
port and shelter in the hour of distress, 
for which, neither heaven or nature de- 
mand a sacrifice of my entire life/* 

" Then you are determined to reject 
him," said Mrs. Wallace, " in defiance of 
your aunt's necessitous state^ and thereby 
deprive her of an opportunity in profiting 
by the West Indian's -good intentions ?" 

'' I would not injure my dearest aunt, 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 251 

for the whole world!*' cried Grace waver- 
ing between a sense of right and tenderduty. 

^' Then refrain from declaring your 
dislike of Sir Matthew's suit, and by 
continuing neuter in the affair, give him 
leave to suppose his nauseous homage 
agreeable; 'tis at worst but an underplot 
his fulsome dotage deserves ; a venial 
crime, (if I may use the expression ) w hen 
committed, to save one who has been a 
parent to you, when deserted by an 
unnatural father. You lay a hel])less 
suppliant for her mercy ; this is the first 
time you have had in your power a small 
return to give, in acknowledgment of 
the many maternal acts of benevolence 
conferred on you by her ;" said Mrs. 
Wallace in an expressive tone. 
M 6 



252 OWEN CASTLE; 

" I know how much I am her debtor, 
in all but affection/' (cried the lovely 
Grace, touched at the recollection of her 
mother's sufferings and the kindness of 
her aunt) *' and / idll for once yield the 
darling principle of my soul, an iinde- 
viatlng truth of word and deed, to the 
pressing urgency of circumstances." 

'' That is right/' said Mrs. Wallace, 
*' and acting like a girl of character, not 
with the insipid fastidiousness of a fearful 
mountaineer; — one thing more; as your 
aunt is under the same mistake as you 
were, do not remove it ; if you do, the 
only result will be, her sinking into 
depression of spirits at her constrained 
situation, and so deprive her of the power 
of entertaining her nephew, free from 



ORj WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 255 

care or fear of not succeeding in her pur- 
pose ; the grand way to obtain rehef to 
your distresses, is not to appear to want 
any; the craving calls of dependants 
often mar the spontaneous Hberahty of 
kind donors ; none hke, to be dunned 
for favours ; take away the free inclina" 
tlon of giving andthe charm of benefaction 
is lost." 

" Since it would only heighten her 
misfortunes to know the price I am ex- 
pected to pay for shelter, I will be silent, 
nor teaze her with needless complaints {* 
returned Grace, catching a glimpse of Sir 
Matthew entering the adjoining walk. 
She begged Mrs. Wallace to entertain 
him, while she to recover her confusion 
at his appearance carried the flowers she 
had been gathering into the house. 



254 OWEN CASTLE; 

'' I will," cried she gaily, " if you give 
me your word to reiurn ahnosl imme- 
diately, and banish that rueful look 
which would kill an Adonis, much less 
your knight, were he to see it»" 

" What! must my features be schooled 
into deception too. Alas ! if this is to 
act with dissimulation, how hard a lesson! 
My countenance Fve been told was the 
mirror of my mind and heart, the reflec- 
tor of each passion that inhabits my 
breast ; how severe then will be my effort 
to hide contempt under the feigned smile 
of pleasure;" sighed Grace. 

" You are such a novice in the art of 
manoeuvering; — how think you, child, the 
ever jarring passions of mankind would 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 255 

be bid, and made subservient to their 
interest, if it were not for dissimulation y 
the grand stay of many a great man, who 
instead of crinorinn; to the earth at the 
approach of hi:^ patron, and concealing 
beneath a placid smile of content his im- 
patience at being neglected himself, and 
his envy of a rival, who to throw off his 
guard, he very cordially shakes by the 
hand in the presence of the undiscerning 
great one who has placed him over his more 
meritorious head, would otherwise give 
vent to complaints of indignation at this 
treatment, which would procure no other 
end but his entire dismissal from favour." 

" Can such things be?" said Grace. 
" To be sure," returned Mrs. Wallace, 



25^ OWEN castle; 

" and dissimulation is as frequently re- 
sorted to amongst the female speculators 
for husbands, as by courtiers trying for 
places ; each respective feature undergoes 
its schooling before a glass, with as much 
anxiety to hide a defect or augment a 
beauty, as a tragedy actress would study 
to distort her*s into the horrifying visage 
of perfect insanity, for serious bread and 
reputation from the public." 

" That actresses should thus labour, I 
am not surprized ; for only by the most 
arduous study, persevering industry, rare 
talent, and uncommon understanding, can 
they acquire a name ; for merit is essen- 
tial to the means of their life, by which, 
and by the exertions of their youth, they 
amass fortunes to support them in their 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 257 

age, with eligibility and comfort; but 
that beings, who are by hereditary pos- 
sessions placed beyond the fear of future 
necessity, should thus study to deceive, is 
to me incredihle\ the virtuous passions 
of our soul want no disgrace •, the base ones 
should be subdued or kept under by the 
exercise of relis^ious duties and benevolent 
deeds^ the countenance would then serene- 
ly reflect the refinement of the heart ; for 
what face can appear ugly, when adorned 
by the placid and beautifying smile, aris- 
ing from a pure conscience?" said the 
artless Grace. 

•' That may be very fine in theory,'* 
replied Mrs. Wallace with spirit ; *' but 
the ladies demand more certain cosmetics 
to add to their loveliness, than the charms 



25 S OWEN castle; 

a tedious round of formal duties might 
yield them in twenty years: when the 
face is wrinkled the gentlemen of the 
present day never notice its ejrpressidrii 
and in age it might as well glare a Medu- 
sa, ab shine a seraph ; the frightful aspect 
of the one, and beauty of the other, would 
be equally overlooked ; 'tis the empty 
fop's ]j referring the outside of a beliefs 
head, to the solid information it should 
contain, that makes woman such artificial 
senseless creatures; beauty is the bait 
which they acknowledge will snare them, 
while mental powers scare them away, 
and render the female curst that possesses 
it, by being too clear in her comprehen- 
sion of their demerits. A pretty ideot is 
the certain idol of their worship, and if 
after marriage they find the ideot a 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 259 

cunjiing hiave, they must blame them- 
selves for giving the choice to shoiv and 
not reality. Religion and benevolence 
forsooth! a mighty pretty doctrine, if 
men were angels, indeed ; but woeful ex- 
perience proves the lords of the creation 
to be mere frail mortals wedded to vice- 
How then can it be expected that the iveak 
females with whom they hold a constant 
intercourse, can escape contamination ? 
*Tis plain they must have recourse to art, 
to be able to contend with their wily 
combatants; but I only waste my breath 
to talk to thee, thou untaught infant of 
the world! Vanish! for here comes your 
Strephon, and I will take another oppor- 
tunity to finish my side of the question." 
She waved her hand, and Grace hailed 
the signs of freedom with pleasure at her 



26o OWEN castle; 

escape from him, and fled swiftly along 
the garden. 

At breakfast the next morning all were 
surprised at her sad appearance. Mrs Mil- 
bourne started, but did not venture a re- 
proof. Sir Matthew's varying cheek 
and contracted brow, were tokens of in- 
ternal displeasure, yet he spoke not. Mrs. 
Wallace secretly rejoiced, ft^igned asto^ 
nishment and friendly pity, and in the 
softest voice, whispered an enquiry, why 
she had changed her dress for the deepest 
mourning. 

Can my sable garments create wonder 
to the friends around me, whoknowthe 
loss I have sustained ? Have not the pa- 
rents of my William been in black these 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 26l 

two months, and can his affianced wife 
do less than mourn with them ? As soon as 
reason resumed her empire, I felt it a 
duty due to my William's memory. — My 
heart has long bewailed his loss, why then 
should I refuse to decorate my person 
with the siorns of lamentation ? None can 
say he was undeserving my affection while 
living ; none can blame me for honouring 
the memory of the man I had cliosen 
from his whole race, or say it is more 
than virtues like his demand. 1 hough he 
be dead, his name will live in the grateful 
memory of the helpless aged, and be en- 
graven on the hearts of aspiring youth 
for many succeeding years. Look on the 
row of cottages built by his bounty as a 
shelter for infirmity! — Behold the school 
for the cultivation of the opening mind of 



262 OWEN CASTLE; 

rustic infancy, and the riper stripling! and 
say if my William ever can be forgotten ? 
Oh, never ! The energy of her feelings hur- 
ried her voice which at first was in the 
murmur of reply, to angelic enthusiasm ; 
the soft but solemn tone it gained, touched 
even the callous heart of Sir Matthew ; he 
turned his head aside, to avoid the mel- 
ting lustre of her tearful eyes ; he faiicied 
a reproachful glance mingled with their 
brightness, as they for an instant rested 
on his ; wherefore did he misconstrue their 
expression ? Was it unerring conscience 
that stung him, or jealousy of the dead ? We 
cannot fathom the mysteries of his bosom, 
but hope the day will come, when the 
machinations of the wicked heart will be 
developed. 

"I tremble lest your habiliments may 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 263 

give a deeper cast to the dejection of your 
mind, which still bears the gloom of 
recent despair,"" said her aunt ; '' and vvould 
entreat you to cast away the sable cloth^ 
ing of sorrow, if I thought it vvould 
move your compliance ; but knowing it 
has been your desire for many weeks, 
I will not urge my request.'* 

"It will sink her spirits ^igain into de- 
spondency," cried Mrs Wallace, '- and as a 
friend I would force her to forego a whim 
likely to renew the derangement of her 
senses." 

" I never had occasion, madam," returned 
Mrs. Milbourne " to use Jbrce with Grace. — 
Her actions ever being just, I could offer 
no rebuke ; if miid persuasion have no ef- 



264 OWEN castle; 

feet, I will not persecute her by harsh com- 
mands ; and how can I teach my tongue 
to belie my heart ; for I am assured, were 
I so situated, I should adopt the same 
measure." 

" Most likely you would/' cried Sir Mat- 
thew with a sarcastic smile, (curving his 
parched lip, and a flush of rising wrath 
passing over his withered cheek,) *' most 
likely you would ; 'tis from your romantic 
notions of breeding her up, that she has 
acquired this nonsensical idea of putting 
on black for a youdi who has been dead 
these eight months, for he was stiff and 
cold, and mouldering to dust, long before 
the news of his being killed reached Eng- 
land.' 

" Ah ! there is my grief/' cried Grace in 



CTL, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 265 

a plaintive accent of regret; '- had I received 
his last sigh, had I wiped the death damps 
from his forehead, I should have been 
more resigned ; but to know he expired 
without one pitying friend beside liim, un- 
known in aforeign land, is dreadful/' — She 
burst into a convulsive fit of tears, and 
sinking on a sofa, hid her face with her 
liandkercliief. 

'- Are there not hundreds of brave 
youths butchered as well as William Mur- 
ray ? Is he the only lamented, think ye?" 
said Sir Matthew, approaching and at- 
tempting to console her, but nature had 
not ordained him for the soft cfTice of 
comforter ; he mistook the lan^rua^e of 
condolence and only iiicreased her emo- 
tion. 

VOL. I. N 



266 OWEN CASTLE ; 

Mrs. Milbourne fearing the powerful 
effect his unwary words might have on 
her nieces ear, hastily interrupted him, 
by saying, "Selfish despair is offensive to an 
all wise Providence ; 'tis ingratitude, and 
proves the offender unworthy those bless- 
ings his gracious bounty still showers on 
them. — Might I not be taken from you, 
my suffering child? Oh! think on that, 
and lull this destructive grief to calmness 
and resignation." 

'•Ah ! then * replied the weeping girl, " I 
should indeed be destitute;" at the same 
time clasping her arms round her aunt's 
neck, and sobbing, *' Do not you leave me 
to wander on the earth desolate, forlorn, 
a wretched orphan. Almighty Father of 
the fatherless 1 take not from me the pa- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 267 

reat of my helpless infancy, and I will 
bend in patient submission to my recent 
loss." 

'' Be more composed, my dearest 
Grace," cried her aunt ; '^ you take every 
thing so earnestly; would to heaven less 
sensibility had been mingled in the gifts 
that nature has so lavished on you ; exert 
your spirits and aid me to receive my 
nephew and the gentle Omphale. How 
will the solemn melancholy that hangs 
upon your pensive brow strike the guests 
whose youth and sex entitle them to your 
hospitality. Let not the task devolve en- 
tirely on me; I ask you only to study 
Omphale's comfort; to lighten the hours 
of retirement from company with that 
cheerful flow of conversation, and elegant 
N 2 



# 



:6s 



OWEN CASTLE; 



accomplishments you once so eminently 
charnied and delighted all who heheld 
and conversed with you/' 

Grace promised to suppress her sorrow 
and call forth all her power to please the 
youthful strangers. Sir Matthew^ rejoiced 
in the determination, and in a tender 
whisper, that made her shudder, by re- 
calling to her mind the terms on which 
she stood with him, bade her welcome 
the West Indians as to her own castle; 
^^ to see you shine the queen of /V and w^e,'* 
be added w'ith a pre^^''ure of hii? hard and 
boney hand, '^ is the ardent desire of my 
sou]/'™A sickness spread faintly at her 
heart ; she dare not answer as its recoiling 
sentiments directed; she bent her swollen 
eyes upon the ground^ wishing, yet fear- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 26^ 

ing to trust herself with the use of speech, 
she stood overcome by embarrassment. 
The dthghted knight conceiving the ab- 
straction of her air to arise from maiden 
diffidence, gratified vanity, and acceptance 
of his proposals, was so encouraged and 
misled as to thank her, and calling her 
his bride, attempted to salute her. The 
slight touch of his thin and purple lip 
upon her peached cheek, appeared like a 
Dt^cember blast upon a tender rose, wi- 
thering its soft leaves by a shock of pre^- 
mature winter : A paleness spread instan- 
taneously over her countenance, a chill 
tremor shook her frame, and she in volun- 
tarily pushed him from hr. 

"Am I so loathsome to you, m< dim;'* 
he angrily exclaimed, '' s ) abhorrent in my 
N 3 



S70 OWEN CASTLE; 

person that I fill you with disgust: Is this 
the gratitude due to one of my rank, for de- 
meaning himself to sue one so far beneath 
him. Is this the return you make for shel- 
ter and for bread? Have you no gratitude, 
no fear of resentment, that you treat me 
thus ? Remember, madam, who I am ; re- 
flect on your situation, and that Sir Mat- 
thew Fitzowen was not born to suffer in- 
sult from a dependant/' — He cast on her 
an indignant glance, and hurried from the 
apartment. 

Confounded by this sudden avowal of 
his sanguine hopes, stung to the soul by 
his mean reproaches, and trembling for 
the consequences of his fur}^ on her un- 
conscious aunt, she remained motionless 
on the spot where he had left her; 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 2?! 

when Mrs. Wallace tripped lightly by, 
and in a low voice whispered, Is it thus 
you fulfil your promise ; is this the way 
you strive to repay your aunt for her 
bounty ? Fie, fie, act with more firmness, 
or dread the consequences." 

'^ 'Twas the spontaneous action of dis- 
gust that I could not restrain," answered 
the unhappy girl. " Alas ! were it not 
for my aunt, I would instantly quit the 
shelter he upbraids me w ith.'* 

" Romance and folly T muttered Mrs. 
Wallace, " worthy the heroine of a novel, 
who opposite to all sense and prudence 
flies from her home, where she has every 
comfort, to meet trials and poverty abroad, 
because har Jee lings are so refined as to 
m4 



£72 OWEN €ASTLE ; 

rise above all controul. Where would 
you go r" 

*' Alas! I know not/' sighed Grace. 

" I thought as much/' cried 'Mrs, Wal- 
lace. '* How easy it is to talk. 'Tis hard 
when the path is so plain that you will 
run into entanglements. Can't you endure 
to act the coquette a little ? You must be 
unlike the rest of womankind, if the 
character be displeasing.'* 

'' To act in opposition to my conscience 
and honor, is new to me, and I am 
afraid I shall never go through with the 
undertaking." 

The housekeeper entered and requested 
Mrs. Milbourne to give her the keys of 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE," 273 

the plate. The widow was at the further 
end of the room engaged in writing when 
the house-keeper dehvered her message 
and gave her a note from Sir Matthew. 

'* My hfe on't but that contains dis- 
agreeable orders/' said Mrs Wallace. ^' See 
how your aunt changes colour." 

When the house-keeper had withdrawn 
Mrs.Milbourne approached them with the 
open note in her hand, saying, '•" I am at 
a loss to comprehend the meaning of these 
lines ; perhaps you, Grace can explain it/' 
who took the lettter and read as follows: 

'' Madam, 

'^ For the great pains you 
have bestowed in forming your niece's 
K 5 



274 OWEN castle; 

mind to accept the very flattering propo- 
sals made to her, I return you my sin- 
cere thanks ; hkewise for the very pointed 
manner in which you upheld her absurd 
notions this moining, thereby obliquely 
insulting me, and disposing her to copy 
your example. Since I am not worthy of 
uniting myself to your adopted, I would 
advise you to remove her from my roof 
which is rendered irksome to me, by 
daily experiencing insult and contempt 
from those where gratitude alone is due. 

I am, madam. 
Your disobliged Cousin, 

M. FlTZOWEN." 

P. S. By giving the keys to my house- 
keeper you will favour me. 

*^ The storm is rising at the least sus- 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 2^5 

pected time; for if I understand this letter 
right. Sir Matthew wishes you to leave 
the castle/' said Mrs. Wallace to the 
widow. 

"I am astonished/' cried the latter, " at 
this unmerited displeasure, and the allu- 
sions contained in the letter. I was no! 
aware he was the person who declared 
in favour of my niece. How could I ima- 
gine for a moment, he could entertain such 
a thought as-to wish to link age and infir- 
mity, such as he possesses, to youth and 
loveliness like hers. Were you in the same 
error, my child r" continued she, fixing her 
eyes on Grace. 

" Until Mrs. V/allace undeceived me/ 
said she. " And the price of my shelter 
n6 



276 OWEN CASTLE; 

must be the sacrifice of my only solace ;" 
continued the widow. " Just heaven! 
whence arise these miseries ; one gra- 
dually treading on the heels of another? 
but prepare^ my orphan girl, and let us 
i^Gek some abode in the distant village. 
Let us obey this command/' said she, 
rising from a chair on which she had seat- 
ed herself ; '' let us labour for our food, 
rather than give the price demanded.'' 

Mrs. Wallace interposed^ and by per- 
suasive argument, and an offer to mediate 
between them and the incensed baronet, 
convinced the widow of the necessity of 
her submission to advice so sage. Yet 
to consent to the deceptive conduct of 
her niece, was a severe measure for her to 
adopt, and with the greatest regret, she 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? §77 

gave her promise to be governed by her 
best friend and counsellor Mrs. Wallace, 
who, tor motives of her own, was anxious 
to see them reconciled. She was admitted 
to the presence of Sir Matthew, and after 
an liour's deep conversation with him, re- 
turned Embassadress, bearing the offering 
of peace. '^ I've explained the mistake ; he 
pardons it/' said she, '^ and nothing now 
remains but a smile from Grace to finish 
the war. To you, madam, he sends his 
apologies in form, and begs, if jou mean 
not to distress him, to forget the effects of 
passion and mutual error." 

The widow bowed her head in token of 
assent, but did not speak. 

Sir Matthew entered the room ; he 



^7^ GWBN CASTLE; 

looked kindly on his cousin, and taking 
the hand of Grace, kissed it gallantly, and 
drawing her to the window, asked if she 
did not observe carriages approaching over 
the hills^ and he hoped his guests were 
about to enter the castle. 

^^ And there are two figures hovering 
over the rocks yonder,'* cried Mrs. Wal- 
lace ; " thty appear to take the path that 
leads over the rotten bridge that is thrown 
over the water -fall. They will certainly 
perish if they advance that way. I under- 
stood you had ordered it to be removed 
Sir Matthew r" 

" I did so," returned he, " but this 
pretty romantic, (patting Grace on the 
cheek) begged it might continue, it 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 279 

^eing so beautiful an object in the land- 
scape ; but as they are strangers^ 1 fear 
they will be in danger." 

*^ Should they be in peril owing to my 
fault, I should never forgive myself. J will 
send a servant to conduct them in safety," 
said Grace. 

" They are attendants I suppose," cried 
Mrs. Wallace,'^ and it is of no consequence 
to trouble yourself on their account." 

'^ Trouble myself, madam," returned 
Grace; " I am astonished at your apathy. 
Life is precious to the meanest thing that 
breathes. Be they what they may, they 
are entitled to protection and humanity, 
nor will I hesitate to save them." 



280 GWEN CASTLE ; 

The carriages now rolled into the court 
yard and stopped at the grand entrance : the 
party descended into the hall, to welcome 
their guests. The first carriage was empty, 
but a principal black slave, alighting from 
the second, informed them that ner Lady 
Omphale, terrified at the appearance cf 
the acclivity leading to the castle, had 
left the carriage, and being directed by 
a cottager, and accompanied by Augustus, 
determined to foUowd the equipage. 

Grace, followed by David, and a black 
stripling belonging to Omphaie's suite, 
hastened to meet the wandering strangers. 
She had ascended the rock with the 
greatest alarm, as she beheld a female 
leaning over the treacherous railing, look- 
ing on the foaming waters beneath that 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 281 

dashed against the flinty sides of the 
frightful chasm. Augustus was standing 
on a small projection of a neighbouring 
rock striving to gain a more perfect view 
of the sea. Shocked at the inevitable 
state of Omphale, for death appeared to 
await her at each step, she beckoned David 
to throw her the end of a rope he had 
brought witli him in case of the worst, 
which she threw to the affrighted stranger, 
who hearino^ the rotten boards crack be- 
n^ath her feet^ caught it in terror and 
dismay, but encouraged by the entreaties 
of Grace to hurry forwards, she eagerly 
gained the centre of the craggy bridge, 
when it disjointed, and fell with a despe- 
rate plunge into the dashing current, that 
swelled in frothy violence below. With 
the shattered remnants she was precipi- 



282 OWEN CASTLE; 

tated head-long down the rocky sides of the 
frightful precipice, and must have perished, 
had not the projecting trunk of a half 
blasted tree intercepted her in her perilous^ 
passage, and in its branch received hei' 
light form supported by the rope from 
above, which in her fall had wound round 
her waist. PetrijBed with horror and 
distraction, Augustus stood on the utmost 
verge of the rugged rock, calling for aid, 
and at length dashed into the water, baf- 
fled the strong eddy, and swam to the 
opposite side, when vaulting from crag to 
crag, he soon reached the burdened tree, 
where suspended between life and death, 
lay his love insensible ofher danger. With 
the utmost care he disengaged her white 
garments from the catching boughs, then 
taking her gently on his shoulder, began 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 283 

to climb the chasm's side. Long he strove 
against each treacherous stone, that slip- 
ped from beneath the uncertain footing, or 
the giving weed root at which he clung to 
draw him upwards, while the groupe above 
dreaded to beliold him and his burden 
fall backwards into the dashing flood. 
Spurning every obstacle, he soon gained 
the height, when giving his precious load 
into the arms of Grace, he sunk down 
overcome by fatigue and anxiety. Sir 
Matthew's carriage was speedily procured, 
and they were both conveyed to the 
castle. 

At six dinner was served up, when the 
strangers appeared perfectly recovered 
from their journey and late disaster. Au- 
gustus Milbourne answered in every re- 



^84 OWEN castle; 

spect the description of Mr. Stanley^ con- 
firming by his cordial respect for his 
aunt, the flattering character she had in 
her own mind drawn for him. — When 
07;?p^a/e appeared, all eyes were fixed on 
her. Her tall and graceful figure enfolded 
hi a dress of the purest white, gainc d addi- 
tional elegance from its simplicity of de- 
coration: her delicate features bore a mix- 
ture of dignity and softness that was 
highly interesting ; on her forehead, which 
was high and polished, was bound a golden 
band of lace which tastefully withheld her 
fine and lustrous hair of the deepest raven 
dye from falling over her arched brows, 
and throwing it back in luxuriant curls 
over the left shoulder, and confined by a 
diamond pin from oflf the other, displayed 
a neck and bosom of the finest symmetry. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE." 285 

Her ears were adorned by small diamond 
drops, her neck encompassed by a single 
ro^^- of oriental pearl, her arms enriched 
by bracelets and much exposed; on the 
right she wore a miniature of her beloved 
benefactress, encircled by diamonds of 
con.siderable value. 

When introduced, Mrs Wallace beheld 
her with fear and admiration. The innocent 
expressions of artless affection Omphale 
betrayed for Augustus, and his manner of 
receiving them, filled her with doubts of 
succeeding in her aim, and raised to ihe 
highest her ambition and demon-like re- 
solve, to blight their love if possible, and 
triumph in the misery she might inflict 
on the unsuspecting stranger, who re- 
ceived her compliments and welcome in 



286 OWEN CASTLE; 

the most refined and simple language of 
her ingenuous heart. — To Mrs. Milbourne 
and her niece she seemed particularly to 
attach herself, and received the attentions 
of Sir Matthew with affability and sweet- 
ness To Mrs. Wallace she was more re- 
served, seldom addressing her and replying 
to her questions, but by monosyliabies. 

In answer to a demand made by Sir 
Matthew, how he liked England and Eng- 
lishmen; Augustus replied, he admired both 
exceedingly ; but must give it as his opi- 
nion, that the EnglishQ;jan was more frigid 
in his address to strangers than a man of 
any other nation, the German not excepted i 
he stands so much on form and introduc- 
tion, letters of recommendation being ever 
required before he will grant a smile, or 



©R, WHICH IS THE HtROlNE? ^Sj 

acknowledge to have been in yonr com- 
pany. *'On my faith," said he, '* I came over 
to England with so many letters to per- 
sons in London on such accounts, that I 
resembled a turned otF valet, seeking by 
letter of character and qualifications, a 
good master, instead of an acquaintance 
with my equals. Would to heaven a man's 
actions were his only recommendation to 
notice and attention, we should then have 
less villainy in gilt chariots. I must allow 
a certain degree of reserve is necessary, 
as it keeps a gentleman*s society without 
the hazard of being defiled by many un- 
worthy associates. 1 should not perhaps be 
so warm in my approval of more access to 
the leaders of taste and literature, were it 
not for an instance that occurred before 
iny immediate notice, shewing the force 



288 OWEN castle; 

of recommendatioa ; b'lt before I relate it, 
give me leave to say, iliat I know of no 
man so firm in friendslnp as an English- 
man, thouf?;h he is slow to ofler it." 

«' I was sitting one morning at break- 
fast with my Lord Squander, when I ob- 
served on a chair in the shady part of the 
room, a remarkably beautiful landscape 
that would have done honour to the best 
artists of ancient days, now so highly 
prized; and on a table placed in a light cal- 
culated to show every tint to advantage, 
stood another, which to the delicate 
touches of the former, appeared a made up 
daub. I enquired into the circumstance, 
and learnt from his lordship, that the finer 
painting was done by a mean unknown 
fellow of great genius^ who was starving 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 289 

for bread, and who had the presumption 
of soliciting leave to dedicate his perform- 
ance to him in order to obtain a name 
and notice of his merit in the world of 
fashion and art ; and will not your 
lordship grant his petition, and raise 
from obscurity and wretchedness one, 
who would so highly repay your con- 
descension, by producing talents so 
eminent ?" 

'* Why, I should have no objection 
to serve the poor devil, but I am obliged 
to allow this, (cried his lordship, point- 
ing to the daub) the honor of my pa- 
tronage. My friendy Lord Dunderhead, 
unfortunately has no taste or reputation 
in the world for these soFt of things, and 
for reasons best known to myself, has 

VOL. I, O 



^9^ OWEN CASTLE; 

taken it into his wise head to counten- 
ance this miserable soiler of canvass ; 
being under obligations of an imperious 
nature to his lordship, I am obliged to 
sanction it ; my judgment may be called 
in quesaon by the connoisseurs, but my 
purse escapes the tax upon it" 

I asked what he meant. 

He laughingly replied, that my lord 
Dunderhead paid the usual compliment 
'"fa dedication, not himself. 

I could not forbear expressing my 
pity for the poor artist so undeservedly 
consigned to oblivion, and wished mysel 
a lord instead of a stranger unable to 
uphold the man of merit; however I 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 291 

contented myself by making interest for 
him amongst my friends, who to oblige 
me, purchased the offerings of genius un- 
graced by the patronage of a lord or lady ; 
yet I question if I had not made it my 
particular request for them to encourage 
his works, whether he would have sold 
his finest performance for the price of a 
dinner. I procured him fifty guineas for 
it ; it was worthy of ^ve hundred. 

" You are newly arrived in this coun- 
try," cried Sir Matthew, " and cannot be 
aware how necessary caution is in the 
forming connexions in the metropolis, 
where so many sharpers, surrounded by 
deceitful and flattering appearances lie 
^n wait to prey upon the unwary. 



292 OWEN CASTLE ; 

Recommendatio7is and letters of cha- 
racter, as you humourously call them, 
are the safe guards of a commercial 
nation ; without those vouchers for the 
integrity of the person intrusted, its 
wealth wouid be lost, its estimation 
entirely ruined. But I must assure you 
that we have m^my nobles, who are 
liberal benefactors of the arts ; ere 
long you will join with me in their 
commendation." 

" I do not doubt it, sir," returned 
Augustus, '^and will readily join in their 
praise, the moment I become more 
acquainted with their virtues/' 

END OF VOL. I. 



