ADA REIS. 



CHAPTER I. 

Ada Reis appears to have been one 
of those daring characters which hu- 
man nature produces now and then : 
one of those men who awe and over- 
power all the feeble and many of the 
stronger minded, by the success of 
their enterprises; and who at last sa- 
tisfy and silence reproach and indigna- 
tion by the suddenness of their fall and 
the greatness of their punishment. In 
the history which he gives of himself, 
he dwells long upon the little pecu- 
liarities of his boyish feelings, whilst 
he mentions but briefly his birth and 
early adventures. The account is, 

VOL. I. B 



°Z ADA REIS. 

that he was a Georgian ; — that he was 
sold by his parents for a trifling sum ; 
that when he parted from her, a jew- 
elled ring was tied into his cap by his 
mother, to save him from the power of 
witchcraft ; and that, after a variety of 
narrow escapes, he fell into the hands 
of one Adamo Remolo, a Genoese 
merchant, who gave him the best edu- 
cation he could afford, placed him in 
an academy at Pisa, and, when he 
died, bequeathed him a small property 
and his name. 

From Pisa, the young Adamo, after 
a long series of adventures, was taken 
to be page of honour to the grand duke 
of Tuscany, at whose court he soon 
distinguished himself by feats of early 
prowess, and a most untameable spirit. 
His violent temper, his extraordinary 
talents, his surprising beauty, and fear- 
less disposition, soon gained him a suf- 



ADA REIS. 3 

ficient number both of friends and 
enemies. He was flattered by the wo- 
men, commended by princes, feared 
by dependents, and trampled upon by 
superiors. In this school he became 
cunning and corrupt enough for a 
court : but, in order to succeed in pa- 
laces, caution, reserve, submission, dis- 
simulation, are also necessary ; and for 
these he was utterly unfitted by the 
violence and impetuosity of his dispo- 
sition. The consequence of repeated 
error was his final dismissal. 

Stung to the heart and enraged, in- 
stead of entering the army, according 
to the orders he had received, he 
escaped, and hired himself to a mer- 
chant bound to Spain. His imagina- 
tion had been excited, by reading the 
histories of Corsairs and of their ex- 
ploits ; he ardently desired a life of peril 
and adventure, his turbulent spirit ill 

b 2 



4< ADA REIS. 

enduring any species of confinement ; 
and, young as he then was, he ap- 
peared already to have studied and to 
have detested European manners. In 
this part of his narration we meet with 
vehement censures of kings and men 
in power (censures ever loudest from 
the mouths of those who are them- 
selves the most tyrannical) ; appeals to 
established laws, and invocations of 
national justice ; both very incongru- 
ous, when proceeding from Ada Reis, 
— he who knew neither how to submit 
himself to the one, nor to act accord- 
ing to the other. 

Omitting these and other reflections, 
we hasten on to the period of his em- 
barkation, at which he tells us that, 
for the first time in his short life, he 
felt himself independent. Gazing 
upon the ocean, he knelt down in 
transport, and solemnly vowed to de- 



ADA REIS. 



vote himself entirely to that element. 
From that hour he became indefatiga- 
ble in the pursuit of what he calls 
glory and gain. From the merchant 
ship he entered an Algerine galley, on 
board of which he served above a year ; 
but the Algerine Reis, or captain, 
broke his engagement with him, and 
treated him with contumely : he re- 
solved to be revenged. He had gained, 
by his talents and courage, the affec- 
tions of the crew : he seized his oppor- 
tunity, murdered his enemy, declared 
himself a convert to the religion of 
Mahomet, and, with the assistance of 
the second in command, gave every 
order, and assumed the title as well as 
the authority of Reis 8 . 

He fought many well-contested 
battles, and visited many countries, 
where his spirit of defiance, and thirst 
ibr novelty, continually led him into 



f> 



ADA REIS. 



some desperate and perilous adven- 
ture. He was once made prisoner 
and carried into Spain, where he fell 
deeply in love with a lady of rank, by 
whose favour he was liberated; and after 
again meeting with much of strange 
and marvellous fortune, he finally 
settled at Tripoly, in the twentieth 
year of his age. He there paid court 
successfully to the Reis of the Pasha's 
fleet, and by his means obtained much 
power and many privileges. The 
light of true religion once, he con- 
fesses, had dawned upon his mind, but 
he now gave himself up entirely to 
infidelity, and its usual concomitant, 
idle superstition, and a blind belief in 
wizards and sorcerers. The sacred 
rites of Christianity became the sub- 
ject of his derision ; and though, in 
fact, he believed as little in Mahomet, 
he had the policy to disguise his in- 



ADA REIS. 



credulity, and never publicly to offend 
the opinions of the people of the coun- 
try amongst whom at any period he 
resided. 

At length the Pasha 9 of Tripoly, 
having heard much of his courage, 
himself sent for him, and intrusted 
him with a secret commission, which 
he executed so speedily and success- 
fully as to gain considerable credit and 
influence with that prince. It was 
even rumoured that one of the Pasha's 
daughters would be given to him in 
marriage. However this might be, he 
was placed in a very high situation 
near the Bey 10 , as his own particular 
Reis. That title too was confirmed to 
him, and he was treated with every 
mark of favour and respect. 

Ada Reis, as he was now commonly 
called, was of a commanding stature : 
he had a vigorous mind, at times even 



ADA REIS. 



rising to the sublime ; but he was fond 
of low company and buffoonery, and 
in particular of making bad jests and 
telling long stories. His passions, un- 
governable beyond all control, betray- 
ed him to the very verge of madness : 
he was stubborn as well as violent ; he 
could bear the most acute pain, and 
intense fatigue, with the passive en- 
durance of an Indian. He spoke the 
Turkish and Greek languages like a 
native, and, from having occasionally 
accompanied the Bedouins across their 
deserts, he acquired their dialect. 

He visited Mecca in company with 
two of the caravans from Morocco. 
He was once overtaken by a dreadful 
storm, on his passage from Constanti- 
nople, with some Greek slaves for his 
master the Bey, on which occasion, 
had it not been for his extraordinary 
skill and courage, the vessel and crew 



ADA REIS. 9 

must have perished. But that which 
gained him the highest estimation 
amongst the Tripolitans was the 
bravery and cunning with which he 
opposed the Arabs, who were making 
formidable incursions on their territo- 
ries. Yet in despite of these successes 
nor ladies' love nor a monarch's favour 
could detain him long on shore. His 
delight was in active pursuits and rash 
adventures ; and these he was sure to 
meet with whilst cruizing about with 
his fearless crew : then would he ex- 
ult, whilst sailing on the beautiful 
Mediterranean, and, throwing aside 
his pipe and perfumes, sing with his 
merry followers, and laugh triumph- 
antly, as his swift vessel glided amongst 
the Islands of the Archipelago. He 
would drink, too, and that with such 
intemperance, that many, afraid of its 
injuring his health, or inflaming his 



10 ADA RE IS. 

already furious passions, besought him 
to refrain; but, deriding their coun- 
sels, and mocking at their fears, " Not 
drink!" he cried, "by Allah, or by 
Mahomet, or by all the holy saints of 
Christendom, wine and spirits are the 
soul of life !" And early he had learn- 
ed to quaff the intoxicating draught, 
which opened every cell where fancy 
slept, putting to flight each sluggish 
and dormant thought, and adding 
light and fire to those that remained. 

Gaily and prosperously passed the 
first years of his youth, till ambition, 
overcoming the love of pleasure, pos- 
sessed itself entirely of his mind, and 
he became acquainted with a man as 
wicked and as desperate as himself. 
In the morning early, and in the even- 
ing late, he had continually observed 
a Jew passing before the Reis of the 
Marine's house looking long and fix- 



ADA REIS. 11 

edly upon the sea, as if expecting the 
return of some vessel. He inquired of 
many the name and business of this, 
man, and their answer was always, " It 
is Kabkarra, the Jew." 

"And who is Kabkarra?" 

" He who has sold himself to Zu- 
banyann, the son of the famous ShafFou 
Paca, who came from Egypt to take 
care of the Pasha's harem 11 , and who 
now lives with Lilla Amani 12." 

" And who is Zubanyann ?" 

" He is the evil spirit who is seen 
in the desert, and often destroys the 
weary traveller." 

This account Ada Reis received 
from the gaping multitude, and, wild 
and absurd as it appeared, it still gave 
him a desire to become acquainted 
with this mysterious individual. 



ADA REIS. 



CHAPTER II. 

A great rivalship and contention 
existed at this time among the mer- 
chants at Tripoly, in the sale of certain 
pearls of a particular size and colour, 
which were in the greatest request, and 
highly valued at some of the African 
and Asiatic courts. Two of the Moor- 
ish merchants being aware that Kab- 
karra alone possessed any quantity of 
these pearls, proposed to Ada Reis to 
assist them in obtaining them from him. 
Kabkarra had refused many, but it 
was thought he would not refuse the 
insinuating and all-powerful Ada Reis, 
who upon being asked by Muley Hadgi 
and Yusuph Seid, the two merchants 
in question, if he would risk a part of 



ADA REIS. 13 

his property in this enterprise, " Not 
a part," he replied, — " the whole; for 
in whatever Ada Reis takes an in- 
terest, he considers his life and fortune 
as of no account, and this ensures his 
success/' Kabkarra had besides these 
pearls, in his possession a famous sabre, 
a Damascus blade 13 , said to have be- 
longed to Melchior, one of the three 
Magi Kings : this also was to Ada Reis 
an object of the most intense desire ; 
but upon inquiry, it was discovered that 
Kabkarra had just departed with the 
caravan for Egypt. It was not, how- 
ever, in Ada Reis's character either 
to abandon or to postpone the exe- 
cution of his intentions ; and therefore, 
in the hope of either overtaking him or 
meeting him on his return, he made 
hasty preparations for his journey, and 
set forth with the two merchants upon 
this expedition. Their provisions were 



14 ADA REIS. 

scanty, and soon exhausted ; the wea- 
ther was intensely hot, and for many 
days they traversed the burning sands 
with no other refreshment than a bag 
of meal and some water in their girbas, 
whilst at night they were pierced by 
insufferable cold 14 . Muley Hadgiand 
Yusuph Seid, who were neither gifted 
with courage nor fortitude, immediately 
insisted upon returning, observing that 
the pearls and sabre would be of no 
avail, if their lives were lost, which 
must be the consequence of this un- 
expected detention of the caravan, and 
tedious sojourning in the desert ; but 
Ada Reis laughed at their fears, and 
showed them, by his own example, how 
to bear privation and danger without a 
murmur, observing that now it were 
as well, in fact, for them to proceed as 
to return. 

They shortly after met with a pil- 



ADA REIS. 15 

grim who had been wounded, and who 
informed them that a horde of Arabs 
having fallen in with them, had, after 
a severe contest, pillaged and put to 
flight Jews, Christians, Mussulmen, 
and Pagans ; many were left dead or 
mortally wounded, others had returned, 
and some had been utterly lost in the 
deserts. The sands were strewed with 
the booty which had fallen from the 
grasp of the plunderers, and the mer- 
chants found bags of gold-dust 15 and 
other treasures, as they pursued their 
way. As it grew dark, Muley Hadgi 
and Yusuph Seid reiterated their ur- 
gent entreaties to Ada Reis that he 
would return. An evil spirit, however, 
had taken possession of his heart, and 
he resolved to murder his two aged 
companions, and pursue his course 
alone. He seized the opportunity 
whilst they slept, and, having slain them, 



16 ADA REIS. 

possessed himself of their camels, and 
the treasures which they had with them. 
The horrid deed was no sooner done 
than he looked fearfully round, and be- 
held, to his amazement, on the bound- 
less desert before him, one human be- 
ing who had witnessed his cruelty, and 
who now appeared watching him witli 
immoveable calmness, enveloped in a 
dark heiram : he was armed with a 
long match-musket, the weapon of the 
wandering tribe to which he appeared 
to belong 16 ; he wore a belt inscribed 
with Arabic characters : his air was 
noble and haughty, his figure above 
the middle size, his features were per- 
fectly regular and strongly marked, his 
complexion nearly black. "Who are 
you?" at length said Ada Reis. 

" I am," replied the stranger, " a 
sovereign of the desert, and I know 
you, and the deed you have done." 



ADA REIS. 17 

" Whence come you?" rejoined Ada 
Reis, undauntedly. 

" Like the bird of passage," said the 
Arab, mournfully, " I have no settled 
habitation : sometimes, like the gazelle, 
I roam the plain of the desert; some- 
times, like the eagle, I make my nest 
upon the summit of the mountain." 

" You are not an Arab sheik 17 ," said 
Ada Reis, looking steadfastly at him. 
"The arms you bear, your belted 
girdle 18 , and that dark heiram, cannot 
disguise you from me ; you are a Jew, 
the Jew I am in search of. By the 
prophet, you are Kabkarral" 

" Sayest thou so," retorted the 
stranger, and laughed. 

Ada Reis prepared to strike his 
yattagan into the heart of the Jew, 
for he feared him. The stranger moved 
not ; but the blunted weapon struck as 
upon a breast-plate of iron, and Ada 

vol. i. c 



18 ADA REIS. 

Reis, confounded, threw himself upon 
his face at his feet, saying, "I am 
lost !" 

"Arise!" said the stranger, "fear 
me not. I am the Jew, who, by di- 
stant travelling, and a courage like 
your own, have possessed myself of 
hard-earned wealth. I know a place, 
not sixteen fathoms deep in the sea, 
where pearls grow bigger than the 
eider's egg. I have in my pay many 
slaves, who bring me gold-dust in 
abundance. We have been attacked and 
plundered, but seeing the danger, I 
joined the enemy, and having seized 
upon this habit, was in quest of assist- 
ance. I wear triple-steel upon my 
breast, on my back, and round my 
throat a collar, which once resisted the 
Hamper's shawl 19 . I am rich and pow- 
erful; but, alas! Ada Reis, what are 
all the riches of the earth without a 



ADA REIS. 19 

friend? You are well known to me; 
we are both in the prime of youth; 
the world lies before us; swear upon 
this sword the Arab's oath, — swear 
that treachery shall never enter your 
mind or heart; let us henceforward 
be united." Saying which, the stranger 
opened a sack, and displayed the pearls 
of which Ada Reis had heard so much. 
But Ada Reis only begged to have the 
sabre, at which the Jew smiled, and, 
drawing it from a plain scabbard, the 
air was scented by the perfume of the 
blade; and the mystic device of the 
Magi King, beautifully and curiously 
engraved, excited his utmost admi- 
ration. Ada Reis eagerly accepted it; 
the Jew gracefully presented it, bid- 
ding him not only retain the sword, but 
in future adopt the sigil of the King 
of the East as his own ; after which he 
conversed upon a variety of subjects 

c2 



20 ADA REIS. 

with the grace and ease of one bred in 
the most polished courts, so as entirely 
to win the heart of his companion. 
They then returned to the camels, and 
proceeded upon their lonely journey. 
In replacing the baggage upon the 
animals, Ada Reis shrunk back on 
touching the stiff cold hand of Muley 
Hadgi ; at this Kabkarra laughed. 

The following day, as they were slowly 
proceeding on their way to Tripoly, they 
were joined by several of the dispersed 
travellers of the caravan. The sky, 
clear till now, became dark and heavy ; 
the sun appeared to lose its splendour, 
and assume a violet colour ; the atmo- 
sphere became thick, and filled witli 
dust; the beasts could scarcely breathe 
from the excessive heat; Ada Ileis 
felt unable to support himself; the Jew 
alone seemed not to heed the coming 
storm. As gasping and faint the travel- 



ADA ItEIS. 21 

lers and the camels proceeded, not a 
leaf, not a tree, was to be seen; no 
shelter near for thirty miles ; one burn- 
ing waste of endless sand met the eye ; 
not a drop of water, but what they had 
with them, could be procured. When 
the wind rose, the sands flew like the 
waves and spray of the foaming ocean, 
and enveloped them: it was then that, 
with a laugh and a yell, Kabkarra de- 
stroyed, one by one, the wretched be- 
ings who were dragging along a part 
of their property, and desiring Ada 
Reis to assist him, placed what booty 
appeared most valuable on their own 
camel. They then slew the rest of 
these animals, in order to procure the 
water they contained, and, mounted 
upon the only survivor, reached a 
Moorish hut, drank of the lakaby 20 
presented to them, and ate of the plain 
fare offered to them, with rapturous 
delight. 



2~ ADA REIS. 

After all these horrors Ada Reis 
fell asleep upon the mat prepared 
for him, nor awakened till the ensuing 
morning, when opening his eyes he 
found his companion was gone. The 
sabre he had left, with some of the 
most valuable of the pearls, and a paper 
written in the Arabic tongue, which 
said, "Farewell! beloved; we shall 
meet again. Remember the Jew Kab- 
karra. Continue thy course: a mon- 
arch's crown awaits thee, in a land 
where diamonds and emeralds shall be 
strewn under thy feet, and where the 
blood of the innocent may flow, with- 
out fear of revenge." 

Ada Reis was alarmed, and yet 
delighted by this epistle ; the vainest 
hopes of ambition filled his mind. 
He returned, however, to Tripoly, and 
thought more of the promise made 
to him, than of the wicked deeds 
he had done. In the space of a 



ADA REIS. 23 

month after these events, he was 
offered the place of the Great Chiah 21 , 
the late Chiah being dead. This 
is one of the highest and most 
powerful offices of the state, and for 
that very reason the most envied and 
suspected, so that it was more than 
probable the successor to it would be 
strangled or poisoned, as the last had 
been. Ada Reis most earnestly be- 
sought that he might be permitted to 
decline the honour intended him : and 
after presenting some of the pearls he 
had obtained to the Pasha, with con- 
siderable difficulty he gained his re- 
luctant consent, that he should depart, 
with other merchants, who were going 
to Constantinople. 

He asked for no favours, no letters 
— freedom was all he desired ; and he 
boasted that he was prouder of the title 
of Reis than of any other whatever, 



24 ADA REIS. 

because he had laboured for it, and 
won it by his own energy. To impose 
upon the ignorant, he claimed kindred 
with princes and kings, nay, with the 
sun itself; but in fact he was proud of 
his low origin, and of having risen to 
the highest dignities by his own exer- 
tions. When he spoke his real senti- 
ments, he boasted that he owed nothing 
to man, not even to his parents, who, 
after bringing him into the world, had 
abandoned and sold him. But the 
orphan, he said, was the child of Pro- 
vidence, the citizen of the world, free 
and independent; the subject of no 
law, the follower of no religion, the 
slave of no custom ; and in this vain 
belief he again set forth in quest of 
adventures. In the course of a five 
years' absence, he was again taken 
prisoner by the Spaniards, and again li- 
berated ; after which he visited France, 



ADA REIS. 25 

Italy, Constantinople, and finally re- 
turned once more, crowned with 
wealth and success, to Tripoly: yet 
he returned not this time alone ; — he 
brought with him the child Fiormonda. 

Previous to his return, when at Con- 
stantinople, while standing alone to 
admire the beautiful and delicious gar- 
dens which surround the shores of the 
Kara Dengis, a wizard appeared to 
him, and repeated to him the predic- 
tion of the Jew : " You shall be king 
in another land," he said, "and the 
offspring of your body, the child of 
blood, shall wear an imperial crown." 

Ada Reis, enchanted, and deeply 
struck with this prediction, with more 
boldness than ever pursued his course. 
Wherever he appeared, wealth awaited 
him ; at every court at which he was 
presented, he was received with admi- 
ration : but the attention which was 



26 



ADA REIS. 



paid to him by others could not be 
greater than that which he paid to 
himself; upon that subject he expa- 
tiates at the greatest length. He cannot 
for a moment cease to commend him- 
self; whole pages are filled with de- 
scriptions of his person. His clear 
auburn hair hanging in curls over his 
fair brow and white neck, his eyes 
beaming with love, his smile irresisti- 
ble, his voice most melodious ; he had 
only to speak to persuade, yet did he 
ever use but few words. He acknow- 
ledges, however, that he delighted in 
low company, in throwing off all re- 
straint, and in giving unbounded li- 
cence to his conversation ; confesses 
more than once that he was a strange 
compound of every excellence, and 
every vice. But where is the excel- 
lence he found in his own character ? 
The bad ever thus deceive themselves ; 



ADA REIS. 27 

and their desperate crimes assume, in 
their own eyes alone, an appearance of 
greatness. Ada Reis, when offended, 
broke into violence, as if he were mad : 
his fury then exceeded every thing 
terrific ; his eyes brightened, whilst his 
dark soul rushed through his lips, and 
poured itself forth in execrations. 

Vanity and vehemence being thus 
amongst his principal characteristics, 
it may be expected that his narrative 
will dwell much upon his successes in 
love. In fact, for pages together he 
does nothing but boast of the advances 
made to him by the fair sex : he speaks 
at great length of a young English 
lady, with whom he became acquainted 
during his short and unwilling stay at 
Madrid. Alarmed at the war then 
breaking out between her country and 
Spain, she placed herself under his pro- 
tection, and he undertook to convey 



28 ADA REIS. 

her safely to her own country : to use 
his own words, " Under the snow of 
the cold climate from which she came, 
lay concealed the glowing embers of 
passion ;" for if credit is to be given 
to his relation, the lady died of her 
love, and was not the only lady who 
perished by a similar fate. Numerous 
are the attachments, of which he pro- 
ceeds to detail the circumstances ; end- 
less the list of names he enumerates — 
Zoe, Orrellana, Issaline, Aura, Zemyra, 
Orgylia, Mania, Kala, Drossora, Rho- 
da, Heliodora, Morosa, Levidolche, 
Muskatina ; but the one alone to whom 
he soon surrendered his mind and soul 
was Bianca di Castamela, the mother 
of the heroine of this tale. 



ADA REIS. 29 



CHAPTER III. 



It was in the spring of the year 
1729, that Ada Reis having landed in 
Calabria, in order to dispose of some 
merchandise, became acquainted with 
a beautiful young Italian maiden, 
whose father was, like himself, a mer- 
chant, and whose hand had been al- 
ready promised in marriage to a kins- 
man of her own. She was then seven- 
teen years of age, the admiration of all 
who saw her ; and she, alas ! too soon 
perceived and returned the interest 
she had excited in Ada Reis's breast. 

The history of unfortunate love, or 
short or long, or well or ill told, is in 
substance every where the same. The 
maiden, after becoming difficulties, 
yielded to the irresistible Ada Reis : 



30 ADA REIS. 

his manly haughty air, his high stature, 
and superb dress, added to his charms 
and his costly gifts and polished man- 
ners, soon captivated her affections ; 
he, besides, assured her, swearing an 
oath, which she believed to be a sacred 
one, that he would return and marry 
her; in token of which he gave her 
his amber beads to keep, and a griffin's 
claw made of rubies and diamonds, 
which the Bey had given him from his 
own turban. 

Bianca expressed no regret for her 
error ; she had yielded to her lover's 
suit, and she was now the mistress 
of a man, whom all her country- 
women beheld with enthusiastic ad- 
miration : they paid her greater court 
for Ada Reis's sake, and envy itself 
was silenced in order to flatter him. 
But the time for his departure drew 
near, and, finding herself in a situation 



ADA REIS. 31 

to excite the suspicions of her parents 
and relatives, she implored her lover to 
take her with him to his own country. 

" And I will, loveliest girl," he said, 
bearing her along with him upon the 
night of his departure to the coast, 
where his vessel was moored, and the 
crew were all impatiently waiting for 
him. " Come with me, if thou darest ; 
for, by Allah, I never will abandon my 
chosen bride !" 

It was a fearful sight for these fond 
lovers, as they yet stood upon the 
shore, to see the little bark tossed 
to and fro upon that tremendous 
sea, the waves foaming and breaking 
against the rocks, whilst the hoarse 
sailors and slaves, with their shouts 
and halloos, seemed to overmatch the 
storm. It was a quick transition, to 
turn from the delights and repose of 
successful love to all the horrors and 



32 ADA REIS. 

dangers of such a night ; and Bianca, 
with a woman's charms and frailty, had, 
it seems, all a woman's fears : she sighed 
when her lover thus addressed her: 
" I will bear thee with me, my beloved, 
if thou hast spirit and courage to be 
the mate of Ada Reis ; and, if not — 
Ha! dost thou shrink already?" 

Bianca trembled, her bosom heaved, 
as in her dark hair she hid her face 
and wept, shrinking back. u Not to- 
night," she cried, timidly. " Ah, go 
not to-night! My father will pardon 
us — another time — oh, heavens ! — an- 
other time, Ada Reis, I will leave all 
and go with thee," 

"And another time, sweet one," said 
Ada Reis, with a scornful smile, " I 
will return and make thee my bride." 
Bianca cast her eyes down with 
shame at this reproach. Ada Reis 
embraced her. 



ADA REIS. S3 

" Thou hast not courage," he said, 
" to come with me, have it then to live 
for me, and I will return." Saying 
this, he sprang into the boat, whilst 
cheers from his merry crew echoed 
along the shore. 

Bianca knelt down, praying for 
his safety ; straining her eyes to see 
him once more. She remained upon 
the spot until the vessel became as a 
single speck in the distance : she 
then returned home to all the dis- 
comforts of family surmises, her own 
heart's reproaches, and a long widow- 
hood of absence from her lover. 

One month passed thus, and the 
beautiful Bianca began to repent of 
her conduct : at such a moment, dread- 
ing her father's anger, and persecuted 
by the continued addresses of her kins- 
man, Giulliano, she had the weakness 
to give him her hand in marriage ; and 

VOL. I. d 



34 ADA REIS. 

Giulliano's love for her was such, that, 
upon her sacred promise never again 
to see her seducer, he received her into 
his house, and, from the day she be- 
came a mother, cherished her infant 
as if it had been his own. 

Two years passed for Bianca and 
Giulliano in peace ; a third was open- 
ing upon their view, when Ada Reis 
returned, and having sought for her, 
traced her to her dwelling, where he 
found her with her child amusing her- 
self innocently during her husband's 
absence : he first snatched up the child, 
and gazed upon it wildly, then re- 
proached the mother with her infidelity. 

" I have been deceived," she cried, 
"and thought you had abandoned me 
to shame. By the gray hairs of my 
father, by our first vows of attachment, 
by your cherub infant's smile — see, 
Ada Reis, is not Fiormonda your 



ADA REIS-. 35 

child? — oh, in pity I implore you, 
show me mercy ! I never loved but 
you." 

*' And you never shall !? he said. 

At half an hour after ten at night, 
five hours and three-quarters before 
the full of the moon, Ada Reis first 
strangled, and then plunged his 
scimitar into the bosom of Bianca de 
Castamela ; then enveloping the child 
in his mantle, he fled from the spot. 

As he hurried to regain the shore, 
it appeared to him that a form, horrid 
as the deed he had done, walked be- 
fore him. He seemed to see an eye of 
fire, as through a misty cloud ; and 
when he thrice exclaimed, " who goes 
there?" the word "Kabkarra" was 
, distinctly pronounced. Remorse ren- 
dered Ada Reis, at this moment, almost 
insensible even to this prodigy. His 
heart was torn by the recollection of 

d 2 



36 ADA REIS. 

the deed he had done, for he loved 
the woman whom he had murdered. 
He wept — he had often been seen to 
weep ; hard hearts and wicked beings 
weep the soonest. The uncontrolled 
passions, the hasty impulses, the un- 
governable desires, which hurry a man 
to every atrocity, are also prone to 
melt into floods of tears, and to wear 
every outward mark of sympathy and 
feeling ; real, perhaps, whilst they last, 
but transient, fallacious, and without 
beneficial effect upon the heart or 
the conduct. When on board his 
vessel, with the first dawn of day the 
infant awoke, and stretched out its 
little arms, as if seeking for its mo- 
ther, then again he shed tears of bit- 
terness ; but he soothed the child's 
cries, kissed it to rest, and smiled at 
its beauty. " And never more," he 
cried, "thou little flower, shalt thou 



ADA REIS. 



see the stem upon which those beauties 
grew. Farewell to Calabria, farewell to 
women and to love, and farewell, dear- 
est of all, to the remains of Bianca di 
Castamela ! For her sake, I will bring 
thee up with more than a mother's 
care ; and as nature has given thee thy 
mother's charms, it shall be my fault 
if thou art deficient in wisdom or ac- 
quirement." 

After this adventure, he returned to 
Tripoly, for there his treasures were 
concealed, there he had purchased 
land, had made friends, and was not 
abhorred, although his crimes were in 
part suspected. 



38 ADA RE IS. 



CHAPTER IV. 

Ada Reis presented many jewels of 
great value and rich merchandises to 
the Pasha. He then, with his permis- 
sion, purchased a country-house, pro- 
vided with baths, gardens, and every 
possible earthly delight. In this re- 
treat he placed his treasures, his ha- 
rem, and his infant, under the charge 
of Aura and Zoe, once his favourite 
wives. For himself, he sought, in the 
indulgence of his passions, for one mo- 
ment's forgetfulness and tranquillity; 
he possessed every thing he most de- 
sired; and he said to himself con- 
tinually, "who in the wide world is 
greater, or ought to be happier, than I 
am ? Who can boast of firmer nerves, 
higher spirits, fairer expectations, or 



ADA REIS. 39 

more admiring followers? Does not 
my child smile upon me, like a little 
cherub of light? Who has greater 
power and wealth than I have ? What 
eastern queen can boast of richer 
jewels than I shall bestow upon Fior- 
monda ; and for steeds and slaves, has 
the Pasha finer or more numerous than 
myself; yet in the midst of my success 
and my splendor I am miserable, and 
wherefore ?" 

Under the influence of these feelings, 
he was unable ever to rest long in the 
same place. From the city he hurried 
to his residence in the country, and 
from thence to the city again with 
feverish disquietude and impatience. 
The only hours that he appeared to 
enjoy were those during which he 
remained upon his terrace to inhale 
the inbat 22 , after a parching day; or 
when in the calm of the night a visitor 



40 ADA REIS. 

chanced to enter and partake of his 
pipe and sherbet 23 , or his favourite 
lackaby. But deep cares overpowered 
his mind when alone, and the least 
noise startled him with strange appre- 
hensions. Often the remembrance of 
past deeds awakened in his soul, and 
he thought of the days he had passed 
in the desert, and the dreadful night 
when Muley Hadgi and Usuph Seid 
had perished by his hand ; then me- 
mory pictured to him the promises of 
love, his jealous rage, and the form of 
his murdered mistress. Ada Reis was 
superstitious, because he had long 
ceased to be religious. When the ma- 
rabut 24 sounded to announce the 
prayer at sunset, he never prostrated 
himself upon the ground ; he never 
turned his face to the east, nor breathed 
to his prophet, or his Creator, one 
single thanksgiving. Into mosque or 



ADA REIS. 41 

place of worship he seldom went, and 
he commanded that Fiormonda should 
be kept in ignorance of every religious 
rite. Nor did he watch with easier 
impatience and parched lips for the 
moon of Ramadan 25 , but himself, his 
child, and his servants, in secret, ate 
and drank during the sacred fast, re- 
gardless of the commands of shrief or 
prophet; and, when the castle guns 
and those of all the batteries announced 
the feast of Beiram 26 , he would walk 
out by night amidst the noise and roar 
and riot which took place during that 
festival. Then would he gaze upon 
the bright glare of the illuminated 
mosques — enter the coffee-bazaars, and 
join in the revelry with dancers and 
singers, and the lowest slaves, giving 
vent to his licentious humour, and 
passing his time amidst the turmoil 
and carousals of the vilest of mankind, 



ADA REIS. 



Was this happiness ? No ! He felt that 
it was not; he found, what all who 
run the same course, sooner or later 
must find, that he who yields up his 
understanding to the allurements of 
vice, submits himself to the dominion 
of an hypocritical and deceitful mis- 
tress, of one who clothes herself in an 
assumed character, and who, when 
she drops the mask of brilliant beauty, 
which for a time she wears, discovers 
herself to be pain and sorrow under 
the semblance of pleasure and gratifi- 
cation. 



ADA KEIS. 43 



CHAPTER V. 

At length, as is the ordinary course, 
these pursuits began to lose even their 
temporary power ; they could no longer 
withdraw Ada Reis's mind from the 
reflection which he dreaded ; and, sa- 
tiated with debauchery and buffoonery, 
he had recourse to study. Possessing 
that comprehensive genius which can, 
in a moment, seize upon and master 
the difficulties of science, he became 
acquainted with many of the wonders 
and mysteries of nature; but he traced 
back the clue to no origin higher than 
this life; and in all that excited his 
admiration, he marked not the hand 
of a Creator. He assembled around 
him the learned and the travelled, 



44 ADA REIS. 

and he listened to their discourse ; but 
he found their wisdom degraded by 
envy, vanity, a desire of petty di- 
stinctions, a pedantry, and a love of 
display; and he soon became weary of 
their society. 

In the meanwhile Fiormonda was 
left at his country-house, where she 
grew in years and beauty ; — she added 
to the gaiety and grace of childhood a 
depth of thought and feeling uncom- 
mon to that age. Most children think 
deeply, if left to themselves, if leisure 
be allowed to the mind to expand, and 
a succession of lessons and trifles follow 
not each other too rapidly; but Fior- 
monda had even a greater share of re- 
flection than other children. Thoughts 
concerning religion already agitated 
her mind; and love, although the 
object was, like herself, a child, had 
already warmed her heart. Ada Reis 



ADA BEIS. 45 

soon perceived that his daughter's dis- 
position required a firm and skilful 
discipline : he had long been searching 
for a person qualified to undertake the 
office of her preceptress. 

At this period a marabut, using the 
privilege of his calling, terrified her 
with continual intrusion, came repeat- 
edly even into her chamber, and warned 
her of approaching danger. 

One evening, on returning to his 
country residence, Ada Reis found him 
in Fiormonda's apartment : a serpent 
hung around his neck, and he was 
dancing his wild and frantic dance. 
Ada Reis was beginning to express 
surprise and anger; but the marabut 
spinning round, soon betrayed himself 
by his horrid laugh and malignant 
eye. 

"Ha! Kabkarra!" 

" Well met, Ada Reis." 



46 ADA REIS. 

" I know," said the former, " what 
it is you seek, and I have prepared 
every thing for you. Shaffou Paca, 
my mother, you well know, still lives 
with Lilla Amani; at my request she 
will leave the Pasha's harem, and take 
charge of my Fiormonda." 

" By the prophet, I think thy imperti- 
nence has no bounds — thy Fiormonda! 
Thou art but a mendicant Jew." 

" Ay," said Kabkarra, " but a Jew 
who can purchase all that the vanity 
of man can desire. Have you killed 
more men or women since we parted?" 

Ada Reis started, and looked upon 
him, but his eye could not long endure 
the stern regard of the being who 
stood before him. Daunted and con- 
fused, he turned the discourse to other 
matters, and Kabkarra now presented 
Fiormonda with a set of chess men, 
made, as he said, of a metal he had 



ADA REIS. 47 

found in his travels, and constructed 
with such exquisite art, that they ap- 
peared alive. This bauble, he con- 
tinued, would amuse his little bride 
when she grew older; and in the mean 
time he entreated Ada Reis to con- 
sider him as a friend, and to call upon 
him whenever any difficulty arose. 

To the infinite surprise of Ada Reis, 
Shaffou Paca arrived some days after 
this interview, bringing a flattering 
message from the Pasha and his eldest 
son the Bey, by which the former be- 
stowed upon Fiormonda the title of 
Lilla, and the latter asked her hand in 
marriage. 

Ada Reis accepted the offer in the 
name of his child, and sent in return 
both to the Pasha and Bey splendid 
presents. It now appeared probable 
that his ambition would be gratified; 
and that his daughter would wed a 



48 ;*DA REIS. 

sovereign : for, like most pretended 
philosophers, he valued above all things 
the honours which he ever affected to 
despise. But such is the inconsistency 
of man; and Ada Reis, though he 
talked, at times, like a wise man, ever 
acted like the veriest of fools. 

It has been said, that he was an ad- 
mirer of beauty. It required, there- 
fore, all his self-command to conquer 
his excessive repugnance to the new 
governess's deformed and undignified 
appearance ; so that whilst he was ob- 
liged to attend to her discourse, he 
averted his eyes, that he might not 
see her hideous countenance. Shaffou 
Paca was, indeed, ugly beyond all 
parallel : she was of Egyptian origin ; 
yet her countenance was not of simple 
Egyptian ugliness, but seemed to ex- 
hibit a characteristic mark of every 
original nation. Her legs appeared 



ADA RETS. 49 

to have been put together by mistake ; 
the right one being considerably shorter 
and thicker than the other. She was 
corpulent ; and her eyes, which saw 
even more than other eyes can see, 
never looked in the same direction 27 . 
She had, besides, the peculiar power, 
like the chameleon, of fixing the one 
upon an object while the other turned 
leisurely round, as if seeking for some- 
what else. In her voluble conversa- 
tion no idea was distinct. It seemed 
as if an endless memory, stored with 
the beginnings and endings of all that 
ever had been, was running over the 
heads and hints of what she wished to 
express. Learning appeared to have 
overpowered her ; she had dabbled in 
metaphysics until it was hardly possi- 
ble to understand what she meant, and 
she was continually misquoting pas- 

VOL. I. E 



50 ADA REIS. 

ages in the dead languages. Under 
these circumstances it is not much to 
be wondered at that Ada Reis could 
not bear to converse with her : indeed 
from the first he had spoken to her 
with such extreme harshness, that the 
fright into which he had thrown her 
increased, to the greatest degree, the 
confusion of her ideas, and conse- 
quently the natural tediousness of her 
discourse. In his first interview he 
asked her a few questions concerning 
education ; and as he knew that there 
is a great deal to be said upon that 
subject, he was not surprised that she 
took much time and many words to an- 
swer. But though not surprised, he 
was fatigued ; and in order to get rid 
of her, he sent for the child, and de- 
livered her into her hands ; for it is a 
common practice to condemn children 



ADA REIS. 51 

to the society of those with whom 
parents cannot endure even for a mo- 
ment to associate. 

Fiormonda fell into hysterics at the 
first sight of ShafFou Paca ; but the 
governess, no ways disturbed, restored 
her in a few moments, by certain 
words and gestures, and soon became 
a tolerable favourite. She talked to 
her pupil of the princesses of the 
Pasha's harem, of the Bey, of Lilla 
Amani. She gave her sweetmeats and 
trinkets, and instructed her in the 
science of chess, displaying to her ad- 
miring eyes the beautiful box and the 
wonderful men her son, the Jew Kab- 
karra, had given her. 

Fiormonda laughed, as she viewed 
the pieces marshalled before her ; but 
Ada Reis bit his lips, and seemed 
uneasy, murmuring betwixt his teeth 
— " I like not this gift, this is no mor- 

e 2 



52 ADA REIS. 

tal gift, this is enchantment. I have 
heard or read of such things only in 
the old legends of fayerie and ro- 
mance ; these imps possibly are alive, 
and the servants of Kabkarra !" 

Shaffou Paca now thought it pru- 
dent to put in a few words, and with 
a stream of eloquence proved, that it 
was the mere power of mechanism, 
which, when the pieces were wound 
up, put them thus in motion. Still 
Ada Reis doubted. 

When the board was placed upon the 
floor, it covered a breadth and length 
of nearly six square feet. The white 
squares were of polished ivory, the 
black of jet ; the rim around was of 
gold studded with gems. The casket 
contained the greatest wonder of all. 
The chessmen were habited in ruby 
and emerald suits : the dark knights 
were upon black steeds, richly capari- 



ADA REIS. 53 

soned ; their antagonists upon greys ; 
all formed with precision, delicacy, and 
exquisite art. They could smile, they 
could move their fingers and feet ; the 
horses pranced, the horsemen showed 
off their skill. The ecclesiastics moved 
with dignity. The castles were borne 
slowly forwards ; two were made of 
rose-coloured diamonds, and two of 
black : upon the battlements men of 
small size were discovered, busily pre- 
paring for the attack. The kings had 
brows which bespoke command ; the 
queens were graceful ; the pawns, with 
plebeian rudeness, appeared eager for 
the combat ; and every piece placed 
itself, as it started from the box, ac- 
cording to order. 

Ada Reis, as well as Shaffou Paca, 
instructed Fiormonda in playing at 
this scientific game, in which she took 
surprising delight; indeed, for many 



54f ADA REIS. 

months she did little else. The chess- 
men were removed to a favourite gol- 
pha 28 which Ada Reis had constructed, 
a retreat, which, however intense the 
heat of the sun, was always cool ; it 
being so contrived, that he could at 
pleasure press from the reeds fresh 
air, and raise soft music like that of 
an JEolian harp. This apartment 
was placed in a wilderness, it is true, 
but it was one of sweets, beneath 
thick orange and lemon groves, where 
white marble channels, with rapid clear 
streams of water, crossed the gardens 
in many directions. Fiormonda veiled 
was conducted there at times ,and from 
a distance gazed upon the gardens, in 
which she was now no longer per- 
mitted to wander. She was kept with 
strict care, and closely watched ever 
since the day when the page Zevahir 
had been found conversing with her. 



ADA RE IS. 55 

The youth, in consequence of this 
liberty, had been dismissed from the 
service of Ada Reis ; and, indeed, ex- 
cept when her father was with her, 
this lovely child was confined like a 
state prisoner, Shaffou Paca scarcely 
permitting her to breathe the air from 
without. 



56 ADA REIS. 



CHAPTER VI. 

It happened that shortly after the 
arrival of Shaffou Paca, Ada Reis left 
his child, and remained away many 
months, when he heard suddenly that 
she was ill. He immediately returned 
to his country residence to see her, 
and was struck with the air of debility 
and melancholy visible in her once 
cheerful countenance ; he reasoned 
with Shaffou Paca as to the cause, and 
made some observations to that lady 
upon her system of education, which 
displeased her. 

Whilst they were engaged in dis- 
pute, a message was brought, in- 
forming Ada Reis that on the ensuing 
morning the Bey would visit his de- 



ADA REIS. 57 

stined bride. This was not customary ; 
but the honour was so great that no 
objection was made ; and when the 
young prince arrived, Ada Reis led 
him into his daughter's apartment. 

The chamber was in the form of a 
tent, entirely lined with light blue 
satin, ornamented with gold fringe, 
and costly embroidery. The couch, 
beautifully adorned according to the 
Moorish taste, was placed upon a Turk- 
ish carpet in an alcove. Sharfou Paca 
was employed in attiring her little 
charge in the splendid habits worn 
only by the ladies of the Pasha's 
harem, and all Fiormonda's care was 
how to look beautiful. Hers was a 
happy mixture of Circassian and Italian 
beauty, with a countenance original 
and peculiar to herself. She was dressed 
in a light Persian jelique 29 and white 
under vest, her arms bare, white mus- 
lin trowsers, and her little feet, like 



58 ADA REIS. 

alabaster, ornamented by solid gold 
bands, such as the ladies of the blood 
royal are alone entitled to wear 30 . 
These, and a girdle of charms to save 
her from evil eyes 31 , were her only 
ornaments. Her hair, as yet unb raided, 
hung carelessly around her beautiful 
neck and face. An old gray Iman was 
standing near her, prescribing for her 
ill state of health. 

The Bey knelt in admiration at her 
feet, presenting her, at the same time, 
with a string of pearls. She raised 
him immediately ; and afterwards wait- 
ed upon him and upon her father, 
offering them sweetmeats and refresh- 
ment : she was not, however, well ; 
her pulse was quick, and her manner 
hurried, like that of a wild bird caged, 
or a tender gazelle caught in the net 
and kept from its herd. The Bey 
expressed great anxiety upon her ac- 
count, and the Iman advised Ada Reis 



ADA REIS. 59 

that she should be left more at liberty, 
that the tediousness of her toilette 
should be shortened, the number of 
her ablutions diminished, and that she 
should not be wholly fed upon coffee 
and sweetmeats ; but, above all, he 
insisted much upon her not being op- 
posed in her desire to walk : for her 
present languid state, he said, was oc- 
casioned by heat, pampered luxury, 
and confinement. Her happiest years 
seemed condemned to be passed in 
show and dress. Three times in the 
twenty-four hours Shaffou Paca at- 
tended her to the bath, where Zoe and 
Aura employed themselves, the one 
in washing her beautiful ringlets with 
orange and rose-water, and the other 
in drying them with scented perfumes : 
the plaiting them in fifty tresses, and 
adorning her lovely person with every 
ornament, would now take several 



60 ADA REIS. 

hours more; besides which, Kabkarra 
had terrified her with his live serpent 
and strange contortions, and had given 
her nearly half the sentences out of 
the Koran, in a cup mixed with sher- 
bet of pomegranate juice. By Shaf- 
fou Paca's superstitious decree, the 
right eye of a crocodile of the Nile, 
and the middle feather from an 
ostrich's wing, were placed under 
her pillow at night: amulets, charms, 
Egyptian hieroglyphics, and other in- 
cantations, were wound either in scrolls 
or linen all over her body. She might 
not walk, she might not play, nor 
might she stand by the lake calling 
together from the mountains the troops 
of wild gazelles, who once came to 
Zevahir's voice, nor must she hear his 
soft songs, for, alas! he had been sent 
from the harem for singing too sweetly 
the air she most admired. All these 



ADA RETS. 



61 



complaints the gentle Fiormonda mur- 
mured forth to the young prince, whilst 
the old gray Iman, fixing his dark- 
shining eyes upon her from a corner 
of the room, seemed to smile with tri- 
umph whilst she spoke. Negresses in 
the meantime wetted her forehead with 
their third finger dipped in a charmed 
liquor, and uttered spells and prayers 
to save her from the contagion of 
those eyes; but it was in vain, they 
had fixed hers ; she felt their power, 
hung down her head, and durst not 
raise it up again. Her women were 
standing near her, some stringing 
beads for her, and others arranging 
the feathers of birds in the most beau- 
tiful and fanciful order. Looking- 
glasses, crystal vases, superb chests of 
mother of pearl and ebony, tablets and 
golden ornaments adorned her apart- 
ments; loose mattresses and cushions 
in the form of sofas not five inches 



62 ADA REIS. 

removed from the ground served for 
seats. The Bey had little to say: " If 
you will leave this house, and come 
with me," he said " you shall have no 
reason to complain." 

" Shall I see Zevahir again ?" 

" Who is Zevahir?" said the Bey. 

Shaffou Paca was about to explain, 
when the Iman frowned, and she was 
silent. 

Coffee was now brought in filigree 
cups adorned with pearls and rubies ; 
it was strongly scented with mace, cin- 
namon, and cloves. The Bey took it 
from his little mistress's hands, and 
seated her by him whilst he drank it ; 
he was fifteen years old, and kept in as 
close a state of confinement as herself. 
The rank of Bey had been conferred 
upon him, but he was only now per- 
mitted to go out with his troop on ac- 
count of his extreme youth. 

It Mas natural that after some time 



ADA REIS. 63 

the conversation should rather flag, 
and both the young prince and Fior- 
monda had nearly arrived at the end 
of all their remarks, when the old Iman 
laughed with a hollow laugh, which 
greatly alarmed them ; then turning to 
Shaffou Paca, " I know the mother of 
an Arab sheik can cure Fiormonda," 
he said, " and I will fetch her ; her 
name is Zezel Peer Banyan, an Arab 
fairy ; she lives far hence, but shall be 
here ere long. Take care of your 
charge, tease her no more, let her be 
free as her own thoughts and feelings. 
Hers are the years when the mind 
should be left to expand, and the limbs 
to grow. All this confinement and 
state make the silly fools we see around 
us. Let Fiormonda be the child of 
simple nature. I will return, and teach 
her to braid her beautiful hair, and to 
cast her dark-blue eyes, with their long 



64 ADA REIS. 



and jetty fringes, with more art than 
you can." 

The Bey stared, and took his leave : 
having but few ideas himself, he was 
surprised at the novelty of this dis- 
course. 

" Leila, here is a bird will amuse you ; 
take it, and follow it around your gar- 
den and groves," said the Iman ; " be- 
come, like it, gay and lively. Beauty 
such as yours, in such a land, is only a 
fatal dowry; for of what avail are teeth 
like rows of pearl, limbs straight, long, 
and light, and all your other fascina- 
tions, if that air of melancholy saddens 
your countenance ? Alas ! I am not to 
you what he has been — Kabkarra is 
not as dear as ." 

Fiormonda coloured, and concealed 
her beautiful face, and played with the 
bird, which was as small as the Indian 
piccaflore 32 , and whose plumes were of 



ADA REIS. 65 

an emerald green, with a ruby-coloured 
ring around the neck : it had until this 
moment been concealed in the Iman's 
bosom. Ada Reis had been so intent 
upon honouring the Bey, and upon 
seeing all due respect and ceremony 
observed towards him, that he had not 
heeded before, nor did he observe now, 
the strange conduct of the Iman. He 
tenderly embraced his child, and then 
attended upon the Bey ; but as they 
quitted the chamber, he thought he 
saw the figure of Kabkarra walking 
out before him. 



VOL. I. 



66 ADA RE IS. 



CHAPTER VII. 



As soon as Ada Reis returned, he 
asked Shaffou Paca if her son had been 
there. She answered, No. The Iman 
was gone. Ada Reis then desired that 
Fiormonda might be left entirely to 
herself, and freed from all unnecessary 
restraint and fatigue, whilst he re- 
mained with her. 

To no prisoner was ever liberty more 
delightful than to Fiormonda, when 
escaped from the thraldom of Shaffou 
Paca. With renewed strength and 
spirits, she bounded before the black 
women and nurses, the very moment 
Ada Reis gave her permission to roam 
about the garden : " Now, now I am 
happy," said she, first looking at the 
jessamine in flower, then gathering a 



ADA RE IS. 67 

sprig of myrtle, then hastening to a 
reservoir in which were her gold and 
silver fish. " I will now go," she said, 
" and let all the birds in my aviaryfree." 
In vain the blacks remonstrated ; in a 
moment the paroquets and cucines, the 
pelican, ostrich, and damoiselle, and 
the one sickly gazelle, whose leg had 
been broken in attempting to take it 
alive, were liberated, all rushing forth 
from their respective places of con- 
finement. " Go," she said, opening 
their wiry gates, " I have felt too much 
the misery of slavery not to feel for 
you ; go, with your beautiful plumes, 
happy birds, and say to those you meet, 
it was Fiormonda set you free. But as 
for thee, poor gazelle, with thy brown 
eyes, stay with me : what though thy 
spirit remains, thy power is gone, and 
liberty now to thee can be no object." 
After this and other feats, for which 

f2 



68 ADA REIS. 

she was gently reproved by her father, 
she joined him at the Golpha, where 
coffee was prepared, and, in order to 
amuse her, jugglers and tambour play- 
ers were assembled. These agile per- 
formers rather confused and wearied 
her; and having, until this evening, 
never for one hour in her short life, 
since she could remember, seen the 
beautiful stars reflected in the waters 
of the dark lake, she gazed upon them 
with awe and admiration, sometimes 
expressing her feelings to Ada Reis, 
and sometimes listening to the notes 
of the nightingale, who was warbling 
sweetly in the orange grove. The 
noise of the players had ceased ; the 
glare and heat of day had passed. Fior- 
monda's whole attention seemed to be 
suddenly arrested by the beauty and in- 
terest of the scene, — thought crowded 
upon thought — her heaving breast and 



ADA REIS. 69 

half open lips showed that the magni- 
tude and mystery of the subject en- 
grossed all her faculties, and prevented 
her from giving immediate utterance 
to her sentiments. At length, timidly 
approaching Ada Reis ; " What are 
these lights ?" she said, " and by whom 
placed there ? Are they balls of fire, 
or precious gems?" 

" They are worlds, perhaps, like our 
own," he replied. 

Then hurrying on with eager cu- 
riosity, " Who made them ; and for 
what end ? What are we, father ? Why 
here? and what will become of us, when, 
like those who have left us, we shall be 
no more ? Shall we go to those bright 
worlds if we are good ? What is being 
good ? What bad ? and is that which 
is good happy, and that which is evil 
the reverse ? Why am I punished when 
my will teaches me to oppose yours ? 



70 ADA REIS. 

By what law have you power and au- 
thority over me ? How is it that I suf- 
fered but just now, and why am I now 
well ? Why are you greater than other 
men ? May any man, if he can, get 
the better of others, and command 
them ?" 

" What law can be stronger than the 
law of power and possession?" said 
Ada Reis. 

" Is there any one upon this earth, 
or in those other worlds, greater than 
you, my father ?" 

Fiormonda did not wait for answers 
to most of these inquiries ; but when 
at length she paused, Ada Reis thus 
replied. " All that you see, fair daugh- 
ter, is the result of chance ; Ada Reis, 
great as he appears, these beautiful 
groves, these mountains, yourself, the 
flowing rivers, the calm lake, the my- 
riads of insects, the crowd of men, the 



ADA REIS. 71 

crocodile, and the sprightly monkey, 
the lordly palm, the perfumed magno- 
lia, the purple rhododendron, and the 
azalia, that blooms for miles and miles 
over the hills, all these are the mere 
combinations of casual attraction. In 
the beginning of all things, if ever there 
was a beginning, there was one princi- 
ple, the power of life or animation; and 
there were two elements to work upon, 
light 33 and darkness; and although 
none can tell what gave the first shock, 
which set these elements in motion, 
yet, since the beginning of time, in all 
probability, attraction and combination 
have given forms and variety to nature : 
there is no vacuum in the universe; all 
is filled, all is alive, and every diversity 
of animated dust sports along, till dis- 
solution unknits the particles, and sends 
them back to fill some other appointed 
condition. We are the sport of chance; 
the tree that grows in our garden may 



72 ADA REIS. 

be composed of atoms that were once 
what we call man. We are, compared 
to this earth, as a drop of water to the 
ocean ; think what we must be to the 
boundless universe ! We are inventive, 
and, with the materials before us, can 
make ourselves palaces, ornaments, 
and delights, but we cannot increase 
the dust of the earth by one particle, 
any more than we can add one ray of 
light to the sun ; for all was complete 
from the beginning; and when all is 
dissolved from its present combination, 
light will return to light, and darkness 
to darkness. This great principle, 
which warms and illuminates — this 
creative being, this God, whose sigh 
(perhaps at being alone, and immortal 
in existence) animated worlds by a 
single breath — this light of life, who 
renders the earth fruitful, will then 
draw forth gradually, from each living 
thing, the latent particle of celestial 



ADA REIS. 73 

fire, which it lent but for a time, and 
attracting it to itself again, waft it up 
on high to its primitive station, where 
all will be perfect light, perfect har- 
mony, and consequently perfect hap- 
piness." 

" I hope," said Fiormonda, " that I 
have nothing but light in me." 

" Oh !" said Ada Reis, with a look 
of despair, " best beloved, unhappy 
Fiormonda, through me, alas ! the evil 
principle has attached itself to thee ; 
by me, the pure and subtle matter, that 
had combined in thee, forming the 
appearance of perfection, (for in that 
which is beautiful beauty rests), has 
been defiled; and if you do not, by 
day and by night, keep guard, the curse 
of the father will destroy the innocent 
child. For the deeds of darkness that 
I have done, nature demands repara- 
tion : blood will have blood ! the very 



74 ADA REIS. 

earth speaks this to me wherever I turn. 
To the evil association, evil repairs; and 
to the pure and the good, all that is 
bright and fair belongs. Tremble then, 
Fiormonda, at the dangers which sur- 
round thee. Virtue is truth, truth is 
light, light is harmony, and harmony is 
happiness ; but evil is darkness, and 
darkness is misery. And, therefore, 
Ada Reis, the great, the powerful, the 
wise, even Ada Reis is miserable ; for 
myself I care not, but I would save 
thee, my child." 

" It was thus that Ada Reis endea- 
voured to instruct Fiormonda, or rather 
to amuse himself; but, bewildered in 
the mazes of error, how could he teach 
that which he had never learned ? how 
even could he attempt to warn his child 
of her danger, or request her to mode- 
rate her passions, when he felt that, 
from infancy, he had given her so bad 



ADA REIS. 75 

an example ? But the gay buoyancy of 
her spirit saved her from the sadness of 
these reflections, and she was happy in 
the levity and inattention of childhood: 
a bird, with beautiful plumage, or an 
insect with bright colours, in a moment 
called her thoughts from these difficult 
speculations to life and enjoyment ; it 
was far different for Ada Reis, and he 
was sad even when he beheld her smile. 
He pressed the reeds in his golpha, and 
the soft air fanned him, and the water 
spouted from pipes around, falling into 
the fountains ; then with a silver wand 
he touched harmonic glasses, — music 
soft and soothing proceeded from that 
touch. At such gentle call, — at such 
hour of evening, — the nightingale an- 
swered the notes, and a voice sweeter 
than the night-bird's sung from under 
the double-scented jessamine. Ada 
Reis reposed, Shaffou Paca and the 



76 ADA REIS. 

attendants were at a distance ; Fior- 
monda throwing pebbles into the lake, 
smiled at the circles she made on its 
smooth surface. The call of the Imans 
to evening prayers at that moment 
caught her ear; she in voluntarily turned 
to the east: so much of belief, notwith- 
standing Ada Reis's prohibition, had 
been inculcated into her mind; the 
hope of immortality had naturally risen 
in her soul, and it had been found im- 
possible entirely to exclude from her 
knowledge the religion of her country. 
She felt her heart full, — a secret con- 
sciousness told her there was a Being, 
to whom she owed the tribute of obe- 
dience and gratitude, and the cold 
suggestion of philosophy sufficed not 
to satisfy her warm and vivid feel- 
ings. She knelt and prayed, — it was a 
short but fervent prayer. She prayed 
like others ; to be deceived rather than 



ADA REIS. 77 

to stand as she now did in existence, 
saying to herself, " I am nothing — no- 
thing around me really is, — all is con- 
fusion, doubt, and uncertainty ; there 
is no after-existence, and whatwe enjoy 
and feel here is all delusion." These 
opinions had led her father into the com- 
mission of crime, — but what was crime ? 
Her mind had in it a proud disdain, as 
she thought, of evil : but what was evil ? 
Alas! who could tell her? " Oh, that, 
in place of the herd of mercenary 
beings who attend me," she cried — 
" who know me not, and feel not as I do, 
— who give me torture when they mean 
to please, and curb me in all my free 
spirit teaches me to delight in ! Oh, 
that a being like the one who watched 
over my infancy could again descend 
to instruct and enlighten me. Could 
I but see thee, gentle Zevahir, and hear 
thee, now I am again at liberty, I 



78 ADA REIS. 

would enjoy with thee the beauties 
and delights of this fair world. Thou 
wouldst explain to me, at once, all its 
delusions and errors, and teach me to 
avoid them. What will become of me, 
if in truth my father destines me to the 
Bey ? How shall I endure to live with 
one whose sluggish soul sees no delight 
in any thing but in the indulgence of 
his heavy spirit, sleeping through the 
weary hours, and happy only in indif- 
ference and insensibility ? M 

As she spoke, she heard the air she 
had often heard in her infancy played, 
as she imagined, by the page Zevahir; 
her bird flew from her, and nestled in 
a shrub, as if alarmed. She then be- 
held a ball, bright as a diamond, and 
musical as the chime of bells, rolling 
towards her, upon the smooth margin 
of the lake, and lightly along the bank 
came a youth, drest after another 



ADA REIS. 79 

fashion than that of her country, but 
of a countenance fair and beautiful as 
her own. He appeared rather older 
than herself; his hair was light, his 
smile radiant, and his cheeks glowing 
with the first bloom of health ; he had 
an angelic expression ; perfect truth, 
perfect faith, and perfect honour and 
purity sate upon his lips and beamed 
from his eyes : a wreath adorned his 
golden locks ; sandals ornamented his 
feet, and his step was fleet and light, 
as he had been a winged messenger 
from heaven. He made obeisance to 
her, she returned the salute with a 
smile : he approached her timidly, and 
said, in a voice soft, low, and harmo- 
nious, " Alicum Salem." To which 
she replied, " Salem Alicum 34 ." 

"You look mournful," he continued : 
" does the time pass slowly for you, or 
has any event grieved you since I fled 
from you?" 



80 ADA REIS. 

He held a flower in his hand, it was 
a catalpa; he knelt and offered it to 
her; she accepted it — the perfume 
was sweet : he wore a chain of beads 
around his neck, the colour of each 
bead varied like the opal and the 
Labrador stone in the light; he un- 
clasped the chain, and seeing her eyes 
fixed upon it, presented it to her. " On 
every bead, lovely Lilla," he said, 
" you may daily read my thoughts; 
wear it for me !" The silver sound 
of his voice was like the sweetest 
music. 

" Fiormonda, in raptures of delight, 
pressed the beads eagerly to her lips 
— " Alas," he said, " it is by gifts 
alone I may yet retain you — keep these 
baubles for me." 

" Is it Zevahir," she said, " my long 
banished page, or are you an angel 
from some bright world above ?" 



ADA REIS. 81 

He answered not, but the diamond 
ball again played that air she remem- 
bered. As when the magnetizer, by his 
power over the enfeebled mind, appears 
to draw the evil humours from out the 
human frame, so whilst these soft 
sounds murmured upon her ear, every 
agitating thought, and every eager wish, 
left her. " Take this musical ball," he 
said, " and when worldly cares oppress 
you, let it play to you ; it will soothe the 
troubled mind and calm the 80111." 

" Are you," said Fiormonda, " a 
guardian spirit, come from one of the 
bright stars, my father says are worlds? 
Will you teach me what is right ?" 

" I have watched you from infancy ; 
as your page, I have followed you ; 
I have brought the freshest flowers to 
you, and sung the sweetest songs to 
you; unknown and unseen, I have 
still been present with you ; it is only 
VOL. i. g 



82 ADA REIS. 

when your violence and vanity have 
grieved me, that I have reluctantly left 
you. Call me Zevahir ; call me by that 
name you have often called me. I am 
not of your country, but come from 
one happier, though not fairer than 
yours. If you would retain me for a 
playmate, you must learn to moderate 
your temper. Yours is as the burning 
siroc, and I am gentle as the balmy 
breeze ; my fine ear cannot endure the 
jarring sound of discord. I was called 
Phaos in the Golden Island ; but my 
real name is Zamohr. This is the 
ball for which King Mulichor sold his 
crown and kingdom ; these are the 
beads for which the Queen of Mora 
Ben Eden forsook her palace and aban- 
doned her children: look at the blue 
bead in the centre, see through this 
glass what is there written." 

In small but distinct characters 



ADA REIS. S3 

there now appeared, plain to Fior- 
monda's eyes — " Love is gentle and 
beautiful ; when you are gentle, Lilla, 
I love you." She coloured, and asked 
him whence he had gathered the Ca- 
talpa, the perfume of which was more 
fragrant than any she ever yet had 
found. 

" I gathered it from the wreath 
which Bordislas-Chan, the Schah of 
Persia, sent to the wife of Ferno, Em- 
peror of Mogul ; the blossoms of that 
wreath were plucked from the garden 
of Eden by a cherub, before our first 
parents brought sin and shame upon 
us ; their perfume is sweet, and they 
will bloom for ever; wear it upon your 
virgin heart, as a symbol of its purity 
and immortal worth ; like you, it is 
spotless : never stain its white by one 
ill sentiment; it will bloom in that 
shrine whilst you are pure." 

g2 



84 ADA REIS. 

" I am pleased with these gifts," 
said the child; "but what have you in 
your hand ?" 

" It is a pen," said he, " which will 
write of itself whatever you command, 
in any character, in any language ; you 
have only to dictate, and it shall imme- 
diately express your sentiments: even 
if there be no better scroll than the 
sand of the desert, your wishes shall be 
conveyed to me. Write, then, freely 
to your guardian friend whatever en- 
ters into your mind; whisper but to 
this pen, and though divided from you 
by immeasurable space, your feelings, 
your desires, will be thus in a moment 
communicated." 

When Zevahir, or Phaos, or Zamohr, 
had concluded, he approached Fior- 
monda in a gentle caressing manner, 
impressed upon her cheek one kiss, 
nor asked forgiveness for the freedom ; 



ADA REIS. 85 

yet he prepared to retire. " Stay," said 
the child ; " in the name of pity do not 
leave me, or tell me, at least, before you 
go, by what wonderful power you have 
gained in a moment such ascendancy 
over me ?" 

" The power, of which you are sen- 
sible, is that of early love ; love, such as 
young hearts and noble natures some- 
times feel ; what poets have imagined, 
what philosophers have doubted, and 
the worldly-minded have scoffed at and 
denied : nevertheless, when kindred 
spirits meet as we do, they feel, they 
must feel, what you now enjoy." 

" But," said Fiormonda, "although 
it be joy whilst with you, do you think 
it will be joy to-morrow when you are 
away?" 

" Yes," said Phaos, " since you 
must deem me ever near you, when 
your kind heart thinks on me ; and 



86 ADA REIS. 

if I do not appear, still believe tone 
watching over you, to bless and guard 
you, as I have done heretofore." 

" Oh, but if you are a spirit and yet 
near me, I shall be afraid of you. I 
love you as you are, alive, and such as 
I now see you ; but if I believed you 
to be more or less than myself, I should 
dread you !" 

" Whilst you are gentle, and good," 
said Phaos, " and innocent, before the 
base world shall have written one ill 
thought within your heart, I may thus 
appear to you : but whatsoever I am, 
you need not be alarmed; I never can 
frighten or harm you : my nature is 
beneficent and kind. When the soft 
sea-breeze gently blows upon you, and 
when the bird that is most beautiful, 
with its purple feathers, flies before 
you, in all that you love best, think 
that it is I ; hear my voice in the sweet 



ADA REIS. 87 

warblings of the nightingale, and think 
of me when the rising lark sings as it 
ascends to Heaven : in all that is in- 
nocent and good, I am. When you 
sleep and dream of Heaven, when you 
pray, I will bear those prayers to the 
throne of mercy; when you give to the 
unfortunate, I will be at your side. I 
am youth, I am innocence, I am early 
love. Be virtuous, be true, and the 
light and grace of Heaven shall be 
with you. As the dew ascends and 
falls upon the flower, so will I, night 
and morning, return to my beloved." 
He spoke, and in speaking left her ; 
but he went as he had come, like the 
soft breath of spring, the fragrance of 
the rose, the first sigh of love, the sound 
of distant music ; his benign presence 
was felt, was enjoyed, his absence re- 
gretted ; but how and when he came 
and went, Fiormonda could not tell. 



88 ADA REIS. 

She felt alone that he was gone, and 
was inconsolable. 

From that hour she became how- 
ever more timid and gentle than be- 
fore. New hopes, new thoughts, arose 
by degrees in her opening mind. She 
prayed to the great Creator for his 
protection. She blest his beneficent 
hand, and she was happy. This hap- 
piness, however, was soon interrupted 
by a most untoward accident ; for one 
day she suddenly perceived that she 
had lost all the cherished gifts, which 
her guardian spirit had given to her. 
The envious Shaffou Paca had seized 
them, no doubt; or the fierce Kabkarra, 
in disguise, had entered her apartment. 
With something of her father's spirit 
she expressed her indignation, and 
meeting only with opposition to her 
will, she gave way to entire distraction. 



ADx\ REIS. 89 



CHAPTER VIII. 



With bitterness the passionate girl 
now arraigned her father, governesses, 
sub-governesses, negresses, and attend- 
ants ; she demanded and sought in 
every direction the vision, which had 
captivated and delighted her. Shaffou 
Paca, Aura, Zoe, the slaves and guards, 
in vain pursued her, in vain inquired 
what had happened; she only replied by 
entreaties that he, whom she sought for, 
might return. At night upon her couch 
she became delirious, and raved, as her 
father imagined, calling ever after what 
none but herself had seen. " Give it 
me ! Send for him !" 

" What, beloved child ?" said Ada 
Reis. 

" That which I beheld in the hea- 



90 ADA REIS. 

vens, ascendingtothe stars; that which 
smiled upon me in the evening, whose 
voice was music. " 

" TheLilla has no doubt been looked 
upon by an evil eye," said Shaffou 
Paca. 

In this belief they sent in all di- 
rections for Shriefs and Marabuts ; 
wise men were stationed around her, 
and dream-expounders attended the 
couch of the child. 

" It is no dream, no folly," said 
Fiormonda, indignant at the least ob- 
stacle which intervened between the 
first intimation and the attainment of 
her most trivial desires. " I will lie 
here and die, if I do not see it again. " 

" Let peace be restored to the heart 
of my child," said the proud merchant, 
as he saw the governess and the nurses 
and slaves flying from her, afraid lest 
some evil spirit had been near her; 



ADA REIS. 91 

" indulge her most trifling wishes,'* 
continued he, assuming that air of im- 
posing grandeur, which only the high 
and mighty are allowed to put on. " Be 
soothed, be comforted." 

" Never, never, till I have it," cried 
the child ; " let me go out upon the 
mountains and the lake, to see his angel 
form, to hear his voice once more." 

" I wish it had a name," said Shaffou 
Paca, " and I would run myself over 
the world and fetch it." 

" I will give the Aashari dromedary, 
and ten of my finest steeds, with my 
best diamonds and pearls, and a mil- 
lion of Spanish ducats," said Ada Reis, 
" to whoever discovers what malady 
has fallen upon my child." 

" Is it the milk-white steed the Bey 
rode upon yesterday," said Aura ; " or 
can it be the young mameluke, who 
brought the tiger to her ?" 



92 ADA REIS. 

" No, no," said the child. 

" Or is it the house drawn by six- 
teen goats, belonging to a strange man 
— a poet?" 

Weeping with disappointment upon 
the bosom of her father ; " it is none 
of these. Alas ! I love you, sir, as 
you know well enough, better than 
my jewels, my dresses, my favourite 
horse, and my singing-birds ; but I 
shall never recover, if I have not that 
which I beheld flying in the skies, 
ascending to the stars." 

And now the treasures of the coun- 
try were ransacked, and brought before 
Ada Reis ; the story of Fiormonda's 
illness reached the ears of the Pasha 
and the Bey ; from far and near every 
novelty, every wonder — giants, dwarfs, 
elephants, were brought to Ada Reis, 
and displayed to the child. But vain 
were all the efforts, all the cost. The 



ADA REIS. 93 

rarities were received with indifference, 
and viewed by the heiress of Ada Reis 
with strong emotions of disappoint- 
ment and disgust: her faded form and 
altered manners alarmed her doting 
friends. They then sent for a christian 
physician, who was at Cairo, offering 
him any sum which might induce him 
to undertake the case. The learned 
man from Cairo came, and all the 
shriefs and sages who could be sum- 
moned elsewhere answered a similar 
call ; the concourse was great, the con- 
sultation long. " Some fiend has cast 
his eye upon the child; it is insanity 
has struck upon the brain; terror has 
diseased the nervous system." 

This opinion had just been given, 
when an immense concourse of Arabs 
from the mountains filled the courts. 
A shiek forced his way into the apart- 
ment, and loudly calling for Ada Reis, 



94 ADA REIS. 

desired permission himself to speak to 
the child. And when it was given — 
" Is he, of whom yon infant is in 
search," he said, " a boy with flaxen 
hair, whose bright blue eyes, and angel 
smile, awaken the heart to love ? Is 
this the bauble," he continued, holding 
in his hand a diamond ball, " which 
plays, when touched, soft music ? Is 
this the pen, which writes from the 
heart that loves it, fervent wishes, even 
were no scroll but the desert waste at 
hand upon which to write ? are these 
the beads ?" 

" They are ! they are !" cried the de- 
lighted child ; her bright eyes beam- 
ing through her tears, as she held 
her arms eagerly out to the Arab ; 
and once again obtained possession 
of those gifts she had possibly lost in 
her eagerness to seek him who had 
given them. 



ADA REIS. 95 

The Arab shiek glanced his wily 
black eye around, he smiled, whilst 
the evil spirit showed itself plainly in 
the dazzling brightness of that eye. 
Shrinking from his rough grasp, Fior- 
monda now retreated back to her couch 
in alarm, while Kabkarra, for it was 
himself, clapping his hands, with a loud 
laugh, exclaimed, " 'Tis well, Fior- 
monda ; and thy impatience and thy 
violence shall soon place thee in my 
power. Sleep, however, now, for thou 
art weary. What a fire I will kindle in 
that young heart when time has ma- 
tured thee for my purpose !" He then 
hastened from the room, leaving the 
child, Ada Reis, Shaffou Paca, and the 
whole company in much consternation. 

A deep sleep now fell upon Fior- 
monda; and the rest of the by-standers, 
fatigued by many days of constant at- 
tendance, were happy, as they could 



96 ADA REIS. 

not explain to each other what had 
taken place, to retire and compose 
themselves. The fever abated ; Fior- 
monda smiled on her father, and her 
eyes closed ; soon every one slept. 

The moon shone brightly in at the 
open casement, the sweet perfume of 
the rose and the jasmine scented the 
air : " Wake, lovely child !" said a 
voice: "Awake, and see thy guardian 
spirit, or in thy dreams be blest by his 
presence." Fiormonda opened her 
beautiful eyes, and Phaos was at her 
side. She talked with him. He endea- 
voured to sooth her : he told her he 
had only left her to avoid the presence 
of those who could not endure him, 
but that while she continued good, 
and pious, and pure, he never would 
forsake her. His was not love, although 
he came by stealth at that lone hour ; 
it was a feeling which can be imagined 



ADA RE IS. 97 

but by few : poets and painters have 
that feeling, when in ecstasy they gaze 
upon the calm beauties of nature ; 
childhood has that feeling, when at 
the twilight hour, upon a summer's 
evening, the gay and weary children, 
tired with sport and play, sit on the 
grass and listen to the rippling of a 
stream, soft music, or watch the pass- 
ing clouds ; age has that feeling when 
near the friend or child it loves, it 
listens to the chime of bells, and the 
memory of past times returns. Fior- 
monda conversed with Phaos, and be- 
came calm and gentle. 

In the morning she was found by 
Shaffou Paca perfectly restored to 
health. Ada Reis shortly after, satis- 
fied with her convalescence, and fa- 
tigued with the prate of the maids and 
physicians, took his leave, promising, 
however, soon to return. 

VOL. I. h 



98 ADA REIS. 



CHAPTER IX. 

Dangerous were the feelings which 
now agitated Fiormonda's mind. Kab- 
karra had spoken truly when he had said 
that as she grew in years a violent spirit 
would show itself. Innocent she was ; 
but wild fancies and strange hopes and 
fears arose to delude her reason : she 
saw not things as they are — wild en- 
thusiasm and romantic passion gave a 
false colouring to every object. In the 
very tone of her voice, in the songs she 
sung, in her impassioned manner, she 
already proved the truth of his pre- 
dictions. In the mean time, every 
night and every bright morning, with 
the rising and setting star, Phaos ap- 
peared to her, instilling into her heart 
sentiments of virtue and beneficence. 



ADA REIS. 99 

By stream or lake, amidst flowers, or 
in recesses in the wood, these happy 
and innocent children met and con- 
versed : she was attached to him ; she 
was engrossed by him. He talked to 
her of piety, and innocence, and hap- 
piness, and reprimanded gently all her 
errors: but too much of woman's love 
mingled already with the feeling of at- 
tachment she felt for her guardian at- 
tendant ; he repressed — he seemed to 
fear such emotion — he chilled her — 
and admonished her to keep a stricter 
watch over her thoughts. At length 
she began to feel somewhat of fatigue 
in his presence, she did not always hear 
him with the same patience, and some- 
times her volatile spirits led her from 
his wise discourses. Her mind dwelt 
more upon the pleasures of life than he 
wished. She was ambitious, too ; she 
spoke of war — of triumph ; splendid 

h 2 



100 ADA REIS. 

jewels pleased her fancy; above all, 
she detested the calm state her present 
companion described. She broke forth 
into a strain of ridicule : in one inter- 
view he found her decking herself with 
jewels which the Bey had presented to 
her ; in another, she burst into frenzy, 
speaking to her attendants in the im- 
perious tone her father ever assumed : 
it was then that the guardian of her 
childhood became seriously offended; 
he had often reprimanded her, and 
sometimes he had seen, with grief, that 
his admonitions tired, and that she 
began somewhat to smile at his ro- 
mantic hopes and wishes. He de- 
scribed a course of life, which had not 
the same attractions for herself as for 
him ; he talked of a happy state, when 
two pure and innocent beings might 
live for each other, and do good to 
those who were less blest ; he spoke 



ADA REIS. 101 

of a country where all worshipped 
and adored the true Deity, and faith 
and benevolence were cherished above 
riches and beauty; where, in order to 
obey a great Creator, passions were to 
be subdued, and trials were to be en- 
dured without a murmur; all glare, all 
pomp, all vanity he detested, and Fior- 
monda acknowledged that she liked 
every thing of the sort : in his own 
country, he said, men had perfect ho- 
nour, and women were gentle, pure, 
and obedient. He maintained that 
beauty and truth were religion, and all 
else was deceit and vice. He shed 
tears over Fiormondawhen she boasted 
of her expectations upon earth. He 
bade her look above for support ; her 
duty was to be humble and gentle. 
She smiled when he thus addressed her. 
His ideas, she said, were, she feared, 
too romantic for this world — after all, 



102 ADA REIS. 

whilst upon earth, we must respect 
even the prejudices of our fellow crea- 
tures ; satire and ridicule had their 
effect. Fear of the bitter irony of Ada 
Reis had already, in some degree, in- 
fluenced her mind ; she thought, also, 
that she saw in her new friend an in- 
experience and a want of knowledge of 
the world, which she was sure would 
not be tolerated in a city like Tripoly, 
and in an age as enlightened as the pre- 
sent ; yet was he very dear to her, and 
she grieved to see him more and more 
seldom. 

Her recovery had now been some 
time complete, and Shaffou Paca main- 
tained that the sooner she espoused 
the Bey the better. In her country 
eight years of age was thought a very 
reasonable period at which to marry ; 
at thirteen some of her companions had 
already a family of children 35 . But 



ADA REIS. 103 

Ada Reis could not quite make up his 
mind to consent to the marriage : he 
had ideas of future aggrandizement, 
which were not sufficiently definite to 
justify him in an absolute refusal; yet 
he delayed to give his entire consent 
to an immediate union, and resolved 
even to consult Kabkarra upon the 
subject. 

A change had imperceptibly taken 
place, within the last year, in Fior- 
monda's air and manner. The passion 
of love had been awakened in her 
ardent breast ; but though she fancied 
the object of it to be her guardian at- 
tendant, he was, in fact, far from en- 
tirely engrossing her affections. 



104 ADA RE1S. 



CHAPTER X. 

There are some who say women 
seldom justly appreciate real merit ; 
their imaginations and passions beguile 
them; and the rare qualities of the 
mind, which refuse to obtrude them- 
selves, seldom attach. Ada lleis in 
his narrative makes no such reflection; 
he merely says, that Fiormonda was 
alone captivated by the mystery which 
gave interest to her secret meetings 
with her youthful admirer; whereas 
every day, as she advanced in years, 
her ambitious hopes gained strength, 
and enthusiasm and passion turned her 
mind from the duties and affections of 
friendship. Ada Reis confesses that 
until this time he had little or no sus- 
picion of his daughter's attachment to 



ADA REIS. 105 

the beautiful boy; he considered her 
as safe under the guidance of ShafFou 
Paca, and at length the vigilance of that 
lady detected Fiormonda's secret in- 
terviews with Zevahir. She lost no time 
in warning Ada Reis of his daughter's 
danger ; she further communicated her 
strong suspicion that the intruder was 
not a mere mortal being, but probably 
an evil spirit ; of this, indeed, she had 
little doubt, as she was a firm believer 
in everything that exceeded the bounds 
of credibility. 

Ada Reis, upon this intelligence, de- 
termined upon putting his daughter 
out of harm's way, by instantly cele- 
brating her marriage with the Bey. 
He made a speedy communication of 
his intention to the Pasha ; who, well 
aware of his immense wealth, had long 
been very urgent upon this subject ; 
and the most splendid preparations 



106 ADA REIS. 

were in consequence made to solemnize 
the nuptials. 

Matters stood thus, when Phaos, one 
evening upon entering Fiormonda's 
apartment, and rinding her in no hu- 
mour to converse rationally with him, 
but, on the contrary, vain, obdurate, and 
flighty, warned her that he was about 
to leave her for ever. " Farewell, love- 
liest!" he said: " since my attachment 
can neither touch you nor bind you, it 
is decreed that we must part ; the time 
is come, and without one word of re- 
proach, I quit you : look upon me once, 
since we shall meet perhaps no more. 
The world and its false vanities have 
already allured your young heart from 
nature and innocence ; you are about 
to enter upon a career of vanity and 
deceit; sometimes, perhaps, you will 
remember your happiest days; the days 
when you were innocent and loved by 



ADA REIS. 107 

me : then was your heart pure and affec- 
tionate ; then were virtue, truth, and 
honour, the only feelings which you 
venerated. My love for you has been 
holy as piety, as beautiful, and as true : 
your early faith and infant prayer drew 
me down to guard you ; your womanish 
vanity and errors have rendered my stay 
impossible. Go, therefore ; for your 
very name has doomed you to be the 
ephemeral plant of a perishable world. 
But you have a soul, whatever false phi- 
losophy may say for the purpose of per- 
suading you to doubt it, and one day 
you will be called to account for all 
your actions. I, the lover of your in- 
fancy, must leave you ; to part is death 
to you, and agony to me. Virtue de- 
lights in concealing her beauties, that 
the mean, the corrupt, the profligate 
may not run after her and admire her 
as they would do could they see her. 



108 ADA REIS. 

Vice, hideous and deformed, stalks 
abroad dressed in jewels and ornaments 
to attract the inexperienced. Oh, Fior- 
monda, cherish yet in thy young heart 
the good seed which has been implanted 
there. You have snapped asunder the 
cords that bound us together, and I 
am forced to quit you. Farewell, be- 
loved child ; for worldly honour and 
accursed vanity you have abandoned 
me." Thus saying, he broke from her 
and left her, with more solemnity than 
could have been expected from his 
youth. 

Fiormonda thought him but gone 
for a moment ; he had ever returned 
when her pen expressed her wishes to 
that effect, and as every bead she read 
spoke to her but of love, tenderness, 
and faith, she gave herself but little 
concern at his bidding her farew r ell ; 
and even felt the silly vanity of a co- 



ADA REIS. 109 

quette, in the hope of making so tender 
a heart suffer, and perhaps love her the 
more for the disdain which she feigned. 
She saw him not, however, the ensuing 
day. In the evening, she talked of 
the Bey, who was so soon, she heard, 
to claim her hand, and take her to his 
palace : she tried on every variety of 
dress for this occasion, and was pleased 
with the adulation and praises of her 
attendants. Never was beauty seen 
surpassing hers, and she admired her- 
self to the full as much as did her ad- 
miring slaves; but her heart was still 
attached to her guardian spirit, and, 
although she liked to show her power, 
she no sooner missed his visits than she 
began ardently and eagerly to pine, 
and wish for his return. 



110 ADA RETS. 



CHAPTER XL 



As soon, however, as Fiormonda 
found that her lover had really left 
her, she informed ShafTou Paca of all 
that had passed ; repeated the words 
Phaos had addressed to her, sang over 
his songs, showed his presents, and 
wept and pined, and complained in 
the same violent way which she had 
done after their first interview. " He 
is," she said, "the page Zevahir ; he has 
watched over me from my birth ; he is 
all that is good and beneficent ; he was 
my mother's friend in early life ; he is 
a guardian spirit, he bore my prayers 
up to the throne of Heaven, he watched 
me whilst I slept, and I have lost him 
by my own faults and folly ! " 

There was a certain juice Ada Re is 
applied to his daughter's lips whenever 



ADA REIS. Ill 

he perceived passion was likely to over- 
power her reason ; and there was a 
pipe pitched to a low tone, by which, 
when enraged himself, he endeavoured 
to modulate his own voice : but on the 
present occasion, when Shaffou Paca, 
Aura, Zoe, negroes and negresses, go- 
vernors and governesses, sub-gover- 
nors, tutors, nurses, and attendants, 
vociferating together in his antecham- 
ber, and from thence all at once break- 
ing into his presence, informed him of 
what had taken place — the juice and 
the pipe were applied in vain ; he fell 
into one of his paroxysms; he even tore 
a white lock out of his beard, which had 
ever grown there the admiration of the 
ladies of his harem, all the rest being of 
a beautiful auburn, and curling like to 
golden wire. He struck his own head 
gently, and was very near repeating 
the blow with greater violence upon 



112 ADA REIS. 

that of others. At length he became 
calm — " And who is this stripling," 
he cried, "and where are his villanous 
gifts ? bring them and the Lilla Fior- 
monda before me. Kabkarra ! I invoke 
your aid. Who knows where to find 
Kabkarra ?" 

" I do," said Shaffou Paca ; " and 
had I followed his wise counsels, my 
young charge had not been now ex- 
posed to the arts and seductions of I 
know not whom." 

Here Shaffou Paca was again inter- 
rupted by the rage of Ada Reis, which 
knew no bounds : execrating her want 
of severity, and his own blindness, he 
vowed vengeance on a youth, who, by 
all the marvels he had heard of him, 
could scarcely be esteemed a mortal 
being, or liable to such proofs of his 
resentment as it was his present inten- 
tion to bestow upon him. 



ADA REIS. 113 

The scattered remnants of broken 
furniture were no sooner removed, 
and the chamber restored to order, 
than the obedient troop of wives and 
slaves went to communicate to Fior- 
monda the wishes of Ada Reis, which 
occasioned nearly as tremendous a fit 
of fury in the child, as that which had 
been displayed by her father. Her 
paroxysm being likewise over, and the 
attire of the Liila set to rights, the 
procession took place ; two black wo- 
men bearing the gifts first, and Fior- 
monda following, her lovely cheeks 
bedewed with tears, the white catalpa 
still blooming fresh upon her bosom. 
Ah ! who that had seen that soft blue 
eye downcast, and covered by its jetty 
fringe, as with slow and calm step she 
gently followed her guardians like a 
lamb to the altar, could possibly have 
believed that a moment before, she 
VOL. i. i 



114 ADA REIS. 

had knocked down the vases in the 
state apartment, and had torn in pieces 
the celebrated veil wrought in Egypt 
for Bianca di Castamela, her mother, 
and presented to her by Ada Reis as 
the most wonderful specimen of the 
art ; could Fiormonda, that lovely, that 
gentle child, have given the yellow 
slave that terrible bump upon his right 
eye, or have impressed a wound upon 
the arm of ShafTou Paca, who now fol- 
lowed her, venting her ill-humour by 
ceaseless complaint ? 

Ada Reis, when he beheld her, ex- 
claimed, " Child of an unhappy con- 
nexion, you little know the danger in 
which you now stand : a royal suitor 
awaits you, a diadem is yours if you 
obey my commands ; but the wretch, 
who has gazed upon you, whom you 
meet in secret, is a sorcerer — an evil 
spirit. I will return his gifts, or," he 



ADA HE IS. 115 

continued, as he now fixed his eyes 
upon these wonderful toys, " I will 
keep them ; not indeed knowing unto 
whom I am to return them at present; 
and, until the arrival of Kabkarra, the 
friend of our family, you shall remain 
under my own superintendance." After 
having said thus much, AdaReis, much 
appeased by this show of authority, and 
the established certainty, that no one 
dared contradict or oppose him, exa- 
mined one after the other the gifts 
which Phaos had presented to his child. 
Fiormonda, as she first delivered the 
beads to her father, taking the glass, 
read upon one, " I am as miserable as 
yourself;" the next said, "fear not ;" 
the third said, " love me;" the fourth 
shed tears ; the fifth breathed sighs ; 
and all the other beads said some one 
of those flattering sayings, which love 
only knows how to say. Fiormonda 
then put one to her lips as Ada Reis, in 

i 2 



116 ADA REIS. 

an angry tone, asked why she delayed 
so long to give him the bauble ; the 
bead, breathing softly, returned the 
kiss she gave. " Wonderful !" she 
cried : " I cannot part with this." 

" Cannot," said Ada Reis furiously, 
" why I will give thee a kingdom for 
this foolish chain ; and your royal 
suitor shall hang upon your neck a 
string of pearls, each pearl possessing 
worth enough therewith .to purchase a 
monarch's diadem." 

"Never!" said Fiormonda faintly; 
but she gave up the beads ; and whilst 
Ada Reis, examining them with con- 
tempt, said they were in his eyes like 
mere common ornaments, Fiormonda 
addressed her pen, which from her 
hand wrote as in the air, " Come to 
my assistance, angel of peace ! Yes, I 
am true to you ; I will be gentle, vir- 
tuous, obedient; I never will belong 
to the Bey or the rich Jew ; I will learn 



ADA KEIS. 117 

to command my passions; I will learn 
to obey." 

Scarce had the pen expressed her 
thoughts, when Ada Reis snatched it 
from her, " And for this trifling quill 
my Lilla Castamela shall have an ele- 
phant, a dromedary, and a diamond 
crown.' ' 

The musical ball was next displayed, 
but that ball which had sung so sweetly 
to Fiormonda, and sounded like the 
voice of her lover, now was silent, and 
when at length moved to play, only 
imitated the martial gong, or the loud 
kettle-drum, and war-whoop. 

" See," said Ada Reis, when he had 
gained his point, turning with authority 
to ShafFou Paca, " see that better care 
be taken to keep intruders from my 
house, or your miserable life may end 
somewhat sooner than you perhaps 
wish. Command the guards to keep 
strict watch in future." 



118 ADA RE1S. 



CHAPTER XII. 



Shaffou Paca and the guards did 
their duty ; but how vain are the 
commands of a despot, and of what 
avail is force against the free spirit? 
A thousand thoughts, born and bred 
under this durance, ripened in Fior- 
monda's mind, and taught her to value 
that which she had lost by her own 
fickleness and presumption : how end- 
less the day appeared, and how cheer- 
less the evening without her second 
self, her other half! What struggling 
passions waged war with each other in 
her mind ! She pined for she knew not 
what: she talked of virtue, heaven, and 
immortal hopes — worldly honours and 
costly attire ; made transitions from 
the stars of the blessed to the good 



ADA REIS. 119 

things of this world, with a rapidity 
and facility astonishing to the by- 
standers. Love, fear, hope, heaven, 
Phaos, the Bey, and Kabkarra, were 
alternately subjects of her incoherent 
conversation : until at length Shaffou 
Paca maintained that a struggle be- 
tween the evil and the good principle 
was taking place within her mind, 
which would probably end in the total 
alienation of her reason. Sickness fell 
upon her. Life in all its glorious pro- 
mise faded before her. Doubts, fears, 
passions, arose within her breast ; and 
Ada Reis, alarmed, and awake to her 
danger, resolved, without loss of time, 
to invoke once more the aid of Kab- 
karra. Her illness increasing, the blacks 
began to howl and scream the dying 
veil. Shaffou Paca exclaimed, " If it 
be your wish," addressing Ada Reis, 
" my son shall be here this night: the 



120 ADA REIS. 

way is long, it is true, but at a word I 
can make him come." 

" Ha !" said Ada Reis, " well, then, 
bring him before me ;" and Shaffou 
Paca, pleased with a display of her 
power, did not observe the dark suspi- 
cious frown of surprise and anger which 
now overspread her master's counte- 
nance ; she, with all the despatch in 
her power, obeyed his commands. 

But Kabkarra, offended, refused to 
attend the summons of Ada Reis. 
" The Lilla Fiormonda," he said, 
" has much wronged and displeased 
me ; she has contracted a friendship 
with another : let her rue her folly. 
To prove, however, that my regard 
is not entirely extinguished, I send in 
my place a skilful female, Zezel Peer 
Banyan, who will tend the Lilla with 
all the care and all the art which her 
malady requires." 



ADA REIS. 121 

ShafFou Pa ca informed Ada Reis of 
this mandate, and he received the in- 
telligence as the head of a family re- 
ceives the news of the arrival of the 
apothecary when he has sent for, and 
expects, a renowned physician. 

At half an hour after ten at night, 
five hours and three-quarters before 
the full of the moon, Zezel Peer Ban- 
yan arrived, and seating herself upon 
a mat in the child's apartment, began 
drawing lines with her finger upon the 
palm of her other hand, and appeared 
very well satisfied with herself and 
situation. A chant from without was 
at that moment heard, and a troop of 
Arabs bearing torches entered the 
house and surrounded her, whilst a 
procession of Arab children followed, 
with charms, and spells, and serpents, 
and messes in their hands. The chil- 
dren were all nearly of the age of the 



122 ADA REIS. 

invalid : they ranged themselves in 
rows before the couch, and sung in 
short impressive accents, not wholly 
inharmonious, a song or hymn to the 
dying child. Their gestures and un- 
couth garb gave an animated air of 
wild emotion to their countenances, 
whilst they danced and played in my- 
sterious attitudes. 

Zezel Peer Banyan, in the mean- 
time, enveloped in a loose dark woollen 
blanket, or baracan, one eye of terri- 
ble fierceness alone appearing, spun 
around, as if performing some of the 
ceremonies of a Marabut, at the same 
time shrieking as loud as her hoarse 
voice would permit. She then stampt 
upon the Koran, and squatted herself 
down upon the carpet in the middle 
of the room ; the children, like imps, 
dancing wildly around her. Fiormonda 
moved not. The sorceress then stirred 



ADA REIS. 123 

a mess up with a variety of gestures ; 
the Arabs and children prostrated 
themselves before her, all shrieking 
like herself; after which, in discordant 
accents, they sang deep and tremulous 
invocations. A flame arose from the 
caldron. 

Upon this sign Zezel Peer Banyan 
bade them return to their homes. Then 
taking with her hand somewhat from 
the flame, she seated herself upon the 
mat, entirely enveloped in her black 
baracan, with her one bright eye alone 
in view, and that fixed like a basilisk's 
upon the child. Silence and terror un- 
paralleled reigned through the apart- 
ment; even Shaffou Paca was awed, 
and the blacks obeying the gestures, 
which bade them depart one by one, 
slowly left the room. No sooner had 
every one retreated, than the Arab 
fairy began again to whirl around with 



124 ADA REIS. 

terrific attitudes and horrid gestures. 
She danced too, and for so long, that 
at length her dance became one con- 
tinued convulsion ; she laughed, she 
howled, she stampt, she sung, till Fior- 
monda, from a state of insensibility, 
arose trembling, and called for Aura 
and Zoe, and even for Shaffou Paca — 
but in vain. Again Zezel Peer Banyan 
re-seated herself in silence, fixing her 
eye, in a fearful manner. The child, 
kneeling, implored her to speak, and 
asked in mercy who she was. The my- 
sterious being approaching her, with a 
laugh, suddenly snatched her from her 
couch. At this moment the dark bara- 
can fell, and Fiormonda found herself 
in the arms of a fierce Arab chief, who 
cried, " Ha! lovely one, thou art mine ! 
I have made thee well !" pressed her 
lips rudely to his, and looked upon her 
•with exulting triumph. " Passions 



ADA REIS. l c >5 

have bound thee to me," he cried, 
" Fires, wild and lawless, wait but op- 
portunity and temptation to rage with- 
in thy breast ; thou shalt be mine ! — 
be mine !" 

Ada Reis at this moment entered, 
and the warrior re-assuming the ap- 
pearance of the sorceress, and folding 
the cloak again around him, said, as he 
placed over the child a girdle of the 
finest jewels, which he had drawn from 
without the caldron, " Remember me 
when we meet again, and by this token, 
give not thy hand to any one here, for 
an imperial crown awaits thee." 

He then retired, but the apartment 
remained full of jewels, perfumes, 
gifts ; and the negresses, and Aura, 
and Zoe, had received bona manos 
from Zezel Peer Banyan, they said, as 
she went out. Some, however, hinted, 
that this Zezel Peer Banyan was no 



126 ADA REIS. 

other than Kabkarra, the Jew, the son of 
Shaffou Paca. Suspicions had entered 
the mind of Ada Reis, and sending 
several of his black slaves to bring that 
lady instantly before him, " Strange 
things," he said, " he had been in the 
habit of seeing and hearing all the days 
of his life ; common wonders he con- 
sidered as of small consequence ; even 
the chess-men he had tolerated; but 
now it occurred to him, that Zuban- 
yann, the evil one, and Zezel Peer 
Banyan, the sorceress, were imposing 
upon the facility of his disposition, and 
before he was aware, Fiormonda, his 
lovely child, his only living child, would 
be in their power. ,, Considerably dis- 
turbed by these apprehensions, he fixed 
his eyes sternly upon Shaffou Paca, 
awaiting, in a majestic attitude,her ap- 
proach. Her natural infirmities were 
greatly increased by the alarm which 



ADA REIS. 127 

this sudden summons had caused her ; 
the negresses too were tottering and 
trembling behind, and the blacks, who 
were afraid of their master, hurried her 
along for fear of enraging him by the 
least delay, regardless of the unfor- 
tunate lameness, which prevented her 
advancing quickly, with her short leg 
foremost ; this short leg being her chief 
stay, the other circling round it, as the 
long shank of a pair of compasses turns 
about the shorter when it is planted. 
She now approached Ada Reis ; as she 
came up close within his view his gra- 
vity left him, and for one moment he 
fell back with laughter upon beholding 
her. 

This reception, in some measure, re- 
assured her ; but when he charged her 
with being mother to a sorcerer, and 
questioned her upon the subject of the 
Jew Kabkarra, she nearly fainted j her 



128 ADA REIS. 

two negresses put some cloves and 
cinnamon to her nose, and offered her 
a small cup of orange-flower water, but 
she thought it a disrespect to touch 
any of these things in presence of Ada 
Reis, and, shaking from head to foot, 
answered his questions in the following 
manner. 

" Are you married ?" 

" I was." 

" To whom ?" 

" To a vendor of slippers, a Jew." 

" What was his name ?" 

" Kabkarra!" 

" Ha!" said Ada Reis, and sprung 
from his cushion. " What became of 
your husband ?" 

" He died of the plague ten years 
ago." 

" Had you any children ?" 

« One." 

" Where is he?" 



ADA REIS. 129 

" He wanders about the world, he 
is your servant." 

" Answer straight, thou old sorce- 
ress !" stamping with his foot, and 
ordering two of his blacks to tie a sash 
around her neck, and strangle her if 
she prevaricated ; " answer me, or you 
shall die !" 

" I shall die," said Shaffou Paca, 
kneeling, as she felt the noose about 
her neck, " if you do not command 
these miscreants to loose the sash !" 

Ada Reis smiled, and the sash was 
relaxed. He then proceeded, " How 
came your son in league with the evil 
one ?" 

" It was one fearful night," said 
SharTou Paca, shuddering, " we were 
nearly starved to death : what will not 
man do to purchase food ?" 

"Who?" 

VOL. I. K 



130 ADA REIS. 

" My son and myself: taking a de- 
sperate resolution, he left me." 

" What then ?" 

" He went in search of gold and of 
pearls." 

" What then ?" 

" I know nothing more ; he was long 
absent ; I was on the point of death 
when he returned. He came at length ; 
but his countenance never again ex- 
pressed or hope or peace. From that 
day we have both been rich but mi- 
serable. He, shortly after his return, 
led me from Egypt ; we wandered to 
different countries : I know nothing 
further." 

" Swear it !" 

" I swear it." 

" Was he here to-night ? Did he not 
appear before me in the form of Zezel 
Peer Banyan !" 



ADA REIS. 131 

Shaffou Paca trembled all over, but 
maintained that her son possessed no 
other power than what belongs to mor- 
tal man. 

" You then are leagued with Zuban- 
yann ?" 

" I know him not." 

" Is there an evil one ? Teach me all 
thou knowest. I will strangle thee if 
thou dost not explain all to me ; and 
then, if there be any power in thy 
knowledge, thou mayest restore thy- 
self." 

" Sir," said Shaffou Paca, sobbing 
and wringing her hands, "nothing can 
restore me if you take away my life ; and 
to prolong life, and purchase riches, 
what have I not forfeited ?" With this 
she begged Ada Reis's leave to retire ; 
but his curiosity was insatiable, and 
he questioned her for several hours 
longer. However, he could make no- 

K 2 



132 ADA REIS. 

thing out from her discourse, he there- 
fore commanded her to fetch her son. 
She hobbled off in haste, most eager 
to get away. 

The next day she was furnished with 
a mule and two blacks, and was again 
commanded by Ada Reis to procure 
him an interview with her son. It was 
a journey of many miles to the Guaiana 
mountains, where he dwelt ; she must 
needs be absent two days, and, pro- 
bably, encounter many difficulties be- 
fore she could find him ; beside which, 
he had forbidden her ever in person 
intruding upon him : " he lived with 
the Arabs and banditti in his hut, dug 
within the bowels of the earth, not far 
from the sum ant of the mountain." It 
was immaterial to Ada Reis where he 
lived, or what commands he had given ; 
see him he was resolved he would, and 
he would either seek him there him- 



ADA REIS. 133 

self, or Shaffou Paca must bring him 
before him. 

At length she was persuaded to de- 
part, not without much fear and some 
regret, for she dreaded she knew not 
what, if, contrary to Kabkarra's orders, 
she ventured upon his privacy. 



134 



ADA REIS. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



The way was long and wearisome ; 
the mules went at a brisk trot, but 
the lady could not bear the continued 
shaking, and was obliged frequently 
to rest. 

When she arrived at her son's habi- 
tation, or rather at that part of the 
mountain within which she knew he 
dwelt, she knocked, she called, and a 
fierce Arab with his dog started out 
upon her, demanding what she wanted; 
upon seeing her, as none ever yet were 
like her, the Arab recognised her, bade 
her attendants remain without, and de- 
sired her to enter. She descended 
some steps roughly hewn in the rock, 
and she found herself in a room where 
a man was reclining, apparently in ago- 



ADA REIS. 135 

nising pain ; a musket and a yatagan 
by him. " My beloved son," she had 
scarce time to say, when he, in a hoarse 
tone, exclaimed, " Toad, reptile, what 
art thou here for ?" 

" To seek my son." 

" Am I thy son ?" said he, starting 
up wildly. 

" Alas !" said Shaffou Paca, after 
prostrating herself before him, " all 
that is left me is to wonder and to doubt 
— but whatever thou art, or spirit, or 
man, I implore thee to hasten this in- 
stant to Ada Reis — my miserable life 
must pay the forfeit, if thou refusest 
me." 

" Hast seen the javelin or the arrow 
cleave the air, mother?" said Kabkarra, 
laughing. " Hast marked the light- 
ning's flash ? — With such speed, will I 
obey his summons. But how is thy 
beauteous charge ? Take care of her, 



136 



ADA REIS. 



as she deserves; study alone to in- 
crease every charm ; excite her pas- 
sions, and corrupt her mind. I must 
win her : but first there will be a fierce 
struggle between myself and myrival. ,, 

" And shall I not ?" said Shaffou 
Paca. 

" Go," said he, fiercely, " return, 
and say to Ada Reis, that your son 
will be with him, as he commands, 
before even his impatience can expect 
him. Order the mare Oriah, ,, he con- 
tinued, addressing his attendants ; " I 
obey Ada Reis' summons." 

As Kabkarra said this, blessing her- 
self, and conjuring up in her mind 
every charm and prayer she could col- 
lect in her memory, from the supersti- 
tion of every country of which she ever 
had heard, Shaffou Paca remounted her 
mule, and began to trot homewards, 
notwithstanding her great inclination 



ADA REIS. 137 

to sleep ; and as her blacks and her 
slaves, nodding upon their beasts from 
lassitude, slowly followed after, they 
were aroused by a noise like the whiz- 
zing of an arrow from a bow, and they 
thought they saw a flash pass them, 
like that of the lightning. It was 
Kabkarra upon his milk-white mare 
Oriah, who had darted by them, " My 
message," thought ShafTou Paca, trying 
to excite her tardy mule into a brisk 
pace, " will not be delivered ; but it is 
as well ; I shall then, in all probability, 
be out of the scrape." 

Whilst these things were passing, 
Fiormonda languidly reclined upon 
her couch, talked of nothing but the 
frightful Zezel Peer Banyan, until a 
deep sleep stole over her senses, and 
her father, gazing upon her, fancied 
that she was again ill, or perhaps dead. 
The blacks seeing her so pale and in- 



138 ADA REIS. 

animate, set up once more a frightful 
yell ; and Shaffou Paca being away, 
Ada Reis became impatient beyond 
all bounds. He ordered the slaves to 
cease their lamentations : evening came 
on; a deep silence ensued, all appeared 
calm without, the soft moonbeam 
glided through the open casement, the 
delicious air was perfumed with spices, 
breathing, as it were, upon the loveliest 
and most inanimate of beings. 

Ada Reis sate dozing over sherbet 
in a distant part of the apartment — 
when the air, well known to Fiormon- 
da, sounded from without. At this mo- 
ment entered one who knelt before her 
couch; it was the beautiful boy whose 
gentle presence had been the cause of 
so much combustion and disorder: Ada 
Reis gazed intently upon him. After a 
few words of prayer, he arose from the 
ground, and seating himself upon the 



ADA REIS. 139 

sofa near the child, addressed her in 
soft low tones, whilst the tears were 
streaming from his eyes : " Where- 
fore hast thou, loveliest of thy sex, 
given way to the intemperance of pas- 
sion ? the evil spirit saw and marked 
thee, and has seduced thy young heart, 
whilst thou didst fly thy better angel. 
How calm now is thy form, Fiormonda! 
how cold and torpid flows the current 
of thy blood within thy veins ! Where 
now is that frown which will soon 
learn to awe the world ? Where that 
impetuosity which already shows itself 
too great for thy tender frame ? Alas ! 
this is alone the form of Fiormonda; 
the soul has fled far, far from hence ; 
seized, subdued, and imprisoned by the 
foe of man, and I have not the power, 
without other aid, to redeem it." 

" Oh !" said Ada Reis, who had at- 
tentively listened to this address, " if 



140 ADA REIS. 

there be mercy in the heart of a spirit, 
for such I take you to be, condescend 
to sympathise with the grief of a dis- 
tracted father. I will slay five thousand 
of the fairest ladies in the capital, the 
Bey, and all the nobles of the Pasha's 
court ; I will cut off my beard, the 
longest ever seen, and do penance for 
the crimes of my youth, in any manner 
you think fit, if you will only restore 
my Fiormonda to me." 

" Alas! Ada Reis," said the youth, 
" blood has been shed already, and new 
crimes will not, I fear, efface former 
misdeeds. It is from thee I would save 
the unhappy child of Bianca di Cas- 
tamela ; it is for a happier fate than 
that of being thy daughter, or the 
Bey's bride, that I would restore her 
to existence. But, alas ! she is under 
the thraldom of one more powerful 
than myself, and love, and faith, and 



ADA REIS. 141 

virtue, alone, could have power to 
wrest her from the raging tyranny of 
her present master." 

Ada Reis, who had indulged hope 
for one moment, now gave vent to an 
agony of despair, and ordered his 
guards to seize the intruder. 

" There is no need of force," said 
the youth with gentleness ; " though 
a stranger to thee, I am Eiormonda's 
friend ; all nature is divided between 
the good and the evil principle ; and 
if I so seldom have been seen at the 
court of the Pasha, or near the per- 
son of Ada Reis, it is because they 
both prefer my more violent half-bro- 
ther to myself; my name is Zamohr. 
I am the guardian of all that is pure, 
that is lovely, that is beautiful, that is 
innocent ; and of all mortal and im- 
mortal beings I am esteemed the most 
benevolent and the most gentle. My 



142 ADA REIS. 

form, as you see, is that of youth, for 
there is no ingredient in my compo- 
sition base enough to compose aught 
that is less amiable; never can wrinkle 
wither my bloom, nor age nor passion 
blight the freshness of my feelings ; 
hope not to confine me; thou hast but 
the power of dismissing me ; go thou 
to a sleepless couch and lament ; I am 
happy; on me neither sin nor shame 
have ever cast a shade ; the spring of 
the year is my season, and in the soft 
moonbeam, not in the sunny glare, I 
take my rounds." 

" Wretch!" cried Ada Reis, "I 
know what it is to war with magi- 
cians and spirits ; I know my power 
is circumscribed, and yours is un- 
bounded ; but yet I can wound you, 
and I will do it. Thus, then, on my 
bended knees, I invoke the defender 
of our house, and the dread power who 



ADA REIS. 143 

has so often assisted me! There are 
means, and you well know it, by which 
even the good can be made to suffer, 
and if you cannot feel for yourself, you 
shall, at all events, forFiormondas fate. 
I yield her to thy rival ! I here give her 
up to Zubanyann — to Kabkarra ! He 
can aid her, he can defend her; he shall 
make her powerful and rich, and save 
her from your seductions." 

As he said this, he heard cheers and 
shouts of triumph. The gentle Zamohr 
vanished into air; the nuba36 sounded; 
the joyous song of people from with- 
out was heard : the attendants, run- 
ning in, informed Ada Reis, somewhat 
suddenly, that the Pasha's son, the 
Bey, had come to know the state of 
Fiormonda's health. The song of 
" Loo, loo," was distinctly heard. The 
Bey was accompanied by only one at- 
tendant, his favourite Mameluke, and 



144 ADA REIS. 

his horse seemed almost exhausted 
with fatigue. Ada Reis, who had 
heard that the Bey was gone out 
against the Arabs, was astonished at 
his so swift return; but when the beau- 
tiful stranger appeared before him, he 
started, for in a moment he saw that 
it was not the Bey, but that it was 
Kabkarra ! He wore a crescent of 
diamonds, and his large turban was of 
the finest white muslin, crossed with 
a shawl of dark purple, and richly 
embroidered gold. He was decked 
from head to foot with jewels. His 
countenance, though fierce, was beau- 
tiful, and, regardless of Moorish man- 
ners and laws, he boldly entered the 
presence of Fiormonda, though the 
shrieking females had hardly time to 
fly and conceal themselves. " I am 
come," he said, in a commanding voice, 
" to answer your demand. You know 



ADA REIS. 145 

the Jew Kabkarra too well to inquire 
of me who I am, and if I have abused 
the credulity of the people by assuming 
the garb of the Pasha's son, it is (for- 
give my vanity) that I wish to show 
you that a turban and an embroidered 
cloak can make of Kabkarra the thing 
you admire. Fiormonda, my lovely 
child, fear not ; although the Prophet 
himself were here to prevent me, thus, 
thus would I approach thee ; for who 
was it saved thee, when thy affrighted 
nurses were howling around the shriek 
of death, and from what rival have I 
snatched thee, save from the gnawing 
worm in the cold sepulchre ? As to the 
Bey, thou shalt never be his bride. " 

" You have promised," said Ada 
Reis, " that she shall possess a royal 
husband, and wear an imperial crown." 

" And she shall wear it !" said Kab- 
karra, with a laugh of triumph : " but 

VOL. I. L 



146 ADA REIS. 

not here, not in these countries may 
she reign." 

" Ah ! these delays and equivoca- 
tions," said Ada Reis, " whilst the 
Bey, on the contrary, would instantly 
place her in his father's palace ; and the 
title of Lilla, in consequence of his 
known intentions, has already been 
granted to her. And what can the 
title of Lilla do for a proud and free- 
born soul like hers ? And what is the 
Pasha's palace, but a splendid prison ? 
I offer her far better than this \ the 
world is my habitation : by sea and by 
land we will travel together, and enjoy 
the moment of existence granted to 
us." 

Fiormonda smiled to hear Kabkarra 
speak ; and he, kneeling before her, 
bade her be firm, and resist every at- 
tempt made to allure her. " If jewels 
please you," he said, " I can bring you 



ADA REIS. 147 

the finest and the rarest. If gifts like 
those my half-brother Zamohr present- 
ed gratify your fancy, are not the chess- 
men Kabkarra gave more worth your 
care ? Where, too, is the girdle I placed 
upon your heart, when you were ill ? it is 
fitter than the string of cloves and gold 
the Moorish ladies wear." 

" And are you, who are so beauti- 
ful, the same who came to me the 
other evening ? Are you that frightful 
Zezel Peer Banyan ?" said Fiormonda, 
gazing with admiration and astonish- 
ment upon him. 

" Am I not like her?" said the 
youth, with a sarcastic smile : " these 
eyes, these features, this form, are they 
not the same ?" 

" What is your real name?" said 
Fiormonda. 

" Can I need any other," said the 
stranger, "than Kabkarra? And now 

l % 



148 ADA RE1S. 

ask me no more questions ; I am come 
to save you. Ada Reis, mark me ! 
whether I be an enchanter or a mere 
mortal is immaterial ; but if you heed 
not my warning, you will repent. In 
a short time you will be obliged to fly 
this place ; observe my instructions : 
when danger menaces, call for me ; 
bid Shaffou Paca send you her son, and 
mount upon my steed, the one I shall 
leave here ; as for my charming little 
mistress, she must likewise be pre- 
pared. Do this, and all shall be in 
readiness ; for I must save and bear 
you hence. The deeds you have done, 
Ada Reis, are known ; the Pasha looks 
upon you with an eye of suspicion : in 
a few days your head will be demand- 
ed, and your life forfeited if you obey 
not my injunctions. Give me your 
signet-ring 37, that in case of necessity, 
I may have the means, whilst you are 



ADA REIS. 149 

detained within, of being obeyed with- 
out by your slaves." 

" Bel Nabi!" said Ada Reis, "you 
seem to have means enough without 
any ring of mine ; however, take it : 
great men, I find, are always pursued 
by wonderful adventures/' Ada Reis 
then gave the ring, although with some 
reluctance, and Kabkarra departed 
with the same precipitation with which 
he had arrived. The song of " Loo ! 
Loo !" was repeated. The astonished 
Ada Reis remained in silence; until at 
a late hour that night, long after Fior- 
monda was asleep, the weary ShafFou 
Paca at length returned, and heard the 
pleasing intelligence that her son, as 
she had expected, had arrived before 
her, and had entirely satisfied her 
master. 



150 ADA REIS. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

The character of Ada Reis was not 
formed to endure patiently the slight- 
est appearance even of disrespect from 
a superior. He was astonished a few 
days after Kabkarra's visit, at receiving 
an unceremonious mandate from the 
Pasha of Tripoly, commanding his im- 
mediate presence at his court. A slave, 
who was attached to Ada Reis, made 
him a sign at the very moment the 
message was delivered to him, by which 
he understood that the Pasha's hampers 
were in readiness to strangle him. Well 
aware of the celerity with which these 
commands were at all times executed, 
and suddenly struck with the mourn- 
ful air his slaves and followers had as- 



ADA REIS. 151 

sumed, he bowed respectfully to the 
messenger, and promised to follow 
him, without a moment's loss of time, 
secretly resolved to send for Kabkarra 
and consult him. 

" You have three hours to prepare," 
said the messenger, with a significant 
smile ; " the Pasha has made strange 
preparations to receive you with un- 
expected honours." 

My crimes, then, are known at 
length, thought Ada Reis ; or sooner, 
my wealth, my power, my spirit of in- 
dependence, have given umbrage to a 
tyrant. With feigned calmness he now 
entered Fiormonda's apartment. 

Shaffou Paca, upon this eventful 
evening, had engaged her pupil, now 
much recovered from the effects of her 
indisposition, to play a game at chess. 
" You have not," she said, "for a long 
time opened the box Kabkarra gave 



\5% ADA REIS. 

you ; the little men must be tired for 
want of employment." 

" Who," said Fiormonda, " will ven- 
ture to attack me ?" 

" I will," said Ada Reis, smiling : 
" three hours are yet granted me ; and 
how better can I employ one of the 
three than in endeavouring to enter- 
tain my child? We will place the board 
upon the carpet, and try our powers 
with these little creatures." 

Fiormonda was delighted with ob- 
serving their variety and beauty. She 
smiled, and talked with unusual gaiety, 
and even spoke of Kabkarra with at- 
tachment for having given her so won- 
derful a gift. 

As she prepared to begin the game, 
the musical ball, though confined within 
a chest, sounded a mournful air : it was 
a dirge, intermingled with sounds like 
the sobs and sighs of one in pain. Ada 



ADA KEIS. 1.53 

Reis paused — Fiormonda remained mo- 
tionless : — there then arose plainly be- 
fore their view two resplendent forms, 
the one adorned with all the beauty of 
early youth, the other in all the vigour 
of manhood ! These occupied the op- 
posite parts of the board, the one pre- 
paring to attack the other. They are 
the good and the evil genii, thought 
Ada Reis, contending for Fiormonda. 
But he could not utter a word, or move ; 
his eyes continued to gaze upon the 
prodigy which was taking place before 
them. The game began, whilst all who 
beheld it, attracted as steel to the load- 
stone, watched piece after piece as they 
were ranged in defiance against each 
other. Shaffou Paca, Zoe, Aura, the 
negroes, negresses, nurses, attendants, 
and guards, in due order placed them- 
selves, some behind Ada Reis, some 
behind Fiormonda; their eyes riveted, 



154 ADA REIS. 

their thoughts engrossed, their hopes 
fixed upon each movement of the game. 
And now the one triumphed, and now 
the other : the struggle for mastery was 
great, the skill exhibited wonderful, 
and the celerity of each motion passing 
thought. None had until this moment 
perceived how large the men and the 
board had grown by insensible degrees 
— so large, so formidable, that the coun- 
tenances, gestures, smiles, and frowns 
of the warriors, pawns, and knights, 
were distinctly perceivable, whilst the 
neighing of horses could be plainly 
heard. 

The white king heaved a sigh as loud 
as the breathing of a dormouse, in its 
torpid state, when he beheld his own 
personal pawn taken by his adversary. 
The movement had been inadvertent 
and rash on his part; it had thrown 
his sacred person open to the attacks 



ADA REIS. 155 

of his foe ; he bit his lip, and turned to 
his knights, ordering them forthwith 
to charge ; the obedient troop obeyed 
their lord. The two genii watched over 
their respective armies, directing their 
movements by signs, and now and then 
by words, speaking lowly and myste- 
riously in an unknown tongue. The 
countenance of the youth was like Za- 
mohr, only less serene ; and the playful 
smile and the amorous glance were ex- 
changed for deep thought and marked 
anxiety. No anger, no violence, no 
impatience were shown by him, as, 
with a steady hand, he motioned his 
commands. A band of gold, bright as 
a sunbeam, confined his light tresses ; 
he wore a robe to be compared alone 
in colour to the clouds of evening 
when the sun's setting ray shines upon 
them. His beauty, his youth, his an- 
gelic smile, and varying complexion 



156 ADA REIS. 

interested every one in his success ; 
whilst his dark antagonist marshalled 
his troops with an air of wild exulta- 
tion, his form equal in beauty, but his 
malevolent smile spreading terror into 
every heart. To the gentle and timid 
march of Zamohr he opposed hasty de- 
cisions, and a rash but brilliant attack. 
His countenance beamed with anima- 
tion and fire ; his lips, like rubies, 
parted only to smile with bitter taunt 
or exulting triumph. His men, like 
himself, were dark and fearless. Child 
of the Sun, he lifted up his eyes, and 
gazed like the eagle upon its full me- 
ridian beam, then turned to the game, 
as if secure of triumph. 

That sun, however, descended be- 
fore the awful contest ceased. The 
white queen now made a successful 
diversion to the left; she ventured, 
unattended, even into the midst of the 



ADA RE IS. 157 

enemy's quarters ; her presence caused 
a terrible confusion in the dark ranks ; 
a knight was lost whilst passaging his 
horse to admiration, speaking to it in 
manage terms as it performed its cara- 
cols without one false step. But vain 
was his skill ; he paid the forfeit of 
his rashness. The black bishops now 
advanced obliquely, pronouncing ana- 
themas as they passed. The white 
bishops parried this attack by using 
similar arms amongst the dark troops. 
The white queen, grown bolder, now 
stood firm in front, and checked the 
king. The dark king, highly offended 
at this audacity, frowned, armed his 
towers, placed his videts and pioneers 
in front, and dismissed the fearless lady 
with repeated insults. She retired in 
tears back to her own territories. A 
careless move had nearly lost her on 
her return. The murmur of alarm on 



158 ADA REIS. 

the white side was now general ; whilst 
shouts of triumph could distinctly, al- 
though faintly, be heard from the op- 
posite party. Indecision and fear in a 
general is fatal. The Evil Principle 
had no fear ; his eyes now shone like 
blazing stars in a dark sky, and dazzled, 
by their brightness and glare, his agi- 
tated and half-conquered antagonist. 
The youthful genius made another ir- 
resolute move ; it was past recall, and 
the white king was check-mated amidst 
the groans of his own forces, and a 
clash of arms and shout of victory 
from the contending pigmies of the 
opposite side. The vision immediately 
vanished. The board shrunk back to 
its ordinary dimensions, and the chess- 
men resumed their usual shape and 
appearance. 

Ada Reis remained gazing upon a 
vacant space, Fiormonda in the same 



ADA REIS. 159 

attitude stood for a moment in breath- 
less terror : a loud noise from without 
was heard, it was as of the tramp of 
steeds and clash of arms. A flash from 
the eagle-eye of Kabkarra was felt as 
he rushed into the apartment, even 
before he had fixed its triumphant 
glance upon Fiormonda. His long 
dark hair streamed wildly over his still 
darker mantle, as, springing forward 
with a leap, he shouted, " I have con- 
quered, and won ! Give me my bride ! 
Mount, mount, Ada Reis ; my horses 
wait for you. Fly! for there is not a 
moment to be lost, the Pasha's guards 
already surround these walls ; fly ! or 
meet a fate you cannot avert." An 
explosion, like the blowing up of a 
mine, took place whilst he was yet 
speaking. " I have saved you by set- 
ting fire to your house. Ha ! ha ! do 
vou tremble ? Away, then !" 



160 ADA REIS. 

As he spoke, flames broke forth on 
every side, and, amidst the deep smoke, 
the dark form of Kabkarra appeared 
terrible. Screams rent the air from 
distracted females ; muskets were fired 
at random, dogs howled, slaves ran, 
whilst the clash of swords resounded 
on every side. The Nuba sounded 
from without, and the song of " Loo" 
announced the Bey ; elephants were 
seen advancing in procession, torches 
glared in the garden ; the inhabitants 
were gathered together, around the 
door the wild cry of the Arabs attack- 
ing the Bey's guards and blacks now 
overpowered every other noise. Ada 
Reis was seized and bound, and placed 
behind an Arab on his horse. Fior- 
monda was borne away in the arms 
of Kabkarra, upon his white mare 
Oriah, whilst Shaffou Paca, hoarsely 
calling for assistance, was tied upon a 



ADA REIS. 161 

mule, and conveyed likewise through 
darkness and distance, until they 
reached the coast, where they were 
all hurried into a boat, which was 
waiting there. 

The men rowed from the shore; the 
sea was tempestuous ; a dense fog ob- 
scured every object ; the groans of 
Shaffou Paca alone disturbed the si- 
lence. Ada Reis saw that it was vain 
to resist ; Fiormonda became insen- 
sible ; Shaffou Paca fell into a trance. 
" Women," Ada Reis remarks, " al- 
ways have recourse to these practices 
in every difficulty, but they seldom 
die, being of all animals the most te- 
nacious of life." He thought, how- 
ever, that Fiormonda had been dead, 
and he said so. 

" Then let her die," replied Kab- 
karra, insultingly, " a melancholy mo- 

vol. 1. M 



162 ADA REIS. 

nument of your tyranny, her own im- 
prudence, and my ardent love." 

" Do as you will," said Ada Reis, 
who found himself on the open sea, in 
the power of a young Arab chief. " Do 
as you will, since we are entirely at 
your mercy." 

" I cannot," said Kabkarra, "power- 
ful as you may think me, take pos- 
session of Fiormonda by the law of 
force ; I shall wait and watch for her 
own consent." 

" You seem in no way restrained in 
the mean time," said Ada Reis, " and 
I therefore conceive you will do what- 
ever you like to do." 

" And so shall you," said Kabkarra ; 
" I desire you will, therefore, give me 
your commands. Some like to know 
their future fate ; yours runs thus : 
Your polacca is at hand ; your men, by 



ADA IlEIS. 16 



my order, await you ; you will hasten 
hence, and sail for Spain j you will pro- 
ceed from thence to the New World, 
for thither lies your destined course ; 
and there the promised diadem awaits 
you." 

" You are then a real friend, after 
all," said Ada Reis ; " but, like one, 
you must acknowledge, you generally 
do just the thing which is most dis- 
agreeable ; yet we shall meet again, I 
hope." 

" We shall meet again," said Kab- 
karra, " upon a dreadful night, just 
five years hence, when this lovely, 
flower, the admiration of all men, has 
forgotten the lover of her childhood. 
Yes, we shall meet again ! Remember 
the hour, and the night, and the time 
of year in which the blood of Bianca 
di Castamela flowed. Upon such a 
night, whilst gazing on the sultry skies 



164 ADA REIS. 

at the fort of Callao, we shall meet. 
Farewell ! And as to thee, mother,'' 
continued Kabkarra, laughing, and 
fiercely shaking Shaffou Paca, " watch 
thy charge better ; let no Phaos come 
betwixt her and me." 

So saying, the Arabs and their leader 
gave a shout. It was returned from a 
distance. They neared a vessel : Ada 
Reis, Shaffou Paca, and Fiormonda, 
were placed upon the deck of it. The 
word Kabkarra was now pronounced 
at once by a number of voices on 
board, and Ada Reis found himself 
in his own polacca with all his crew 
around him. They had received orders 
for sailing, as they said, from the Bey, 
who had shown them their own reis's 
signet ring: every thing was on board ; 
Ada Reis's jewels, goods, coins, in 
short, all he most valued, even Fior- 
monda's marriage presents ; all but the 



ADA REIS. 165 

chess-men, and the gifts of Zamohr. 
Before he could enough rejoice at this 
event, he turned round to thank Kab- 
karra ; but he was gone. The boat at 
a distance appeared in relief from the 
thick fog and white waves, and it 
seemed as if daemons formed its crew. 
Fiormonda slowly recovered ; she 
asked a thousand questions, and wept 
with regret when she heard they had 
left for ever the land in which they 
had so long sojourned. The thought 
too of never more seeing her young 
lover, the loss of his gifts, with the 
confused remembrance of the strange 
events which had taken place, which 
appeared nowlikethe delirium of fever, 
all tended to disquiet her mind ; but 
great emotions, like little ones, pass 
away ; and grief, if it kill not soon, 
gives place in young minds to new in- 
terests ; yet still Fiormonda from time 



166 ADA REIS. 

to time vented her regrets. " What a 
long, long way it is, dear father," she 
would say, as the light galley pro- 
ceeded. 

" It is a long way, fair child," Ada 
Ileis would reply ; " but happiness 
and greatness await us where we are 
going." 

" And shall we never more see our 
own beautiful country ?" 

" We shall see other countries no 
doubt more beautiful," replied Ada 
Reis. 

" I hope so," she would add; " for 1 
pine for the sight of land." 



ADA REIS. 167 



CHAPTER XV. 



In the course of the voyage, a sailor 
chanced to disobey a command which 
Ada Reis had given him : in his fury, 
even before Fiormonda's eyes, he 
caused him to be strangled: "And 
thus die," he cried, " all such as dare 
oppose me !" Immediately, and (as 
Fiormonda thought) in consequence of 
this rash and cruel conduct, a storm 
arose ; the thunder roared, the light- 
ning flashed, and the tremendous waves 
rolled, as it were, mountains high. 

Amidst the terrors of the tempest, 
they beheld a little galley dashed to 
and fro by the violence of the sea. 
" Breakers a-head!" cried the affright- 
ed sailors, as Ada Reis, roaring out his 
hoarse commands, steered his vessel 



168 ADA REIS. 

calmly forward amidst the general up- 
roar and alarm ; but suddenly the 
stranger vessel struck upon a rock, 
and the shrieks of the drowning pas- 
sengers rent the air. Amidst the 
sinking crew of that little galley, one 
man was observed at times, with lifted 
head, labouring amongst the waves, 
and driven towards them by the strong 
current, and imploring assistance. 
" Oh, save him! Ada Reis," said Fior- 
monda, kneeling before her father, and 
clinging to him, " save him, it shall 
expiate the blood already shed." Ada 
Reis ordered a cord to be thrown out ; 
the fearless youth, braving the winds 
and waves, every moment approached 
the galley: at length he grasped the 
rope, and, after a severe struggle, was 
drawn safely towards the polacca, and 
with the assistance offered to him, soon 
reached the deck. His thanks to Ada 



ADA REIS. 169 

Reis were energetic j some also he 
gave to the beautiful child, whose agi- 
tation for his safety he had marked. 
The storm soon abated, and the voyage 
continued prosperous from that day. 
The stranger was also, he said, bound 
for Spain, and as eager to land in that 
fair and rich country as Ada Reis 
could be ; fortunate it was, also, he 
had friends in Madrid, and could be 
of material use to his preservers. 

The name, by which the young 
stranger called himself, was Condul- 
mar. He was of Venetian origin, but 
had passed many years in South Ame- 
rica ; he had also resided in Spain : he 
spoke all languages with facility, and 
appeared to have been nearly as great 
a traveller as Ada Reis. He answered 
Fiormonda's most difficult questions, 
with an intelligence and grace which 
delighted her, though with some re- 



170 ADA REIS. 

serve ; he seemed perfectly conversant 
with America, and was of considerable 
use to Ada Reis, in pointing out to 
him in what manner most speedily to 
gain his intended object in going into 
that country. Power and personal 
safety were all which Ada Reis now 
sought, for wealth he possessed even 
beyond his wishes. Condulmar ap- 
peared to know intimately the Spa- 
nish Viceroy, so that he could faci- 
litate Ada Reis's views in every re- 
spect, and thought, by doing so, only 
to show his grateful sense of the kind-* 
ness done him in his former perilous 
adventure. 

After a short and prosperous voyage 
they all arrived in safety at their de- 
stined harbour. The young Count 
Condulmar more than fulfilled his pro- 
mises. Fiormonda was admired by 
every one at the Spanish court. Ada 



ADA REIS. 171 

Reis made such purchases as he thought 
necessary; exchanged his vessel for a 
sloop, better fitted for so long a voyage ; 
and hearing with pleasure that Con- 
dulmar was anxious to accompany him, 
they set out for Carthagena, with every 
favourable prospect before them. 

At this period two great wars en- 
grossed the attention of the new and 
of the old world. England had de- 
clared hostilities against Spain ; Ver- 
non had already invested the town of 
Porto Bello ; Anson was employed in 
blockading Panama ; when the cry was 
heard at Xauxa, beyond Tarma, and 
the Indians making one desperate ef- 
fort to regain their independence, from 
hill to hill, from plain to plain lighted 
their watch fires, and gave the secret 
signal of union and rebellion to each 
other, in order the more successfully 
to attack their common enemy ; even 



172 ADA REIS. 

to the very walls of Lima they pushed 
their efforts, albeit in vain. Tyranny 
triumphed ; they were repulsed — sub- 
jected once more to the Spanish yoke ; 
and many of their wretched chiefs, 
when taken alive, thrown into the 
prisons of the inquisition. 



ADA REIS. I73 



CHAPTER XVI. 



Dangerous is it for the young and 
the beautiful to take long voyages or 
long journeys together ; side by side 
they are placed near to each other, and 
have greater opportunities of confiden- 
tial intercourse than may fall to their 
lot during whole years at home. On 
board of the vessel Fiormonda neces- 
sarily saw much of Condulmar. 

Ada Reis had leisure to hear some 
of the history of his new acquaintance, 
who had met, it seemed, with many 
very singular adventures, although he 
was still in the first vigour of youth and 
manhood. He was not at all times, 
however, in a mood to relate even to 
Ada Reis all he had heard and seen ; 
he was, for the most part, mournful, 



174 ADA REIS. 

and he did but half open his thoughts 
to his companions : there was an im- 
penetrable depth Ada Reis could not 
fathom : if looked upon suddenly, there 
was a bitter smile upon his counte- 
nance ; and when Ada Reis, speaking 
of the unfortunate violence of his 
temper and passions, acknowledged to 
what lengths they were in the habit of 
leading him ; Condulmar looked down, 
and sighed, seeming to acknowledge, 
that his own violence was greater. 
To some it is a pleasure to communi- 
cate their thoughts : great travellers, in 
general, require no long acquaintance 
before they open their minds to the 
companions whom they meet with ; 
experience has taught them to know 
at once the degree to which they may 
trust such temporary confidants ; and 
the great variety of characters they have 
partially studied in their career, gives 



ADA REIS. 175 

them a general and immediate know- 
ledge of the disposition of each chance 
associate. Of some, however, neither 
time, nor much acquaintance with men, 
nor long habits of the world, are able 
entirely to conquer the settled and ob- 
durate reserve. This dissimilarity of 
disposition was strongly marked in the 
different deportments of Ada Reis and 
Condulmar. Ada Reis was gay, free, 
fearless, and in a short time had in- 
formed his companion of nearly every 
thing which had befallen him. Con- 
dulmar, on the contrary, was distant, 
cold, and haughty ; seldom speaking 
of himself or his own affairs, and im- 
penetrable when questioned. Yet, after 
a time, he suffered his coldness to give 
way, and more particularly when con- 
versing with Fiormonda, he relaxed 
from his austerity ; his conversation 
then grew animated ; a light vein of 



176 ADA REIS. 

satire ran throughout it, and a not un- 
pleasing contempt for the things of this 
life. His thoughts were all original and 
just, though the tone given to them, 
by some deep inward feeling, was of a 
bitter and melancholic nature. 

Fiormonda, confiding and ardent, 
listened often with admiration and de- 
light to his remarks. She remained 
alone with him upon the deck enjoy- 
ing the freshness of the morning, and 
the softer coolness of the evening. He 
pleased her with descriptions of coun- 
tries he had seen, and cities which ap- 
peared to her most singular ; but above 
all, he sang to her; and his voice, deep, 
wild, and full, seemed to have power 
to calm every tumultuous emotion in 
her impetuous mind; yet he sang to 
her of wars, of bloody deeds, of ambi- 
tious hopes, of rebellion, of lawless 
love ; and he imitated the wild war- 



ADA REIS. 177 

whoop of the native Indians, who had 
resisted the power of Spain and the 
dominion of the Incas. 

It is difficult to give any idea of days 
passed thus, and of nights, when every 
star shone forth with particular lustre ; 
— when the sea-breeze, soft and cool, 
refreshed and invigorated the frame, — 
these were perilous moments for Fior- 
monda. She had hitherto been assailed 
by mysterious beings, by enchanters, 
necromancers ; she was now with an 
associate far more dangerous ; and as 
Condulmar bent over her, and spoke, 
her young heart repeated every word 
he uttered. In return for his songs 
she showed him the presents she had 
received from the Bey, and the girdle 
of jewels which Kabkarra had given 
her. At that name he started ; " Is it 
possible !" he said, " can it be that 
you also have known that monster ! no 
vol. 1, N 



178 ADA REIS. 

words of mine are sufficient to paint 
his perfidy and his atrocity." As he 
said this the tears filled his eyes, and 
with a look of almost indescribable ten- 
derness, he said he could not think of 
the danger she had been in, nor of the 
ruin Kabkarra had caused to thousands 
without horror. " The properties of 
his gifts are but too well known to 
me," he added ; " they are full of dan- 
ger: these jewels, for example, when 
worn near the inexperienced heart, 
excite the passions and inflame the ima- 
gination ; and need you these ? Alas ! 
some sorcerer first invented these 
charms to pervert innocent and cre- 
dulous maids." 

" How can things like these affect 
the mind," said Fiormonda. 

" Know you then of what the mind 
is composed, that you ask this ? Until 
it be found of what the mind and soul 



ADA REIS. 179 

be formed, it is in vain to pretend that 
material objects cannot affect them. 
As the amber and the load-stone pos- 
sess the property of attracting certain 
matter, so congenial minds exercise a 
mutual and reciprocal influence. Were 
I, for example, at whatsoever distance, 
to think of you, ah ! believe, Fiormonda, 
although the many would doubt it, that 
you also would think of me, and, as it 
were, feel my presence? I could prove 
this to you, by the history of one who 
died ; but it is a mournful history, and 
you, my innocent child, must not be 
made unhappy yet. To return, there- 
fore, to these pernicious gifts ; Kab- 
karra's power is imparted to these 
jewels ; they are, as it were, impreg- 
nated with his sentiments for you ; and 
they being criminal, to place these 
around your heart, will be to excite 

N 2 



180 ADA REIS. 

in that heart a desperate struggle, and 
to subject it to a severe and doubtful 
trial." 

" I can never feel other than fear of 
him," said Fiormonda. 

" Fear is one of the sure forerunners 
of love, if, indeed, it be not rather his 
follower and companion/' said Con- 
dulmar. " I had as lieve you feared 
me, as that you loved me." 

" Indeed !" As she said this, she 
met his eyes, and felt confused. 

" You think your feelings violent, 
though short-lived," he said, with a 
smile ; " but I rather doubt their in- 
tensity as well as their durability." 

" I would I did not feel at all," said 
Fiormonda, piqued at these taunts ; 
" I feel with a violence which you 
would not credit; that which causes 
but little delight to another makes me 



ADA REIS. 181 

happy; a fine day or a smile from one 
I love; and, on the contrary, even a 
harsh word makes me miserable." 

" Shall I take thee, fair child," said 
Condulmar with a bitter smile, " as we 
are journeying to the new world, shall 
I take thee to drink of the waters of 
Guancaveli 38 , so boasted of by the Pe- 
ruvians? the houses on its banks are 
built from its petrifactions. If you 
would cease to feel, come thither with 
me." 

" If you thus deride me, and laugh 
at me, I shall fear you as well as Kab- 
karra." 

" All fear me," said Condulmar, 
mournfully, " none love me. I stand 
alone, like the manzanillo, or the lordly 
metapalo, whose very growth slays and 
impoverishes all around ; yet will you 
attach yourself to me, Fiormonda. 
Heaven knows, I wish it not ; but so 



182 ADA REIS. 

it is decreed: it will give me pain, and 
it will cause your destruction. " 

" Good heaven!" she answered, 
" what can you mean ?" 

" What can I mean ?" said he, ten- 
derly pressing her hand to his lips, 

" It is no matter," she replied, em- 
barrassed. " I wish not even to in- 
quire." 

" Alas !" he said, M could you know 
who I am." 

" Tell me who you are P What has 
been your history ? You have told me 
many things, speak to me now of your- 
self. I like to hear of wonders and 
adventures ; and as you say I am to 
love you, that will be the way to my 
heart, I assure you, for it made me 
almost like Kabkarra." 

<e Name him no more," said Con- 
dulmar, frowning, " he did no more 
than I have done." 



ADA REIS. 183 

" You have been a great traveller, I 
know," said Fiormonda : " tell me, as 
you did the other day, what you have 
seen ?" 

" I have seen the wonders of the 
country you soon shall see ; I have 
been where the high mountains of gra- 
nite take place of the blue hills in Pen- 
delon 3 9, — and there I have gathered 
adamantine spar as it fell from the 
moon 40 ; in Virginia I have eat of the 
fruit of that tree, which makes fools 
of men 4i; and I, like Kabkarra, have 
laughed with those who had eaten of 
it, although it affected me not : but I 
watched the multitude until they be- 
came stupified with their own buf- 
fooneries 42 . Ah, cannot the fruit of 
the vine make men mad in other coun- 
tries beside Virginia ? I have bathed, 
at night, in the Gulf of Cariaco, and 



184 ADA REIS. 

my body has become like a stream of 
light 43 : will you see this wonder upon 
the waves by night ? Stay by me ; and 
I will show you the vessel, as it cleaves 
the waters, shining as it were with fire. 
In Pennsylvania, fair child, I have 
played upon the soft clarionet, and an 
hundred echoes have answered to the 
strain 44 : will you go thither with me? 
There shall I hear the voice of many 
Fiormondas — now the world contains 
for me but one. In Cumana I have 
slept in the cavern of Guachero 45 , and 
my voice has joined with the shrill 
screams of the night-birds, lamenting 
for ill deeds past : will you go there 
with me, and see the bright and cold 
stalactites pendent from the vault, and 
the gigantic trees which surround it ? 
Thousands of night-birds shriek there, 
and the foot of man has never pene- 



ADA REUS. 185 

trated beyond ; all is silent and dark 
on the outside of that grot, but the 
vault within is full of light." 

" Oh ! look not thus when you de- 
scribe it," said Fiormonda, " for I am 
weak and timid, and to hear you makes 
me tremble. Tell me of diamonds, and 
gold, and fair ladies ; speak, as you did 
the other evening, of the silver hill of 
Parim£e 46 , and the Eldorado 4 7; but 
say no more of these things." 

Condulmar smiled. " The gold and 
the diamonds," he said, " were I to 
tell of them, have produced scenes of 
greater misery and deeper terror, child, 
than these. What is the cry of the 
night-bird, or the drowsy hum of the 
zumbadore in the desert, to the hor- 
rors Potosi, Durangar, Guadalaxara, 
have caused? Remember that the 
mountains, where mines of silver have 
been found, generate likewise the ar- 



186 ADA REIS. 

senic and the deadly poison 4 ^ Thou, 
Lake of Guativa 49 , art witness of this; 
thou, into whose waters the poor In- 
dians cast the hateful ore, which drew 
upon them the murderous spirit of the 
Spaniards ; and thou, Lake of Ibara, 
art red with the blood of the mur- 
dered so." 

" Still," said Fiormonda, " you speak 
of horrors. Sing, then, if you cannot 
speak more kindly; I love to hear you : 
sing to me the song of the Indian chief, 
who sung amidst his tortures, destroyed 
by him who conquered his body, not 
his spirit." 

" I would do so," said Condulmar, 
" but, alas ! I begin to fear I am more 
enslaved, more subdued, than the 
young Indian." 

" Leave, then, the Indian," said Fior- 
monda, " and sing to me, as you once 
did, the return of the English De 



ADA REIS. 187 

Vaux to his own country: that song, 
which expresses how the heart, which 
amidst crimes and perils had never 
been touched by remorse, or shaken by 
fear, sunk and broke under its own re- 
flections in the hour of quiet and se- 
curity." 

Condulmar obeyed. 

Sir Henry de Vaux came across the sea, 
To visit his native clime ; 
A face like an angel of light had he, 
But his heart it was seer'd by crime. 

He stood on his castle tower to gaze 
O'er the scenes which he long had left ; 
And a thought came o'er him of happier days, 
Ere his heart was of hope bereft. 

The stream flow'd through that peaceful vale, 
The birds sung to a cloudless sky; 
And the calm around, and the soft fresh gale, 
But increased his agony. 

A tear then fell from that proud dark eye, 
A tear of remorse or regret, 



188 ADA REIS. 

" My will is a law," he cried, " then why — 
Why cannot I learn to forget ? 

" The lightning, which blasted yon aged tree, 
Is deem'd but the fire of heaven, 
The storm which roars o'er the raging sea 
Little heeds where the wreck is driven. 

" All nature's works to evil are prone, 
Yet lose not their beauty or power ; 
Man only remembers the ill he has done, 
And laments it in bitter hour. 

" I have fought, when the desperate fight ran high, 
And the plain was dyed with blood, 
I have sail'd when danger and death were nigh, 
But unmoved, unappall'd I stood. 

" I have drank of pleasure the fatal draught, 

I have given to passion the rein ; 

With the scoffer I've scoff'd — with the infidel 

laugh'd, 
And reason has warn'd me in vain. 

" I have felt the extremes of joy and grief, 
And delighted in every excess ; 
I have languish'd in sickness and sought relief; 
Been wrong'd, and have found redress. 



ADA REIS. 189 

f - 1 have loved to madness, and writhed with hate, 
Yet no shade has obscured my brow ; 
I have struggled, and even triumph'd o'er fate, 
But I never have felt till now. 

" Oh ! the pain that I feel with such deadly force, 
That it strikes through my burning brain : 
'Tis the pain of the soul — despair — remorse — 
There is none can endure such pain. 

" Tis the voice of an angry God that cries, 
Till it harrows the mind within : 
'Tis the worm of the heart that never dies — 
'Tis the memory of sin. 

" What to me that I 've wander'd through many 

a track, 
And return'd with a wond'rous store ? 
I am stretch'd, as it were, on a fiery rack, 
And the day of enjoyment is o'er. 

" What to me that my victims were young and 

bright, 
Or lovely, or ardent, or true ? 
I but sought them their beauty and freshness to 

blight, 
And I left them their frailty to rue." 



190 ADA REIS. 

Sir Henry de Vaux sank low on his knee, 
The light of his countenance fell : — 
" In heaven," he cried, " is there hope for me, 
Since I Ve sold myself to hell ? 

" Oh ! I am grown weak as the sickly child, 
That moans on its nurse's breast, 
And would, that like him, I could be beguiled, 
And soothed for one moment to rest. 

" The fiends are waiting — my brain is on fire — 
My life and my courage are gone. 
Of the thousands who flatter'd each rash desire, 
To obey my last wish, is there none?" 

There was one, when he spoke, who stood by his 

side, 
And received his dying behest ; 
In that self-same hour Sir Henry died. — 
Now God give his soul good rest. 

When Condulmar had finished, he 
turned to look upon Fiormonda; she 
was sad, she knew not wherefore. They 
can effect much who have the power 
to touch and move the heart, to draw 



ADA REIS. 191 

forth tears, and to lead us to mingle 
our grief and sympathy with theirs ; 
but these sad and solemn companions 
are after all not so very dangerous as 
they are supposed to be. They are more 
to be dreaded who can, at their plea- 
sure, make us laugh ; who banish me- 
lancholy from our minds, and quicken 
with gaiety and spirit the lingering 
course of life. Condulmar possessed 
this talent, as well as the other : he 
could divert and amuse as well as af- 
fect : he knew how to excite every 
feeling and passion ; and as he had no 
other object to interest him, he devoted 
his time at present entirely to Fior- 
monda: he won her by the flattery of at- 
tention to her opinions : he struck her 
with amazement at the adventures he 
related: he filled her with curiosity: 
he entirely engrossed her with solici- 
tude and interest. The air of inco- 



1 ( J C 2 ADA REIS. 

herency, of strangeness, of something 
approaching even to derangement, 
which sate upon his countenance, com- 
pelled her to watch the changes of his 
expression ; and he, upon his part, 
sometimes attended her with the 
greatest solicitude ; sometimes turned 
from her with careless neglect ; some- 
times reproved her with severe admo- 
nition ; sometimes appalled her with 
the dark look of sullen anger; and then 
again re-assured her with all the fas- 
cination of a lover's smile. His power 
by this means became unbounded over 
her mind. Had she been less innocent, 
less pure, to what perversion had not 
such a companion led her. But she 
was of a noble and high nature, which 
utterly refused to receive the taint of 
evil ; and the worst sentiment she 
cherished was growing love. She was, 
however, as many children are, restless, 



ADA REIS. 193 

and at times violent : one day she re- 
sisted her father's orders, Condulmar 
approached her — " I love you the 
better," he said, " for this spirit of in- 
dependence ; but if you resist me, I 
will draw from the lake of the valley of 
Orcos 51 the famous gold chain which 
the Inca Huana Capac made, and 
placed there upon the birth of his son 
Huescar, to confine you. When I saw 
you first, I thought you fair and gentle ; 
but, like the calm lake of Xicaragua 52 , 
from whose bosom the mountain Omo- 
tepec shoots forth its volumes of 
flames, your angel semblance, I find, 
is much disfigured by passion. I will, 
however, tame you. Know you not 
that I am destined to be your master ? 
You shall travel with me, and see new 
worlds." An eager glance of hope now 
lighted Fiormonda's countenance. " I 
have been," Condulmar said, " where 
vol. 1. o 



194 Ada reis. 

the workings of the mind and heart are 
visible to the eye, and thought is seen 
even as it emanates from the soul ; and 
I have been where vice disfigures the 
body visibly, so that the fairest creature 
in a day may become monstrous, losing 
with her virtue each bright natural 
grace and charm, which before cap- 
tivated admiring crowds. Will you 
come with me to that country ?" 

Fiormonda coloured, and said she 
should be sorry to go thither ; for, con- 
scious that her errors were number- 
less, so would be, in that case, her de- 
formities. 

" But then what delight," replied 
Condulmar, " to correct the blemishes 
of your person, by amending the de- 
fects of your heart. Passion, for ex- 
ample,' ' he said, " renders you at times 
unlovely." 

" And you terrible," said Fiormonda. 



ADA REIS. 195 

Alas ! she little guessed to what fear- 
ful lengths these feelings would soon 
carry her. She was no longer the happy 
child she had been ; thoughts impressed 
her mind above her years, and her heart 
beat in tumult: passions, fierce and 
wild, had already awakened her ima- 
gination ; and even sleep, the innocent 
tranquil sleep of childhood, fled. 

" You are the first upon deck," one 
day she said, addressing Condulmar; 
" and yet at night we leave you there : 
do you, who know every thing, know of 
nothing to make those sleep who cannot 
sleep ? Tell me of it, if you do, for of 
late my spirit is unquiet, and my eyes 
close not : I used to sleep so well, that 
night appeared to me but as a moment ; 
for as soon as I was asleep, they said it 
was time to rise." 

" You were happy," said Condul- 
mar, with a sigh, " when you rested 

o 2 



196 ADA UEIS. 

thus : they who sleep are blessed, were 
they never to wake again ; but as for 
me — " and he put his hand to his head, 
and looked thoughtfully away for some 
moments, then continued — " I am the 
last in the world of whom you should 
make this inquiry. But, child, my fair 
child ! I know you can sleep ; for yes- 
terday evening I awakened you by 
passing a feather over your mouth, 
when sleeping on the deck, and you 
smiled, and said you had not slept. 
Many say so and yet cannot be thus 
easily awakened ; it is the common 
cant of fine ladies." 

" But," said Fiormonda, whose 
cheeks were pale with the restless 
fever which tormented her, " I am not 
a fine lady : I know of none of these 
things ; I speak from the heart only, 
and therefore I am not believed. Oh, 
I was happy, and rested once securely, 



ADA REIS. 197 

and trusted myself, whilst I slept, to 
Him who made me." 

" The flowers and plants sleep, sweet 
one," replied Condulmar : " the vege- 
table world enjoys this state of blessed- 
ness. At regular and stated periods 
the plants send forth their odoriferous 
emanations, then fold themselves up in 
their silken leaves; infants enjoy re- 
pose; all nature is harmonized; but 
where the spirit is perturbed, it cannot 
rest. Fiormonda, you who ask of me 
to teach you how T to regain that tran- 
quil sleep of which I have robbed you ; 
would that you, who say you cannot 
sleep, could grant me one hour of that 
repose from which I aroused you yes- 
terday !" 

" And yet," said she, smilingly, " I 
am not unhappy, only I am disturbed ; 
for I dreamt when I slept yesterday, 
and it is as fatiguing as not sleeping 



198 ADA REIS. 

at all. I dreamt an ugly dream, which 
made me uncomfortable : yet I saw 
you in my dream; but, Condulmar, 
when I did see you, you frightened 
me, for your eyes looked upon me as 
if you loved me not." 

*> Can such as you are dream ?" said 
Condulmar, with a look of surprise. 
"Come, tell me, child of my heart, what 
is it you dreamt of; I am curious to 
know." 

" Last night," said Fiormonda, " I 
thought I was in a plain, and there 
were wild beasts, and animals, and 
birds, and fish, and every sort of living 
thing, all staring upon me : it was a 
horrid dream, and I thought you stood 
in the midst, and your eyes glared upon 
me, till they awakened me by their 
power." 

" If my eyes were not fixed upon 
you, my thoughts were," he said, 



ADA REIS. 199 

mournfully; " and yet I warn you, 
and remember that I do so — better 
were it for you to listen to the love 
Kabkarra professed — nay, better, in 
truth, were it for you to hide yourself 
in some cell, and die there ; the greedy 
vulture alone permitted to prey upon 
those opening beauties, than to know 
me, for I am — " 

" Oh! say, what are you?" inter- 
rupted Fiormonda. 

" I am miserable," said Condulmar, 
striking his hand upon his heart. " But 
even this hard heart acknowledges the 
beauty of innocence, and bows before 
a child." 

u - What I am — may'st thou never know — 
A friend, perchance — perchance a foe. 
Yet thou art pure, and need'st not dread 
Either the living or the dead. 
The living dare not injure thee; 
The dead awake alone for me. 



200 ADA REIS. 

Thy earthly senses cannot hear 

The strains which ofttimes glad my ear; 

Thy power of vision may not see 

The passing shades which flit by me. — 

Hark! even now, I hear the choirs 

Of cherub angels strike their lyres, 

As borne aloft on silver wing 

To heaven, they songs of triumph sing. 

For me, alas! how sad the strain — 

It bids me never hope again: 

Unbless'd, alone, when all is still, 

And the mind fears and fancies ill ; 

When thy young eyes are closed in sleep, 

I gaze upon the boundless deep ; 

For then a thousand phantoms drear 

Upon the dark calm waves appear, 

All pale and cold. The drown'd, the dead 

Arise from out their watery bed, 

Filling the bosom of the sea, 

As it were one vast cemetery. 

Ah ! start not, sweet one ! what I say 

Is but to wile the time away; 

Let not my words distress thy heart, 

Thou know'st too well how dear thou art. 

I '11 tell thee now of cities rare, 

Of gallant knights, and ladies fair; 



ADA REIS. # 199 

I wish alone to make thee smile, 

And the long dreary way beguile. 

I 've made thee weep — I '11 soothe thy tears — 

See tranquil now the moon appears, 

Upon the softly swelling sea — 

Her silver rays shine forth for thee. 

Go to thy couch, thou gentle one ; 

Go, and I'll watch whilst thou art gone. 

Child of my heart, beware of sin; 

Let not the wily tempter in : 

Fly him, by fate and passion driv'n, 

And fix thy early faith in heav'n. 

Yet would'st thou, my beloved, know 

What my grief is, and whence my woe? — 

'Tis that these eyes can never weep, 

Tis that this spirit cannot sleep !" 



" What mean you, Condulmar? — 
say/' said Fiormonda, interrupting 
him — " What is it which makes you 
look so fearfully around, and seem so 
sad?" 

" Remorse feeds on my heart in the still night, 
When gloomy dreams the weakened soul affright ; 



*200 ADA REIS. 

When thoughts their mournful constant vigils 

keep, 
Remorse feeds on my heart, and will not let me 

sleep 3 
When the all glorious sun arises bright, 
Remorse appals me, and I fly its light. 
Nature in vain looks beautiful for me ; 
One fearful spectre every where I see : 
Thy words are daggers, thy caresses death; 
I catch but poison from thy balmy breath; 
Thy infant smile, what can it now impart ?— 
'Tis a last ray of hope to cheer a broken heart." 

Fiormonda wept; and Condulmar, 
seeing that he had again given her 
pain, endeavoured to sooth and to 
amuse her. 

Thus as the swift vessel pursued its 
course over the vast ocean, Fiormonda's 
passions, like the rolling waves, back- 
wards and forwards, ebbed and flowed. 
Love, in all its first delights, opened 
within that warm and guileless heart. 
Reason in vain opposed the growing 
infatuation : — of religion (her only safe- 



ADA REIS. 201 

guard) she knew little. Various were 
the impetuous feelings which alter- 
nately possessed her mind: like the 
frail beings who wander along the 
earth, she was already their victim. 
Still time passed on, and the vessel, 
emblem of time, pursued its way. 

At length the New World burst 
upon their view. They gazed; they 
neared the land. They entered their 
destined harbour, and were received 
with every mark of respect and con- 
sideration. Ada Reis had letters from 
the Spanish government, which strongly 
recommended him to the protection of 
the viceroy. The sums he had ad- 
vanced to the consulado gave him at 
once a free passport, and made him of 
considerable consequence : his talents, 
his haughtiness, his courage, enhanced 
these credentials; and the splendour 
in which he made his first appearance 
attracted around him many a flatterer. 



C 202 ADA KEIS. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

Such were the principal events of 
the life of Ada Reis, according to the 
MS., up to the period when he settled 
in America, where, during three years, 
he became an active agent to the Spa- 
nish government. He landed his cargo 
at the Guayaquil; his treasures were 
considerable : he conveyed them safely 
across the country to Lima. 

Fiormonda was now no longer a 
beautiful child, but a lovely and ac- 
complished girl, heiress of immense 
riches, and surrounded by adoring 
suitors. 

Ada Reis had established himself at 
Lima; he had purchased a magnificent 
house near theviceroy's palace; he lived 
in splendour; he dedicated much of his 



ADA REIS. 203 

time to the cultivation of FiormondVs 
mind, who grew every day more and 
more beautiful, but likewise more fond 
of power and admiration ; he had 
hitherto kept her strictly according to 
the customs of the country he had left, 
seldom permitting her to be seen by 
any but female eyes. " An imperial 
crown awaits her: ,, these words, and 
the promise of himself being King, 
rendered him proud, and regardless of 
all the offers of marriage repeatedly 
made to her. Yet Condulmar was per- 
mitted to attend her. All who knew, 
all who saw, lamented the impression 
the young adventurer had made upon 
the heart of so beautiful a girl, and so 
great an heiress. 



NOTES. 



Note 1, page xvi. 
Like Humboldt. 
M. Humboldt, le 23 Juin 1802, apres avoir 
monte sur les Andes a 2773 toises de hauteur, 
fut oblige de redescendre, parce que le mercure 
etoit descendu a 14 pouces 7 lignes, et que la 
densite de Pair lui faisait sortir le sang des 
levres, des gencives, et des yeux. Ce savant 
n'a vu ni en Hongrie, ni en Saxe, ni aux 
Pyrenees, des montagnes aussi irregulieres 
que dans les Andes, et qui off'rent autant de 
substances diverses ; enfin qui devoilent les re- 
volutions etonnantes de la nature. — U Europe 
et TAmerique comparee, vol. i. p. 37. 

Note 2, page xvi. 
Like Park, 
Extract from Amadi Fatouma's Journal : — 



206 NOTES. 

" We departed from Sansanding in a canoe ; 
there were Mr. Park, Mr. Martyn, three other 
white men, myself, and three slaves, &c. &c. 

" We entered the country of Haoussa and 
came to anchor. Mr. Park gave me seven 
thousand cowries to buy provisions; he told 
me to go to the chief and give him five silver 
rings, and tell him these presents were given 
to the king by the white men, who were taking 
leave. The chief inquired if the white men 
intended to come back ? Mr. Park replied, he 
could not return any more : this reply occa- 
sioned his death; for the certainty of Mr. 
Park's not returning induced the chief to 
withhold the presents from the king. Next 
day Mr. Park departed ; I slept in the village 
Yaour. Next morning I went to the king; 
on entering the house I found two men who 
came on horseback, they said that they were 
sent by the chief of Yaour to the king, * We 
are sent by the chief of Yaour to let you know 
that the white men went away without giving 
you any thing ; this Amadou Fatouma is a bad 
man, and has likewise made a fool of you,' 
they continued. The king upon this ordered 



NOTES. 207 

me to be put in irons. The next morning 
the king sent an army to a village called 
Boussa, near the river-side: there is before 
this village a rock across the whole breadth 
of the river; one part of the rock is very 
high; there is a large opening in that rock 
in the form of a door, which is the only passage 
for the water to pass through ; the tide current 
is here very strong ; the army took possession 
of the top of this opening. Mr. Park arrived 
after the army had posted itself; he, not- 
withstanding, attempted to pass. The people 
began to attack him, throwing lances, pikes, 
arrows, and stones. Mr. Park defended him- 
self a long time ; two of his slaves were killed. 
They threw every thing they had into the 
river and kept firing ; but being overpowered 
by numbers, and unable to keep up the canoe 
against the current, Mr. Park took hold of 
one of the white men and jumped into the 
water ; Mr. Martyn did the same, and they 
were drowned in the stream in attempting to 
escape : the only slave remaining in the canoe 
was taken to the king, and confirmed this ac- 
count." — Amadi Fatouma's Journal. 



208 NOTES. 

Note 3, page xviii. 
Deeply tinged. 

L'Orenoque a ici, comme le Nil pres de 
Philae et de Syene, la propriete remarquable 
de colorer en noir les masses de granit d'un 
blanc rougeatre qu'il lave depuis des milliers 
d'annees. — Tableau de la Nature, t. xi. p. 202. 

A Tombre des massifs de palmiers, leur 
couleur passe au noir fonce, mais dans des 
vaisseaux transparens, les eaux sont d\m jaune 
dore. L'image des constellations australes se 
reflet avec un eclat singulier dans ces rivieres 
noires. — p. 191. 

JPai remarque que Teau qui sortoit du Rio 
de Guayaquil prenoit graduellement une teinte 
jaune doree, puis couleure de cafe quand elle 
avoit sejourne pendant quelque temps sur les 
prairies. — p. 192. — Tableau de la Nature, 

Note 4, page xix. 

In a pirogue. 

L'on confie les canots vides, appelles ici 

pirogues, a des naturels qui connoissent bien 

leRaudal et en designent chaque degre, chaque 



NOTES. 209 

roche, par un nom particulier. — Tableau de la 
Nature, p. 210. 

Note 5, page xix. 

Like the golden serpent with the bell, Sfc. 

Le Serpent (Tor, ou le Serpent a Sonnettes, 
que les Indiens nomment Curi-Mullinvo, est 
fort remarquable : ce nom lui a ete donne a 
cause d'une peau de couleur d'or, et tavelee 
comme celle des tigres ; car Curt, en Indien, 
signifie or. Cette peau est toute couverte 
d^ecailles, et la figure du reptile merae est af- 
freuse, la tete est d'une grosseur demesuree, 
et le corps a proportion, sa gueule est armee 
de deux rangs de dents et de crochets aussi 
grands et plus aigus que ceux des chiens or- 
dinaires. — Voyage au Perm, par Dom George 
Juan, t. ii. p. 305. 

There are also fish that cast their shells ; for 
instance, the lobster, the cray-fish, the crab, 
the hodmandod and dodman, and the tortoise. 
— See Bacon's Philosophy. 



VOL. I. 



210 NOTES. 

Note 6, page xxi. 
Of that song returned. 

The late Lord Bathurst had much fre- 
quented the opera in the time of Queen Anne. 
Frederick Prince of Wales wanted him to sing 
a favourite air of Nicolini's, which he could 
not at that instant recollect, as it had been 
performed not less than forty years before, and 
the music of operas was not then published 
from season to season as it hath been of late 
years. Some time afterwards his lordship 
dreamed that Nicolini sung part of the air to 
him, and when he awoke he remembered the 
whole song, repeating it from hour to hour, 
till he had waited on his royal highness before 
it had escaped his memory. 

I took the liberty to desire his lordship to 
give me an idea of another air of Nicolini's, 
when he immediately sang it throughout: — 
his lordship was at this time eighty-seven, to 



NOTES. 211 

the best of my recollection, and affords a strong 
instance of musical memory being very perfect 
even in that late stage of life. It need scarcely 
be observed that he could not probably have 
heard this song for more than threescore years. 
— Harrington's Miscellanies, p. 323. 

Note 7, page xxii. 
Manzanillo grows upon her grave. 
Manzanillo, from Manzana, an apple. — A 
tree remarkable for its beauty and variegated 
wood, the golden fruit of which is very at- 
tractive, but contains a thin white juice of a. 
deadly poison ; many have died of eating it, 
or from even sleeping near it. The natives 
and the very beasts from instinct shun it. — 
Ulloa's Voyage, vol. i. p. 53. 

Note 8, page 5. 

Reis. 

Captain in the navy. — Tully\s Tripoly. 

Note 9, page 7. 
Pasha. 
The Turkish word paschaw is formed of 

p2 



212 NOTES. 

two Persian words, pa-sehab, which literally 
signifies viceroy. — Volney's Egypt, vol. ii. 
p. 78. 

Note 10, page 7. 
Bey. 
A title often conferred upon the Pasha's 
eldest son, and Prince of Tripoly. — Tully's 
Tripohj, p. 32. 

Note 11, page 11. 
Care of the Pasha's harem. 
Ada Iteis's harem was not kept with as 
much regularity and strictness as the Grand 
Signior's seraglio or harem. — The seraglio 
means the enclosure of the whole Ottoman 
Palace, which is not less than a moderate town. 
The wall surrounding it is thirty feet high. 
The seraglio has nine gates, two of which are 
magnificent. From one of these the Ottoman 
Porte takes the name of " Sublime Porte/ 1 
Where the ladies live who belong to the Grand 
Signior, is called the harem : no persons but 
those officially belonging to it, can enter the 
first gate. 



NOTES. 213 

The harem looks upon the sea of Marmora. 
The Grand Signior and his eunuchs are the 
only persons that come within sight of these 
ladies. The number of these ladies (always 
numerous) is regulated by the order of the 
Sultan ; and among all, owing to a singular 
regulation, there is but one servant. They 
wait upon each other in rotation : the last who 
enters serves her who entered before her, and 
serves herself; so that the first entered is 
served, without serving, and the last that 
enters serves without being served. They all 
sleep in separate apartments, and between 
every fifth there is a preceptress, who minutely 
inspects their conduct. Their chief governess 
is called Caton-Ciaha, which means governess 
of the noble young ladies. When there is a 
Sultaness Mother, she forms her court from 
amongst the ladies of the harem, having the 
liberty allowed of taking as many young ladies 
as she chooses and of those she likes the best. 
When the Grand Signior's intention to allow the 
ladies to walk in the gardens of the seraglio is 
made known to the Caton-Ciaha (or governess 
of the harem), all persons are ordered to retire. 



214 NOTES. 

A guard of black eunuchs is ordered to place 
itself along the walls of the gardens with drawn 
sabres ; if, by inadvertency, any one is found 
in the gardens, he is instantly killed, and his 
head is brought to the Grand Signior. The 
mother of the eldest son of the Grand Signior 
is called AsaM, that is, Sultaness Mother. 
For the first son, she is crowned with flowers, 
she then takes upon her the prerogatives of a 
wife. No other ladies, though they have sons, 
are crowned or maintained with such costly 
distinction as the first, or Sultaness Mother ; 
but they are served apart, have state apart- 
ments assigned them, and are exempt from 
serving after the death of the Grand Signior. 
All the mothers of the male children, who are 
considered as queens, are shut up in the old 
seraglio, from whence they can never come 
out, unless any of their sons ascend the throne. 
— Vide History of a Ten Years' Residence at 
Tripoli, p. 36. 

Note 12/page 11. 
Lilla. 
Lilla, means in Moorish a lady; as Lilla 
Kebbierra. — Tully's Tripoli/. 



NOTES. C 215 

Note 13, page 13. 
A Damascus blade. 
These scimitars, besides being famous for 
their beauty and lightness, have the steel so 
impregnated with perfume in the manufac- 
turing of them, that their fragrance can never 
be destroyed, while a piece of this extraor- 
dinary blade remains. Their price is from 
fifty to one hundred guineas, the blade only ; 
imitations of them, which are superficially per- 
fumed, are bought for a much less price. — 
Tully's Tripoli/, p. 145. 

Note 14, page 14. 
Pierced by insufferable cold. 
They traverse the sands for many days with 
no other refreshment than a small bag of meal 
and some water ; while at night they are some- 
times drenched by heavy rains. — Tully's 
Tripoly, p. 173. 

Note 15, page 15. 
Bags of gold dust. 
The people here may be said to walk upon 
gold. This precious ore is sifted for on the 



2l6 NOTES. 

sea-shore, and taken up in very small quan- 
tities ; but whole veins of this rich metal are 
found inland as they approach Fezzan. When 
it is found on the coast (which it is on several 
parts near Tripoly), the people gather up 
handfuls of it, put it into a wooden bowl, and 
wash it with several waters, till all the gold, 
which is so much heavier than the sand, re- 
mains at the bottom. This rich sediment is 
then tied in little bits of rags, and brought in 
that state to Tripoly about the size of a small 
nut. These small parcels are known by the 
name of Metagalls. Each of them are worth 
exactly a Venetian Sequin, or ten shillings and 
sixpence. The merchants who purchase these 
Metagalls, melt a certain number of them into 
bars, which they call ingots, and they are 
known by the same name in India. These 
bars of gold are of various sizes. — Tully\s 
Tripoly, p. 27. 

Note 16, page 16. 
Wandering tribe to which he appeared to 

belong. 
The Arabs are the descendants of Ishmael, 



NOTES. 217 

of whom the angel foretold before he was 
born, that he would be a wild man, and that 
kt his hand would be against every man, and 
every man's hand against him," (Gen. chap. 6. 
v. 12.) this is almost literally true of his pos- 
terity, even to this day : the manners of these 
people are various, and they may be divided 
into two tribes, the one inhabit towns, while 
the other wanders from place to place, without 
any fixed habitation. These wandering Arabs 
are divided into families and tribes, every 
tribe, however numerous it may be, being go- 
verned by a chief. 

The Arabs first passed over from Greece 
into Africa, 653, under Othman the third 
Califf, who sent an army of more than eighty 
thousand fighting men, under the command 
of Occuba Bennesie. They built the city of 
Cawen, thirty leagues distant from. Tunis on 
the east. Three other tribes passed over in 
the year 999, which was the four hundredth 
year of the Hegira, by permission of the Califf 
of Cawen. — Shaw's Travels through Arabia, 
p. 221. — Le Sage, Atlas Historique. 

There is a horde called the unvanquished 



218 NOTES. 

horde, from their living in places were none 
can penetrate but themselves; many sove- 
reigns have attempted to subdue them, but 
none have ever been successful ; they are of a 
deep copper colour, a dark baracan which at 
times but ill conceals them, with an immense 
long gun, is all they are usually burthened 
with. 

The dress of the Arabs in general consists 
of a blue skirt, descending below the knee, the 
legs and feet being exposed, or the latter some- 
times being covered with the ancient cothurnus 
or buskin. A cloak is worn of very coarse 
camel's hair cloth, almost universally decorated 
with broad black and white stripes, passing 
vertically down the back : this is of one square 
piece, with holes for the arms ; it has a seam 
down the back : made without this seam it is 
considered of greater value. Here then we 
perhaps behold the form and material of our 
Saviour's garment, for which the soldiers cast 
lots. It was the most ancient dress of the in- 
habitants of this country. — Tully's Tripoly, 
p. 171. 



NOTES. 



219 



Note 17, page 17. 
You are not an Arab sheik. 
A Sheik is the chief of a tribe of Arabs : 
they are divided into a multiplicity of govern- 
ments, and pride themselves on their descent. 

Note 18, page 17. 
Belted girdle. 
He wore a curious wrought belt (of a ma- 
nufacture peculiar to this country and the 
hand of an Arab), ingeniously woven in a 
variety of figures resembling Arabic cha- 
racters ; it was wound several times, tight and 
even, round his body; and one end, being 
doubled back and sewed up, served him for 
his purse. In this belt he wore his arms, and 
prided himself much on them, not on account 
of their richness, but from the proof he had 
had of their execution. — Tully^ Tripoli/, 
p. 171. 

Note 19, page 18. 
Which once resisted the Hampers shawl. 
While Ben Shabbon and his son thus stood 
debating, they perceived within the Skiffer 



220 NOTES. 

two Hampers looking at them with their hands 
behind them. These two guards were the 
only people they saw. The Hampers let Ben 
Shabbon, who was highly respected by all the 
country, pass quietly by; but the moment 
after, they threw the fatal cord over his neck, 
and strangled him instantly. — Tully's Tri- 
poli/, p. 163. 

Note 20, page 21. 
And drank of the lakaby presented to them. 
Lakaby is a liquor drank by the common 
people of Tripoly; it is extracted from the 
date tree in the following manner : 

Three or four incisions are made at the top 
of the tree; a stone jar that will contain a quart 
is put up to each notch : the jars put up at 
night are filled by the morning, with the 
mildest and most pleasant beverage ; and on 
the contrary, those jars put up in the morning 
and left till late in the day become a spirituous 
strong drink, which the Moors render more 
perniciously strong by adding leaven to it. 
The tree will yield this juice for six weeks or 
two months, and generally runs for a month 



NOTES. 221 

at the rate of two gallons a day. It is cus- 
tomary in noble families to have the heart of 
the date tree at great feasts, such as weddings, 
the first time a boy mounts a horse, the birth 
of a son, or the return of an ambassador to his 
family. The heart lays at the top of the tree, 
between the branches of its fruit, and weighs, 
when cut out, from ten to twenty pounds ; it 
is not of a substance to take out before the 
tree has arrived at the height of its perfection. 
When brought to table, its taste is delicious, 
and its appearance singular and beautiful. In 
colour it is composed of every shade, from the 
deepest orange and bright green (which latter 
encompasses it around) to the purest white ; 
these shades are delicately inlaid in veins and 
knots, in the manner of the most curious wood. 
Its flavour is that of the banana and pine ; 
except the white part, which resembles more 
a green almond in consistence, but combines 
a variety of exquisite flavours that cannot be 
described. — Tully's Tripoty, p. 50. 



222 NOTES. 

Note 21, page 23. 

Was offered the place of the great Chiah. 

The office of great Chiah is an honorary 
situation, producing no emolument. He com- 
mands the castle in the Pasha's absence, and 
guards it while in it ; he never quits his post 
night or day, sits always in the Skiffer, and 
has a deputy under him ; all affairs of moment 
are laid before him, and the keys of the town- 
gate are at night delivered to him. The 
Nuba is played at the creation of a Chiah, it 
only being allowed to play at the creation of a 
Chiah, a Bey, and Reis of marine ; otherwise 
it only plays for the Pasha. — Tully's Tri- 
poli/. 

Note 22, page 39. 
To inhale the inbat. 
The warm air abates nothing of its oppres- 
sion till a sudden cool breeze arises from the 
sea, which happens regularly every afternoon 
during these intense heats; but this sea air 
rusts all sorts of steel work even in the pocket, 
and will wet a person's dress entirely through 



NOTES. 223 

in a very few minutes. — Tully's Tripoli/, 
p. 59. 

Note 23, page 40. 
Partake of his pipe and sherbet. 
The beverage was various sherbets : some 
composed of the juice of boiled raisins, very 
sweet; some of the juice of pomegranates 
squeezed through the rind, others of the pure 
juice of oranges. These sherbets were co- 
piously supplied in high glass ewers, placed 
in great numbers on the ground. — Tully's 
Tripoli/, p. 137. 

Note 24, page 41. 

When the marabut sounded to announce the 

prayer at sun-set. 

Let a Moor be where he may, when he hears 
the Marabut announce the prayer for sun-set, 
nothing induces him to pass that moment 
without prostrating himself on the ground. — 
Page 25. 

We met one of the noted Moorish saints or 
holy men — this man, contrary to the general 
appearance of these Marabuts, was tolerably 



224 NOTES. 

covered with a long wide blue shirt reaching 
to the ground, and white trowsers underneath. 
He wore nothing on his head, which was shaved 
close, except a long lock of hair descending 
from the back part of it. 

The whole dress of many of these Marabuts 
consists of a bit of crimson cloth, about four 
inches square, dexterously placed on the crown 
of their head. The Marabut we met in the 
castle was returning from the Pasha, with 
whom he had had a long private audience. 
His appearance, from the furious and strange 
gestures he made, with an immense large living 
snake round his shoulders, was truly terrific, 
though we were all aware of the unfortunate 
reptile having been rendered harmless by the 
wearer's extracting its sting before he attempted 
to impose on the credulous in making them 
believe he alone was exempt from death by the 
reptile's touch. 

The devotion of another order of the Ma- 
rabuts consists in wounding themselves, affect- 
ing madness, and walking the streets almost 
naked, or dancing religious dances for many 
hours, during which they incessantly scream 



NOTES. 2 L 2«5 

out one of their names of the deity. They at 
last throw themselves on the ground foaming 
at the mouth, appearing in a state of madness 
and in the agonies of death — this order of 
Marabuts is named the Kadru, they have a 
convent near Pera. — Tully's Tripoli/, p. 102. 
The name of Marabut is given both to the 
mosque, and to the saint or holy man who re- 
sides at it. Iman is the crier to prayers, and 
Shrief a churchman of an order belonging to 
Mecca. — See Tolly's Tripoli/. 

Note 25, page 41. 
And parched lips for the moon of Ramadan. 
Ramadan is the great Moorish fast: the 
word in Arabic is said to mean a consuming 
heat. It lasts thirty days ; during this period 
no follower of the prophet, upon pain of death, 
is allowed to take the least refreshment be- 
tween sun-set and sun-rise. This fast is rigidly 
observed. — Blaquiere's Letters, vol. ii. p. 59. 

Note 26, page 41. 
The batteries announced the feast of Beiram. 
The morning after this fast (Ramadan) the 
VOL. i. q. 



226 NOTES. 

castle guns, and those of all the batteries round 
the town announce the feast of Beiram, which 
lasts three days in town and seven in the 
country. All sorts of noise and rioting seem 
to make up for what the Moors have suffered 
during the fast. Men go about dressed in all 
kinds of strange and awkward garbs, resem- 
bling nothing in heaven above, or in the earth 
beneath. Though they call themselves lions, 
camels, &c. the greatest complaisance cannot 
lead you to make out the least similitude to 
any thing but a bundle of sticks and rags, 
strangely packed up together. 

They go about dancing with reeds and other 
music. Swings are erected between two ex- 
tremely high wheels in the streets, where the 
people swing for a small piece of money each. 
No fish can be procured during this feast, as 
the boats are all taken up, rowing the common 
people about the harbour. Though drinking 
wine is against the law of Mahomet, immense 
numbers of Moors get intoxicated with a 
liquor they call lakaby, which renders them 
very troublesome, as it literally puts them into 
a state of madness. In fact, during these three 



NOTES. 227 

or four days, it is dangerous for Christians to 
go into the streets. In the consuls'' houses a 
table is set out in the courtyard, and kept 
covered with fresh supplies of wine, oil, bread 
and olives, during the three days of the feast, 
for as many hampers, chouses, and black slaves 
belonging to the Pasha as choose to partake 
of it ; and the Dragomen, or guards, call them 
in parties, according to their rank. During 
the feast, every night, all the mosques are 
illuminated. The town not being otherwise 
lighted, but totally dark, shows to great ad- 
vantage the bright glare of several rows of 
lamps. The coffee bazaar is where the Turks 
meet to tell the news of the day, and to drink 
coffee ; it is filled with coffee houses and coffee 
kitchens, which are very black on the inside 
with smoke, and where nothing is dressed but 
coffee. No Moorish gentlemen enter these 
houses, but send their slaves to bring their 
coffee out to them at the doors, where are 
marble couches covered with green arbours. 
These couches are furnished with the most 
beautiful mats and carpets: here are found, 
at certain hours of the day, all the principal 

q2 



228 NOTES. 

Moors, seated cross-legged, with cups of coffee 
in their hands, made like essence itself. The 
coffee served to the ladies of the castle has 
sometimes in it a quantity of cinnamon, cloves, 
and nutmeg. The Moors, when at these coffee 
houses, are waited on by their own black ser- 
vants, who stand constantly by their masters, 
one with his pipe, another with his cup, a third 
holds his handkerchief while he is talking, as 
his hands are perfectly necessary for his dis- 
course, marking with the fore-finger of the 
right hand upon the palm of the left, as ac- 
curately as we do with a pen, the different 
parts of his speech, a comma, a quotation, or 
a striking passage. 

This renders their manner of conversing 
very singular, and an European, who is not 
used to this part of their discourse, is at a per- 
fect loss to understand what the orators mean. 

The Bazaar is illuminated from one end to 
the other, during every night of the feast, till 
after one or two o'clock in the morning. We 
walked in it one evening during the Beiram, 
till after twelve oVlock ; it was crowded with 
the first people in the place, on each side, most 



NOTES. 229 

of them richly dressed. The perfumes of 
amber, orange-flowers, and jessamine, were 
much too strong to be agreeable. From the 
immense quantity of lamps, the whole place 
was as light as day. — Tully's Tripoli/, p. 16. 

Note 27, page 50. 
And her eyes, which saw even more than other 
eyes can see, never looked in the same di- 
rection. 

During my residence in the country, I had 
frequent opportunities of examining that most 
singular of the animal productions, the came- 
leon. It is hardly necessary to adduce any 
proof to the philosophers of the present day 
against the vulgar error, that it feeds only upon 
air. The fact is, its principal support is flies, 
which it catches by darting out an exceedingly 
long tongue, covered with a matter so glutinous, 
that if it but touch an insect, it is impossible 
for it to escape. The most singular part of 
its conformation is the eye, the muscles of 
which are so constructed that it can move the 
ball quite round ; and I believe it exists the 
only known instance in all animated nature of 



230 NOTES. 

a creature which is able to direct its vision to 
two different objects at the same time, however 
those objects may be situated, — Tour from 
Gibraltar to Morocco, by William Lem- 

PRIERE, p. 91. 

Note 28, page 54. 
A favourite golpha. 
The golphas and best rooms in the country 
houses are sometimes delightfully relieved by 
a considerable stream of clear flowing water 
conducted, in a marble channel, through the 
middle of the room. The floors and sides of 
the apartment are finished with coloured tiles, 
and the ceilings carved and painted in Mosaic. 
In the inner court belonging to the house is a 
gebbia or reservoir, continually filled with fresh 
water from the wells near it, and which flows 
through it into the gardens ; it is surrounded 
with a parapet of marble, and a flight of mar- 
ble steps leads into it. There is only a broad 
walk left round it, which is paved or terraced, 
and into which the best apartments belonging 
to the house open. This circumstance affords 
a refreshing coolness to the house, and is most 



NOTES. 231 

delightful during the extreme heat. — Tully's 
Trijwlg, p. 53. 

Note 29, page 57. 
A light Persian jelique. 
Her chemise was covered with gold em- 
broidery at the neck ; over it she wore a gold 
and silver tissue jileck, or jacket without 
sleeves, and over that another of purple velvet 
richly laced with gold, with coral and pearl 
buttons, set quite close together down the 
front ; it had short sleeves finished with a gold 
band not far below the shoulder, and dis- 
covered a wide loose chemise of transparent 
gauze ornamented with gold. 

Note 30, page 58. 
Gold bands, such as the ladies of the blood royal 
are alone entitled to wear. 
She wore round her ancles, as did all the 
ladies of the Pasha's family, a sort of fetter, 
made of a thick bar of gold, so fine that they 
bind it round the leg with one hand ; it is an 
inch and a half wide, and as much in thick- 
ness : each of these weigh four pounds. None 



( 23 c 2 NOTES. 

but the Pasha's daughters and grand-daugh- 
ters, are permitted to wear this ornament in 
gold; ladies who are not of the blood royal 
are obliged to confine themselves, in this ar- 
ticle of dress, to silver. — Tully's Tripoli/, 
p. 81. 

Note 81, page 58. 
And a girdle of charms to save her from evil 
eyes. 
Disapprobation was strongly displayed in 
the nurse's countenance, while she by order 
showed the infant to the Christians. She covered 
it as much as she could with the charms that 
it wore, and at every look the Christians be- 
stowed upon it, she wetted her finger and 
passed it across the forehead of the baby ; pro- 
nouncing, at the same instant, the words, 
" AH Barick,"' (a prayer to Mahomet, to pre- 
serve it from " bad eyes," or malicious ob- 
servers.) — Tully's Tripoli/, p. 136. — De- 
scription of the visit to Lilla Uducia, the day 
after her accouchement. 



NOTES. 233 

Note 32, page 64. 
Small as the Indian piccqflore. 
The gardens of all kinds in the villages are 
much frequented by a bird very remarkable 
both for its smallness and the vivid colours of 
its feathers. It is generally called Picaflores, 
or flower-pecker, from its hovering over them 
and sucking their juices, without lacerating or 
so much as disordering them. Its proper 
name is quinde, though it is also known by 
those of rabilargo and lisongero, and in Eng- 
land by that of humming bird. Its whole 
body, with its plumage, does not exceed the 
bigness of a middle sized nutmeg : the tail is 
usually near three times the length of the 
whole body, yet has but few feathers ; its neck 
is short ; the head proportioned, with a very 
brisk eye ; the bill long and slender, white at 
the beginning and black at the end ; the wings 
are also long and narrow. Most of the body 
is green, spotted with yellow and blue. Some 
are higher coloured than others ; and all are 
variegated, as it were, with streaks of gold. 
Of this bird also there are various species, di- 
stinguished by their size and colours. This is 



234 NOTES. 

thought to be the smallest of all known birds ; 
the female lays but two eggs at a time, and 
those no bigger than peas. They build in 
trees, and the coarsest materials of their nests 
are the finest straws they can pick up. — 
Ulloa's Voyage to South America, vol. i. 
p. 477. 

Note 34, page 79. 
Salem Alicum. 
" Bo 'here peace between us." " There is 
peace between us.'" 

Note 35, page 102. 
Already a family of children. 
The Moors marry so very young, that the 
mother and her first-born are often seen to- 
gether as playmates, equally anxious and 
angry, in an infantine game. The women 
here are often grandmothers at twenty-six or 
twenty-seven years of age ; it is therefore no 
wonder they live frequently to see the children 
of many of their generation. — Tully's Tri- 
poly, p. 30. 



NOTES. 235 

Note 36, page 143. 
The nub a sounded. 

The royal band of the Pasha. The nuba 
is never played but for the Pasha and his 
eldest son when they go out with the army, 
or on any public occasion. 

The sounds of the nuba are singular to an 
European ear : they are composed of a Tur- 
buka, a sort of kettle-drum, the reed and 
timbrel ; the Turbuka belongs to the Moors, 
the reed and timbrel to the blacks. — Tully's 
Tripoli/, p. 28. 

Note 37, page 148. 
Give me your signet-ring. 
The town has been in some commotion to- 
day, from a general search having been made 
by the guards for Sidy Hamefs great seal, 
which was stolen from his person last night. 
It was of gold, chased with Turkish characters; 
each of the princes have one of these seals or 
royal signets as soon as they arrive at a certain 
age. It is worn near the bosom on the left 
side of the jileck next the watch, with a rich 
chain hanging from it. The mould is de- 



236 NOTES. 

stroyed when the seal is made ; and as they 
never suffer it to be taken away from then- 
persons day or night, they do not fear its being 
counterfeited. — Tully^ Tripoli/, p. 162. 

Note 38, page 181. 
To drink of the waters of Guancaveli. 
Dans la ville de Guancaveli, au Perou, on 
montre une fontaine dont Teau, dit-on, se 
change si promptement en pierres, que la plu- 
part des maisons sont baties de cette petrifac- 
tion. — V Europe et VAmerique comparees, par 
M. Drouin de Bercy, p. 551. 

Note 42, page 183. 
Stupified with their own buffooneries. 
Aux environs de James Town, en Virginie, 
il croit un arbre dont la pomme, lorsqu'elle 
est cuite, produit les effets les plus etranges. 
Quelques Anglais, ignorant ses dangereuses 
proprietes, s'empresserent d'en manger: au 
meme instant, ils devinrent tous imbecilles 
pendant pleusieurs jours. L'un passait le 
temps a souffler des plumes en Fair : un autre 
a lancer des pailles ; un troisieme s'accroupis- 



NOTES. 237 

sait dans un coin, faisant les grimaces 6Vun 
singe; un quatrieme ne cessait cTembrasser 
ceux qu'il rencontrait, et leur riait au nez 
avec mille postures bouffonnes. On fut oblige 
de les renfermer Tespace de onze jours que 
dura cette frenezie. L'usage de la raison leur 
revint, sans aucun souvenir de ce qui leur 
etait arrive. — JO Europe et VAmerique com- 
parees par M. Drouin de Bercy, p. 54. 

Note 43, page 184. 
A stream of light. 
Quand on se baigne le soir dans le golfe de 
Cariaco pres de Cumana, quelques parties du 
corps restent lumineuses au sortir de Teau. 
La mer, entre les tropiques, est lumineuse a 
toutes les temperatures. — M. Drouin de 
Bercy. 

Note 44, page 184. 
A hundred echoes have answered to the strain. 
Apres avoir navigue sur le fleuve du Poto- 
mack, dans la Pensylvanie, on arrive dans un 
certain endroit, a travers les Montagnes Bleues, 
ou Ton entend les echos les plus extraordinaires 



238 NOTES. 

quHl y ait au monde. Ailleurs (dit Jean de 
Crevecceur, ecrivain et cultivateur Americain) 
ils balbutient; ici ils s'expriment distinctement. 
Nulle pars ils ne sont aussi nombreux ni aussi 
attentifs a repondre. Les intonations de leurs 
voix ressemblent aux conversations de pcr- 
sonnes placees a des hauteurs et a des di- 
stances difFerentes. Les uns vous parlent a 
Poreille ; la voix des autres est plus forte, leurs 
accens mieux prononces : les uns vous repon- 
dent sur-le-champ ; les autres apres une cer- 
taine intervalle, comme s'ils pensaient avant de 
parler ; quelquefois ils s'ecrient tous ensemble. 
Cest surtout quand on rit, que le melange de 
leurs eclats rend Terreur complete. Lorsque 
les vaisseaux approchent du rivage en lou- 
voyant, il est impossible de ne pas croire 
entendre des personnes assises derriere les 
rochers; ceux qui repondent du haut des 
montagnes le font toujours si distinctement que 
Pceil, guide par Toreille, croit apercevoir Tarbre 
derriere lequel ils sont tapis, ces Hamadry- 
ades entendent toutes les langues, et repetent 
avec plaisir les chansons des voyageurs. Joue- 
t-on de la flute ou de la clarinette, elles imitent 



NOTES. 239 

a Tinstant les memes instrumens; alors c'est 
un veritable concert execute avec la derniere 
precision. On compte jusqu'a dix-sept de 
ces admirables echos qui vous repondent a-la- 
fois on les uns apres les autres, ou qui se re- 
petent a eux memes apres qu'ils vous out parle. 
— U Europe et VAmerique comparees, p. 64. 

Note 45, page 184. 
/ have slept in the cavern of Guachero. 
La Province de Cumana fournit une curio- 
site naturelle digne de remarque, dans la 
caverne du Guachero, dont le nom lui vient 
d'un oiseau qui habite dans rinterieur de la 
grotte, qui y multiplie d'une maniere prodi- 
gieuse, inconnue aux naturalistes d'Europe, 
et qui offre le premier exemple d'un oiseau 
nocturne parmi les passereaux dentirostres. 
II a la grandeur des poules d'Europe, et le 
port des vautours. Quoiqu'on en fasse, tous 
les ans, un horrible massacre, pour en prendre 
la graisse, qui sert de beurre ou dliuile, le 
nombre n'en diminue pas. lis attachent leurs 
nids a la longue voiite de la caverne, et quand 



240 NOTES, 

on y penetre a la lueur des flambeaux, ces 
oiseaux effrayes poussent des cris tels que les 
Indiens, effrayes a. leur tour, nosent jamais 
avancer jusqu'au fond de la grotte. lis at- 
tachent des idees superstitieuses a. cet antre 
habite par des oiseaux de nuit, et d'ou sort 
le rio Caripe. Cest leur Tartare, leur Styx : 
ce sont leurs oiseaux stygiens. — V Europe et 
VAmerique comparees, par M. Drouin de 
Bercy, p. 49. 

Note 46, page 185. 
Silver hill of Parimee, SfC. 
Selon la tradition de plusiers naturels, les 
nuees de Magellan du ciel austral, et meme les 
magnifiques nebuleuses du vaisseau Argo^ ne 
sont que le reflet de l'eclat metallique que 
jette la montagne d'argent de Parime, &c. — 
Tableau de la Nature, p. 188. Humboldt. 

Note 47, page 185. 
The Eldorado, $c. 
Le Lac Parimee est fameux par le rocher 
de talc qui reflechit comme un miroir les 



NOTES. 241 

rayons dores du soleil ce qui a fait croire long- 
temps que les rues de la ville d'Eldorado 
etaient pavees d'or. 

Note 48, page 186. 
Mines which produce silver. 

Les mines d'argent de Sainte-Maries dans les 
Vosges, de Bassory, dans les Pyrenees, de Cha- 
langes pres d'Allemont en Dauphine, enfin ces 
mines de Norwege, avec celles du Perou, du 
Bresil, de la Terre-Ferme, du Mexique, du 
Chili, de la Castille d'or, de la Californie, de 
la Nouvelle-Grenade, &c. Ces fameuses mines 
d^rgent du Potosi, apres avoir enrichi le monde 
pendant plusieurs siecles, sont encore aujour- 
d'hui une source intarissable de richesses. — 
L' Europe et FAmerique compart es^ p. 65. 

In most of these mines, arsenic is found in 
combination with the silver : also antimony and 
copper. 

Note 49, page 186. 
Thou, lake of Guativa, art witness to this. 
Le Lac de Guativa, au nord-ouest de 
Santa-fe de Bogota, est celebre par la quantite 
vol. I. R 



242 NOTES. 

(Tor que les Indiens y jeterent, lors de la con- 
quete de leur pays par les Espagnols. — 
U Europe et VAmerique comparees, p. 77. 

Note 50, page 186. 
And thou, lake oflbara, art red with the blood 
of the murdered. 
Le Lac d'Ibara, fameux dans Thistoire des 
Incas, fut surnomme le Lac de Sang, pour 
avoir ete le tombeau d'une multitude d'Indiens 
qu'un Empereur y faisait jeter, a mesure qu'on 
les egorgaient sous ses yeux : ses eaux en furent 
rougies pendant quelque temps, ce qui lui fit 
donner le nom de Lac de Sang. — V Europe 
et VAmerique comparees, p. 78. 

Note 51, page 193. 
Valley of Or cos. 
Dans le Perou, le Lac de la vallee d'Orcos 
est cite pour contenir dans son sein, la fameuse 
chaine d'or que Tinea, Huayna-Capac, avoit 
fait fabriquer lors de la naissance de son fils 
Huescar. — L? Europe et VAmerique comparees, 
p. 78. 

The first I?ica, or Inga, the people of Peru 



NOTES. 243 

mention was Mangocapa, who they feign, after 
the flood, came out of the Cave of Tammbo, 
five or six leagues from Cusco; and from him 
descended the chief families of Ingas, the first 
of them, called Hanan-cusco, and the other 
Urin-cusco; from the former of them came the 
sovereigns who conquered the country. 

It is to be observed, that Inga, among the 
Peruvians, signifies King or Emperor: and 
Capac Inga y the only King, which was the title 
they gave their sovereigns ; all the male issue 
being called Ingas, and the queen Coy as. — 
See Historical Account of Peru, taken from 
Herrera's History of America. 

Note 52, page 193. 
Like the calm lake of Xicaragua 9 from whose 

bosom the mountain Omotepec shoots forth 

its volumes of fames. 

Le Lac de Xicaragua s'etend, en longueur, 
a plus de 60 lieues, et en largeur 91 lieues ; 
TOmotepec elance son sommet enflamme du 
sein de ce Lac. — U Europe et VAmerique com- 
parees, p. 76. 

END OF VOL. I. 
